BROTHERLY RECONCILEMENT: Preached in Oxford for the union of some, and now
published with larger meditations for the unity of all in this Church and
Commonwealth:

With An Apology of the use of Fathers, and Secular learning in Sermons.

By EGEON ASKEVV of Queens College.

Acts 7. 26. Sirs, ye are brethren: why do ye wrong one to another? LONDON,
Printed for GEORGE BISHOP. 1605.

TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN AND MIGHTY MONARCH, JAMES, by the grace of God, King of
Great BRITAIN, France and Ireland, Defender of the true Catholic and ancient
Faith, etc.
MOst religious and renowned Prince, when I duly consider what a son of peace
your Majesty has been, His Majesty's speech to the Parliament.
Keeping peace and amity with all, yea an heir of reconciliation, in whose
royal person, those two princely houses are united: as also what a Father of
peace and peacemaking reconciler, outwardly of our enemies, inwardly of our
selves, your Majesty continues; I cannot but judge your Majesty is the
Solomon, in whose peaceable days Gods house shall be finished, when thus peace
is tied to your person. In regard of our civil union, seeing your sacred
person has joined the wood of Israel and Judah in one tree, that they shall be
no more two peoples, neither be divided henceforth any more into two kingdoms,
as the Ez^k. 37.
Prophet speaks, I thought it seasonable to write of Reconciling of Brethren.
And in respect of our Ecclesiastical union, since your sacred self has been
our peace, in breaking down this partition wall of ceremonies and rites in
this Church; so making of two one, and reconciling both to one God, slaying
hatred thereby: I thought it bounden duty, and presumed to dedicate to the
Reconciler of Christendom a work of Brotherly Reconcilement. An argument
(gracious Sovereign) if ever and for any, now and for us, most needful and
necessary, when not only the bands of brotherhood are dissolved among
brethren, but sons also (as prophesied our Savior) rise against their
reverend fathers. How much the rather may I hope your royal clemency will put
forth a gracious hand, and receive this Dove into the arc, that comes (shall I
say from the waters of affliction?) with an Olive branch of peace and
reconcilement in her mouth, since she finds no rest for the sole of her foot,
but on the arc of your testimony! wherein I rest, beseeching God still to
bless you, with the head of Solomon, the heart of David, and hand of Gedeon;
and fructify may he your work of union and Brotherly Reconcilement, that in
this body humorisme purged out, in the feamelesse coat scisme sewed up, and
men in orders (indeed out of all order) brought into order, God may be served
in verity by this Church, and preserved in unity till the coming of his son
Christ Jesus unto judgment. Amen.

Greenwich this 27. of April. 1605. Your Majesty's most humble and loyal
subject, EGEON ASKEVV.

A Preface to the Christian Reader.
Beloved Christian, as a time was 2. Tim. 4. 3.
foretold, when men's ears would itch Act. 17. 21.
Athenian-like, for new things: so have they now according to their lusts, got
them an heap of Writers, and there is no end in making many books, -- tenet
insanabile multos
Scribendi cacoethes,
said a Inuenal. Sat.
Satyrist of his days: and in ours we daily see voluntary offerers bring so
much to the building of the tabernacle, that unless Moses should forbid them,
Presses would be oppressed, and the world not contain the books that should
be written.

Wherein, as I cannot but tax our obscene Pamphleters, who, ad prelum tanquam
praelium, run to the Press as the horse rusheth into battle, where they are
wounded with their own quils, when they publish their imperfections, and
subscribe to their own folly: so gladly them I would excite, to bring their
grain to the market, who Prou. 10. 14.
lay up knowledge in their heart, as that Prou. 11. 26.
hoorder did his corn in the arc: or wrappe up their gifts in paper, as did
the slothful servant his talent in a napkin, and make their commonplace
books bigger, as he did his barnes, where they may lay up in store their
fruits for many years: for this night may they fetch away thy soul from
thee, and then whose shall those things be that so long thou have provided?
Whosoever art called to labor in the vineyard, resolve with the master of the
vine, Ioh. 9. 4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day:
the night comes when no man can work.

And seeing there is a voice by Luke 1. 63. Gal 4. 20.
writing, as well as by speaking; and a preaching by Amboverbu^ praedicant, hic
quidem scripto, ille vero voce: and praedicandi scie^tia vtrouis modo iuuat,
seu per manum, seu per linguam operetur. Clem. Alex. lib. 1. Str. page 1.
pen, as by tongue: how can we think, but that the 1. Cor. 9. 16.
neglect is attended on with a woe, and negligence with a i curse, when by
neither we preach the Gospel? Ier. 48. 10.


In which respect, as it stands them upon, whose tongue like Zacharies is not
unloosed, to ask with him for writing books, and write, saying: (for though
their tongue cleave to the roof of their mouth, yet should not their right
hand also forget her cunning:) So may they think it an Pulchrum esse and
honestu^ existimo, ijs etiam quipostea faturi sunt bouos silios relinquere: ac
filij qoidem corporum: animae autem sunt foetus, orationes* Clem. Alex. ibi.
honest and comely thing, to leave good children of their mind to posterity,
seeing sons are but of the body from mortal seed, and good books from the
soul by the immortal seed of Gods word. Are they too simple? why he who by
the mouth of an Ass forbad the foolishness of a Prophet, has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise. Are they too weak in
themselves? His power is made perfect through weakness: and he, who with five
stones in David's sling overthrew strong Goliath, has chosen the weak things of
the world to confound the mighty things. Are they vile or despised among men?
Why he who by the sound of Rams horns ouerturned the walls of Jericho, has
chosen the vise and despised things of the world to bring to naught things that
are; so mighty through God, though weak in themselves, are the weapons of
their warfare, to cast down holds, and every thing that is exalted against
Christ. Wherein, though the living spirit of speech quickens most, more then
the dead letter of writing, whence Paul himself wished for writing, to speak
unto the Galathians, that he might change his voice of the pen into a tongue,
Gal. 4. 20. Yet when their bodily presence is weak, and their speech of no
value, their writings may be forcible and strong. Neither let all think, that
such as they are in word by letters when they are absent, such can they be,
with S. Paul, when they are present with the people, 2. Corint. 10. All which
considerations, as they may stir up spiritual Fathers to present their young
Samuels to the temple of the Lord, by the mouth of which babes and sucklings,
his praise may be made more perfect among men: so, since the tabernacle is not
quite finished, free offerers need not fear their oblation (though of goats
hair) shall be rejected, when infirmissima, the weakest things are as
necessary for the spiritual, as that was for the material tabernacle of the
Lord. It were ridiculous, says Ridiculum certe fuerit, little qui sunt boni ac
studiosi scriptis repudiatis, eos, qui tales non sunt, componentes admittere.
Sed Theopompo quidem and Timaeo, qui fabulas and maledicta componunt, praeterea
etia^ Epicuro quoque qui estprinceps and author impietatis, quin etiam
Hipponacti and Archilocho tam turpiter scribere co^cedendum est: ei autem qui
veritatem praedicat, prohibendum est posteris vtilitate^ relinquere. lib. 1.
Strom.
Clemens Alexandrinus, to refuse the writings of good men and studious, and
admit or license the^ that are neither. Neither need any fear that of ours,
which he adds of his days.

For my part, when I saw many rich men, cast of their superfluity so much into
the Lords treasury, I thought the widows farthing would be needless, and
once resolved with Lib. 3. adu. Pelag.
Jerome in like case, to surcease from this work, lest I should pour water
into the sea, or carry wood into the forest, as he speaks, aut enim eadem
dicere^ ex superfluo: for that that is, has been, and there is now no new
thing under the Sun, aut si noua voluerim dicere, a clarissimo ingenio
occupata sunt meliora. And indeed, to speak truth, this diseased Sermon, like
the poor creeple at Bethesda, had kept its couch to the death, had not an
Angel at a certain season, that trobled the water, put it down into the
poole, and made it walk abroad. Whose first conception as it was sudden and
too present: so, like the untimely fruit of a woman that perishes before it
sees the Sun, might the womb have been its tomb, or at most like the
Ephemeron Seg nius irrita^t animos demissa per aures: Quam quae sunr oculis
subiecta sidelibus. Horat.
have lived but one day, but that thinking it would profit more by the eye,
then it did by the ear, many reasons forced me to publish it to the eye of the
world, that was privately spoken in the ear of a College. Some it may be will
ask me, -- Amphora cepit
Institui, currente rota cur vrceus exit? Horat.

Why I extend it to a book that was intended but a Sermon, and propose a
pitcher what I purposed but a kanne. Indeed, like the woman of Samaria, I
brought a pitcher at first to the well of living water, but because of short
meditation I had nothing to draw with, I have now drawn deeper of Iaakobs
well, filled my water pot to the brim, and this abortiue issue has reentred
(as it were) into the womb, and been borne again. In whose second birth, I
have, as Galen speaks of nurces, or mid-wiues framed the unfashioned feature
and lims of this infant, before I durst presume to bring it to the church, and
christen it in the Press with the name of a book. An argument (dear
Christian) most needful for these iarring and uncharitable times: wherein I
beseech my ecclesiastical brethren, in the bowels of Motives to Ministers,
that they preach faith that works through love, and join necessity of works
with their doctrine of faith.
Christ Jesus, that they would preach faith that works through love, and
adioyne to their doctrine of faith the necessity of good works: more then
some do, who by beating solely on sole faith, have made her solitary. O ye
Priests and Ministers of my God, remember, the high Priest carried pomegranates
as well as bells, and a pomegranate for every bell, when he went into the
sanctuary of the Lord, Exodus 28. And so the high priest of our profession, his
doctrine still was, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be
hewne down and cast into the fire, Mat. 7. Those beasts in Ezekiels vision,
whereby the four Evangelists are prefigured, as not only ancient 1. The
practice of Christ and his Apostlas.
Fathers, but modernes observe, had hands as well as wings, and an hand for
every wing, Ezekiel. 1. It was the Apostles, and even S. Paul's practice, who, and
where, and to whom he stood most on justification by faith only, as in his
Epistles to the Romans and the people of Galatia, when in the former part he
had laid that good foundation of faith, omitted not in the latter end to build
thereon gold, silver, and precious stones of good works.

It was his strait charge to Titus, and in him to al Preachers: this 2. Paul's
precept.
is a true saying, and these things I would thou should affirm, That they
which have believed in God, might be careful to show forth good works; these
are good and profitable unto men. I may adioyne what he adds, And let ours
also learn to show forth good works for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful. Tit. 3. 8. 14.

A doctrine, as necessary in all ages, so most needful in our times, 3. These
loose and uncharitable t^^es.
wherein works are changed of many into words, walking in goodness into talking
of God, hands into tongues, and hearts into ears; that to cure the
superstition, we neglect true deu^tion; and to avoid the opinion of meant, we
cast off the care of well doing; that the faith which was wont to be in words
of any, is now scarce found in the other of many. Wherein the disease of our
forefathers heads is so dangerously fallen upon our hearts, that whereas they
having good hearts and b^d heads, being but children in understanding, might
truly cry with the Shunamites boy, Mine head, mine head, and their mother
could not help them. We having good heads and bad hearts, may cry out with
Jeremy in another meaning, My belly, my belly, I am pained at the heart: and
every where barren faith like Rachel crying, Give me children, or else I die,
give me works, or I am but a dead faith; yea she weepeth for her children, and
will not be comforted because they are not.

How much the rather should spiritual fathers open by these means 4* The
sland^r of our Church.
the womb of barren faith again, with whom as it did with old Sarai, it
cease to be after the manner of women, that God may take away her slander of
barrenness and her rebuke among women: and having her quiver full of these
arrows, she may be blessed before God, and not be ashamed when she speaks
with her enemies in the gate.

A precept Apostolical, not duly enough practiced of some, who A reproof of
solifidia^ Preachers that teach faith alone to be sufficient to salvation
think to make faith fruitful, as Gardeners do their Walnut tree, by still
beating on the bole* Whose tantum creed, only believe and thou shall be saved,
has taught many to turn the grace of God into wantonness, and resolve with
Eunomius, that faith without works will serve the turn. Of whose blind zeal
and indiscreet speaking, good works like those workers may complain, Exodus 5.
The Lord look upon you and judge, for ye have made our savor to stink among
the inhabitants of the land, in that ye have put a sword in their hand for to
slay us. O then Moses and Aaron, why cause ye the people to cease from their
works? Get ye to your burdens. Lay upon the people the number of works which
they did in time past, diminish nothing thereof, for they be idle, therefore they
cry, saying, Only believe and we shall be saved, for all things are possible to
him that believes. Which 4. motives, as still they forced me in my speech to
bid our Rebecca meet her spouse with bracelets as well as with eare-rings,
seeing not the hearers of the law, but the doers thereof are justified before
him, Romans 2. 13. so* moved they me now to pen a tract (most needful for our
times) of Brotherly Reconcilement, whereof none ancient or recent has
particularly (that I know) written or diuulged, that James works might be
joined with Paul's faith, and faith work through love in all Christian
professors.

Wherein, si forte mihi vitio detur (as Epist. in lib. d^ Instit. reip.
Patricius apologized his citing of many authors) if perchance I be blamed,
especially of these idle make-bates, and gaping or idle cauillers, that I have
taken most things out of Greek and Latin writers, and apply them to mine own
use, I must answer them as he did such men, Me parum admodum fidei rebus meis
facturum fui^se, si solum authoritate mea niterer. And beside, it is the
custom of all writers to mingle other men's things with their own, Tum vt
certiora scribant, tum vt gratius iucundiusque legantur: or as Idem ibid.
Aphranius being accused that he had taken much out of Menander; I confess
(says he) I have taken, not only out of him, but out of every one that agreed
to my matter, Quodcunque me non posse facere melius credidi. If next the
Scriptures I have preferred the ancient Fathers to their children, Genus hoc
sermonum positum in hominum veterum authoritate and eorum illustrium plus
(nescio quo pacto) videtur habere grauitatis, as De Amicit.
Tully in like case spoke of his citing the ancient, Neque omnem sermonem
tribuimus Tithono, ne parum esset authoritatis, sed M. Catoni seni, quo maiorem
authoritatem haberet* oration, as De Senect.
elsewhere he speaks. Neither have I relied on men of yesterday, least my
word might want warrant, but on the ancient especially, that the multitude of
years might teach wisdom in this tract: whereof, as I may truly like Prefat
ad lect. in lib. civil. doct.
Lipsius of his sententious centons, confess omnia nostra esse and nihil, that
all and nothing is mine: so justly do I fear the authors whom I cite, may
return Martials apostrophe upon me, Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuum,
and their licour running through so mean a channel, has lost much of his
sweetness. But of the manner enough or too Hunc ser^are modum nost^i nouere
libelli, Mart.
much: for the matter it self, howsoever this mean book has learned this
mean, parcere personis, dicere de vitijs, yet some (as he Lips. ibid.
speaks of that his book) homines male acuti and callidi sensisse aut
scripsisse me volent, quae per somnu^ non sensi non scripsi, will think I meant
that which never came in my mind, referuntque pleraque omnia ad hoc vnum aeuum,
and quae nos communiter diximus, sic volunt accip^ quasi in Titium aut Scium
dicta. Imo vates etiam agunt, non lectores: nec sumunt a nobis sensum, sed
adferunt, and mentem aliquam adfingunt ex sua mente: o angues, o viperae, fugio
vos, fugio, and tamen vix effugio. Howbeit I may safely avouch with Saint Ad
Nepot. de vita Cleric.
Jerome, Nullum laesi, nullius nomen mea scriptura designatum est. Neminem
specialiter meus sermo pulsauit. Generalis de vitijs disputatio est: qui mihi
irasci voluerit, ipse de se quod talis sit confite bitur. I have striue^
against no man, but only his strife; maligned no man, but his malice; nor
envied any, but his envy. Scio me offensurum esse quamplurimos, as Ier^m.
epist. ad rustic. Mo^ach.
he said in like case, qui generalem de vitijs disputationem in suam referunt
contumeliam, and they shall gain but what he adds, Et dum mihi irascuntur,
suam indicant conscientiam, multoque peius de se quam de me iudicant. Ego enim
neminem nominabo: nec veteris comoediae licentia certas personas eligam atque
perstringam. He subnecteth a good medicine for such sore backs, Prudentis viri
est dissimulare, imo emendare quod in se intelligat, and indignari sibi magis
quam mihi, nec in monitorem maledicta regerere, says Ierom. Touching them that
are loving and friendly to their brethren, as Plutarch when he offered his
book of Brotherly love unto Nigrinus and Quintus agreeing brethren, said, Ad
quae libellus cohortatur, ea vos iam agentes testimonio potius ornari qua^
officij admoneri videbimini: so this little book of Brotherly Reconcilement
shall rather bear witness of their unity, then entreat them to that which
willingly they do. For them that are factious folk and contentious, I easily
understand I shall not please them, as Ci^. ad A^tic 8. 15. Facile intelligo
p^gnandi cupudis hominibus me no^ satisface^e.
he speaks: howsoever, I pass little to be judged of such, or of man's
judgment when I judge not my self. Only thee (gentle Reader) I would
entreat, that what Socrates thought of Heraclitus his obscure book, thou
would charitably think and say of mine, (...), what I understood is good,
and I hope that which I have not understood. Quin and amplius fitis tog^ti pro
indulgend^ venia, si ^licubi repe^etis nos aliquos imperere, aut cauillis
incessere, quum alias hunc morem non habeamus. Etsi alicubi propter zelum
aduersus haereses, and ad auertendos lectores, exacerbati dixerimu^ aliquos
deceptores, aut circulatores aut miseros homine^* ignoscite: Epiphan. pra fat.
in lib. haeres.
If thou shall find I touch some kind of men, and deride their ridiculous
customs, which is not my wont, let me crave pardon for my want. If in hate and
heat against the spirit of singularity and scisme, and to auert the readers
therefro, being provoked, I have called some deceivers of minds, Puritans or
Pruritans, bear with this zeal also: Ipsa enim necessitas aduersus huius
certaminis doctrinas instans, talem nobis sudorem efficit, and vt lectores
auertantur, as says Epiphanius in not unlike case, I did it because sinful
scisme is impudent; and having a whores* forehead, will not be ashamed till we
spit in her face.

In which respect, as I cannot hope for better acceptance of my widows mite
then did Prooem. in lib. 2. comme^t. in Oscam. Alij quasi parua contemnunt and
quicquid dixerimus co^trectare despici^it. Alij odio nominis nostri non res sed
personas considera^^, magisque aliorum silentium quam nostrum studium probant.
Sunt quae audacter nos facere asserant etc. Quidam in eo se disertos
arbitrantur and doctos, si alieno operi detrahant, etc.
Jerome, of his much, cast into the treasury. Some will despise it as a thing
of no value, and whatsoever we write, disdain to read it: Others in hatred of
our name consider the person not the thing, and more commend others silence
then our endeavor: some count us bold for handling a matter never written of
before: some think themselves skillful and learned, if they can detract from
other men's labors, and non quid ipsi possint, sed quid nos non pos^umus
dijudicent: so may I justly wish with Lucilius, that neither the best nor worst
learned might be my readers, because they understand nothing at all, and these
more then perchance I do mean. Cicer. lib. 2. de Orat.
Perseum non curo legere, Laelium volo: Perseus is too learned, honest and not
unlearned Laelius I wish for my Reader. And now thee I entreat (good
Christian) if thou have not written, suspend thy censure, till thou know what
it is to write and be buried in a dead letter of less delight and persuasion:
if thou have written, yet suspend thy judgment, till thou meet with a matter
wherein thou have every man, and yet none for thy help. It is an easy matter
to change an Author e Graeco in Latinum from his Athenian cloak into a Roman
gown. A more easy matter, like Chrysippus, to take Euripides his Medea, and
concealing his name, make it our own Tragedy, as some do. I speak not this
to tax others, or commend my self: (...), was the brag of a proud Painter:
that thought be far from my heart: only I tell Momus, Carpere vel noli
nostra vel ede tua. If I have done well, Martial, Epigr.
and as the story required, it is the thing that I desired: let God have the
praise, thee the profit, and me the pains. But if I have spoken slenderly and
barely, (as thou shall perceive) it is that I could. The God of peace enlighten
thine understanding, and sanctify thee throughout, that after thou have
enjoyed the peace of conscience, thou may possess that eternal peace of God
in the heavens.

Amen.
Thine in the Lord, Egeon Askew.

BROTHERLY RECONCILEMENT.
MATH. 5. 24. Go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother.
THose Mat. 23. 13.
Porters of the kingdom, who had taken away the Key of knowledge, Luke 11. did
with their forged gloss (that Bulling. conc. 39 in Apoc 9. 1. Doctrina
adulterata est clauis adulterina.
false key) so wrest the lock and sense of the Law, that sooner they could
enter those Deuter. 29. 29.
secreta Iehouae, the privy chamber of Gods secret counsel, then open these
reuelata, the presence chamber of his revealed will. For whereas Law was not
only Romans 7. 12.
holy, to bind the hand from the action of bloodshed, Leuit. 19. 18. but Verse.
14.
spiritual also to bridle the heart from the affection of hatred, verse. 17. the
Scribes and expounders of the Law (whose Ier. 8. 8.
pen it seems taught falsehood by tradition) misconstruing the turbulent
passions of anger, malice, and envy (as Bellar. lib 1. da statu p^ccat c. 3.
9. 12.
Papists now do) to be but Chrysostom Homil. 11. op imp. in Math. 5. sic
glossord. Calvin. muscul. Chem. Aret. Bez. Pisc. Ferus and Quill. in Mat. 5.
expon.
least matters of the law, Mat. 5. 19. 20. restrained by their gloss the sixth
precept, Thou shall not kill, to the outward act of murder, verse. 21. and
openly professed out of, not Math 23. 2.
Moses chair, but their stool of Psalm 94. 20.
wickedness, whereon they imagined mischief for a law, yea publicly
proclaimed (as if not 2. Corint. 3. 15.
their heart alone, but Acts 28. 27.
eyes too, in reading of Leu. 19. 17. 18. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thy heart, nor remember injuries.
Moses had been covered with a veil) that this outward action of killing
only, and not these inward motions of the mind were forbidden in this
commandment, as Nic. Lyra in Exodus 20. 17. and Mat. 5. ^^
Lyra a Jew by offspring out of their own Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 12. cap. 13.
Antiquarian well observes. Thus these text-corrupting glosers staying their
superficial knowledge in the utter court and dead letter of this precept, nor
once entering into the spirit, and holiest of all, measured murder but with the
span of a bloody hand; and mete out homicide with the Esaias 58. 4.
stroke of the fist of wickedness. Thus like the^^ Esaias 8. 17.
fathers they (...) the (...)ng to the dead: and Mez(...)-like (...) the living
spirit of this precept to the dead letter of the law, they stifled the life
thereof with the dead caracter, they murdered its soul with the killing letter,
and made the commandment of God of no authority by their glossing tradition.
Wherefore our Lord thinking it now time to put to his hand, seeing they had
destroyed his law, purges it from their glosses, as he did the Mat. 21. 12.
Temple of the buyers and sellers: and opening with his Key of knowledge the
meaning of his Fathers will, quickneth the dead letter of this precept with the
spirit of truth; who laying his axe not only to the hands and branches of the
tree; but even to the heart the root of bitterness, both chains up thereby
an Herodian Luke 13. 31. 32.
fox from violence or blood, and in him also takes the Cant. 2. 15. vid Iun.
and Fen.
little foxes, anger, hatred and malice, which lurking in the den of his
heart would eftsoons destroy the vine, and like Judge. 15. 4. 5.
Sampsons foxes set all on fire: proclaiming with his (...) from heaven, that
even an ireful heart, a disdaining gesture, and a reuiling tongue, as well as
bloody hands, are guilty of murder and culpable of judgment. Ver. 22. But I say
unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be guilty of
judgment: and whosoever says to his brother, Raca, shall be guilty of a
Council: and whosoever shall say Fool, shall be guilty of the gebenna of fire.
This heavenly gardener (if so with John 20 15. Coherence of the text.
Mary I may suppose him) having thus extirpated (...), and plucked up murder by
the roots, in weeding out those Fibras and roots of bitterness, verse. 22: he
now plants the herb Plin. hist. (...) lib. 14 cap. 19.
Philanthropos or brotherly love in the ground of their hearts, verse. 23. 24.
to cure their malice, the Kings evil of the soul (so In Ephesians 4.
Chrysostom calls it) as that vegetiue heals the Kings evil of the body, as
Rimb. D(...). l. 4 plant. ca. 74.
Herbalists observe. Where seeing the M^st in Mat. 5. 23. ^
Pharisees to misconceiue like their Esay^^. ^. (...)
auncesters, that the Almighty would be pleased with their legal oblations,
though their hearts as the others hands were full of blood: he prescious of
their thoughts, preuenteth their excuse, and does anticipate their supposall in
the sequent verses, If then thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift: agree with thine adversary quickly, etc. The brief
and sum whereof I have here selected for the theme of my future discourse,
Go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother: paralele whereto in sense are
these words immediately subnected, verse. 25. Agree with thine adversary quickly;
for agree, here is be reconciled; for adversary, brother; for quickly, first.
In which precept of our Savior, we may observe The general division of the
text.
a dismission from the altar, Go thy way: secondly, a commission of two, be
reconciled to thy brother: thirdly, this without all intermission, first, Go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother. Touching the first, if this
dismission seem so indefinit, that like First, the dismissio^, go thy way.
John 6. 68.
Peter thou ask, Master, to whom shall I go? He tells thee thy whole arrant,
Mat. 18. 15, If thy brother trespass against thee, go thou unto him, and tell
him his fault between thee and him alone; if he hear thee, thou have won thy
brother. If thy brother of generation or regeneration by nature or grace,
trespass in word or deed, says a Aret. in hunc locum, and Bez.
writer, by injury or conturnely, says the Interl. in hunc locum.
gloss, against thee, that thou Aug. ser. 16. de verb. Dom.
only know it; go, if he be absent, beyond the sea (says Lib. 1. de sermon.
Dom. in monte cap. 20.
Austine) that much water must not quench the fiery coals of thy love, nor the
floods drown it: but go, non pedibus corporis, sed motibus animi, though not
with the sole of thy feet, yet with the feet of thy soul; and at least (
Ibid. cap 20.
says he) thou must resolve with thy self that so soon as opportunity of Go.
going unto him shall offer it self, thou will be reconciled. But if
propinquitie of place will oportune thine intent, go thou servant with
reverence to thy master, thou companion lovingly to thy fellow, thou master
with authority to thy servant, says a Guiliad. in Mat. 18 15. Thou.
writer. But vade mansuetus go in all meeknes, with a cool temper of rebated
heat: for as fire cannot be quenched with fire, so neither (says Homil. 59 in
Genesis 33.
Chrysostom) can fury be allayed with fury, since meekness and lenity
asswageth the hot fit of anger, as water extinguisheth combustion. And indeed
the reason why in quenching civil garboiles and domestical combustions, we
often for water add fuel to the fire, and oil to the flame, is, quod
ira(...) irati ipsi obiurgamus, says an Plut. de ira cohibend.
heathen, because in our anger (...) chide our brothers anger: Et quae per ira^
sunt peccata in ea per iram (...), and under pretense of correction, in our
anger r^ufige the off^ce which through his anger he gave us: as if one could
see Matthew 7. 45
clearly to pluck out the more in his brothers eye, who has a beam in his
own. Hence some heathens would not adventure their speech in reproof or
command, till their fury was past and anger abared. It was the lesson of
Athenodorus the famous Philosopher, which at his departure from Rome he gave to
Octauius: Si succencere contingit o Imperator, etc. If thou chance to be
angry o Emperor (says Plut. Apoth. in sinc.
he) say over the 24. letters of the Greek Alphabet before thou burst forth
into speech. Hence others durst not in their rage trust their hands with the
rod, nor would fit corrections among their families, nor come with a rod when
they could not in the spirit of meekness: Caederem te nis^ir ascerer, I would
beat thee if I were not angry, said Senec. lib. 1. de ira. cap. 15.
Socrates to his servant: Non ausus est se irae committere, says my Author, he
durst not trust himself with anger. Plat^ his scholar took out that lesson in
his practice, Senec. lib. 3. de ira. cap. 12.
who being angry with his boy, and laying him on the block with full intent to
beat him, when he had lift up his hand to fetch a blow, perceiving himself in
some passion of anger, held it in suspense and would not strike: but being
asked of one by, what he did, Exigo poenas ab homine iracundo, says he, I am
punishing an angry man and correcting his anger, Speusippus beat thou this
youth for I am angry. Plut. de ser. number. vindict.
Architas of Tarentum was not unlike, who having found all things wrong in his
field, perceiving himself grieved in mind toward his Steward, touched him not
then, but only said departing: It is happy for thee that I am angry: or (as
Lib. de ira. cap. 18.
L(...)tius does relate it) Silly fellow, whom I had killed with blows, if I
were not angry. If these Moralists, Philosophers of discretion, durst not in
heat of their wrath proceed to correction of their servants, (which yet may
seem peculiar and an act legitimate for anger) lest they should exceed the
golden mean of correction and oeconomicall justice* much less may we in ou^
bile and choleric passions march furiously like Iehu to admonition of our
brother, (which should be the purueyer of peace) lest for building we break
down, for planting pluck up. and for saluing his malady, gall the sores and
v^cers of his soul: and therefore in policy and wisdom of the spirit sends
the Apostle Lenity before, as Admonitions harbinger, to prepare for his
coming. 2. Tim. 2. 25. (...), in meekness not fury, Gods servant must
instruct, lest when admonition comes to be entertained, they will not receive
him, because his behavior is, as if he would go further. But of this more anon.

To him. As thou like a good Physician must come, not with To him.
coals but coolers, to allay the fever of thy brothers fury: so in
discretion of time must thou seasonably apply thy medicinable instruction. For
as Physicians forbid (says Lib. 3. de ira.
Seneca) to apply prescripts and medicines cum morbus in accessu est, ac
saeuit, when the hot fit comes, and paroxisme begins to rage: but then
oportunely cum se remittit, when it slaketh its extremity. So that Physician
of the hot ague of anger, Idem ibid.
prescribes this season for her receipt, not to admonish her when the hot fit
is upon her, sed vbi tempore coeperit esse leuior, when by some protraction of
time her extreme heat and hate is abated. Primam iram non audebimus oratione
mulcere, we dare not (says Senec. lib. 3. d^. ira, cap. 39.
he) prescribe any receipt, or minister any precept to anger in her fit: he
gives the reason, Surda est and amens, it is then deaf and mad, and will take
no receipt, no not the balm of Gilead: but whether thou pipe unto her or
lament, sing of mercy or judgment, like the deaf adder she stops her
eare^, and will refuse to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so
wisely, Psalm. 58. 4. It was both deaf and mad in those stif-necked Jews at
Stephens reproof, Act. 7. Deaf, for when their hearts brast for anger, they
stopped their ears says Saint Luke: and mad, for they ran upon him like mad
dogs all at (...)e, and gnashed their teeth: though causlesly both deaf and
(...) at his now Act. 7.
coming to them with a rod, since Act. 6.
before with the spirit of meekness he could not prevail. Which season for
angers cure we should the rather observe, because though all other evils of the
body (says De ira cohib.
Plutarch) admit remedies when the malady rages, yet anger brooks no medicin
when the mind outrageth, but like a fired house fills all full of smoke and
fire, that none can see for the one, no^ for fear of the other dare come to
quench it. And therefore when Rebekah saw Esau on fire of hell, that he fumed
toward his brother for the blessing, ( Genesis 27. 42.) she wisely advised her
son Iaakob not then to go unto him and tell him his fault, but (as the Romans
12. 19.
Apostle speaks) dare locum irae, to give place for a while to his wrath,
verse. 43. My son (says she) hear my voice, arise and fly to Haran to my
brother Laban, and tarry with him awhile till thy brothers fierceness be
assuaged, and then I will send for thee again. Right so (says Lib. 2. de
Iaakob and Esau, ca. 4
Ambrose) if any through envy threaten and menace his brother, let patience
like Rebekah (who by her counsel kept both the one brother from danger, and
the other from his mischief) advise and persuade us to give place for a while
to the rage of wrath, till seasonably we may mitigate her fury. And then
indeed as Iaakob when his brothers heat and hate was allayed, presented him
fitly with Genesis 32. 20.
gifts, and with fair Verse. 18. and cap. 33. 4.
speeches appeased his wrath: so shall we observe the Eccles. 3. 5. 7.
Wise man's opportunity of time: To embrace and to be far from embracing; to
keep silence and to speak, and our words thus spoken fitly for Cicer. lib. 2.
de Orat.
time, person, and place, shall be like apples of gold with pictures of silver,
Pro. 25. 11. The Ovid. lib. 1. de remed.
heathen could see this in the twilight of nature: -- accendas vitia irritesque
vetando,
Tempo ribus si non aggrediare suis.
If thou do not in their right season reprove vices, especially wrath and
anger, thou may sooner kindle then quench them by correction; and therefore
his advice is from natures oracle to reprouers Dum furor in cursu est currenti
caede furori. (he spoke it of love, but must more in hatred be observed.)
Forbear to rebuke men in their fury and violent passions, for Impatiens
animus nec adhuc tractabilis art
Respuit atque odio verba monentis habet,
the impatient mind which is yet intractable hates to be reformed, and will
cast thy words behind him: Aggrediar melius tum cum sua vulnera tangi
Iam sinet, and veris vocibus aptus erit.
The fittest time to pacify his wrath will be, when being somewhat appeased,
he will suffer his sores to be touched and admit instruction: lest his v^cers
(says Sermon. 2. de resur. Dom.
Bernard) being angered and exasperated more Phrenetici non solum repellat, sed
and mordere tentet medici manum, Like a mad man, not only he reject thy
physic, but even seek to bite the hand of his Physician. It was a caveat
given the primitive Church, and observed by ancient Fathers in those bloody
times, Non corripere furentem tyrannum, not to rebuke a tyrant in his fury,
lest that should more incense his rage against the Church. Which Christian
policy (I think) they learned of Saint Paul, who in his Epistle to the
Romans did not so much as touch Nero their bloud-thirsting Emperor, (but
willed Romans 13. 1.
every soul be subject to his power) lest that Lion (as wisely not in that,
but truly in 2. Tim. 4. 17.
another Epistle he termed him) being awaked by reproof, should roar after
his prey, and seek whom he might devour: only he wills Timothy to pray for
the appeasing of such wrathful Tyrants and Kings, that they might lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1. Tim. 2. 2.

Our Savior has prescribed each reprouer a semblable caveat, Mat. 7. 6. Give
not holy things to dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine, Why? lest they
tread them under their feet, (saih he) and turn again all to rent you. By
holy things and pearls he means Piscat. in Mat. 7. 6. schol.
holy admonitions, called holy things, August. lib. 2. de sermon Dom. in mont.
cap. 31.
because they must not be spilt; and pearls, because not contemned: and these
must not be misspent and spilt on dogs and swine, which in their woodnesse
Calvin. harm. Euang. in Mat. 7. 6.
admit no medicine, but Chrysostom. op. imperfect. hom. 17. in Mat. 7.
vomit up their rancor at reproof, and by wholesome admonition become more
sick then salued thereby, lest not only like swine they tread them under
foot, sed illorum prebitorem persequantur, calumnijs ipsum impetentes and
iniurijs afficientes, says Cap. 43. Coment. in concord. Eu^ng.
Iansenius, lest as mad dogs they turn again all to rent you: only then must
we pray for the ass^^aging of their impetuous fury, that God may give them
repentance to know the truth, and come out of that snare of the devil to
amendment of life, 2. Tim. 2. 25. The child and son of God by nature and
grace has in spiritual wisdom observed this caution, and in policy of the
spirit eschewed for a season the rage and wrath of the furious, as Genesis 27. 43.
Iaakob fled from Esau, Exodus 2 15.
Moses from Phara^, 1. Sam 27. 1. 2
David from king Saul, 1 King. 19. 3.
Elias from I^sabel, Act. 9. 25. 2. Cor. ^1. 33.
Paul from the Damascens, Luke 4 30. Ioh. 11. 54.
and Christ himself from the Jews, nec defuit eis refugium and consolatio,
says a Father, neither wanted they in this flight comfort for a city of
refuge: for Genesis 29. 13. 14
Iaakob found favor in Labans house, Exodus 2. 22.
Moses a rich father in law, 2. Sam. 2 4.
David the kingdom, 1 King. 19. 5.
Elias an Angel to feed him, Act. 9. 27.
Paul spiritual brethren to comfort him, and Christ the comforter.

All these gave place to wrath for a season, and when it came, most of them
seeing the wrath of their enemies allayed, fitted opportunity to pacify their
fury. Therefore the faults of offenders (says Lib. de constable. vis and vur. c. 8.
Austine) must estsoones crave silence for a season, (he means anger, wrath
and fury) Vt aptiori tempore corrigantur, That in fitter time they may be
corrected: Ne exasperatus increpatione non proficiat, sed magis ex correptione
scandalnm sumat, Least the party exasperated by rebuke be not bettered, but
more scandalized by unseasonable reproof. And this he thinks discretum
silentium, a discreet silence, and Augu lib 1. de Cinis. De^. cap. 9.
consilium charitatis, the counsel of charity, and policy of the spirit. For
as the Carbo ad Pru(...). si^ Hebr.
cold and dead coal (says Solomon) is to a burning coal, Pro. 26. 20. that
is, augmenteth the heat (says Hugo), so though thy heat be cooled, and thine
anger dead out, yet if thou come to thy brother in the heat and flame of his
fury, thou shall but lay sticks upon his fire (says Syracides) and increase
the flame, Eccles. 8. 3. therefore his advice is wise, verse. 10. Kindle not the
coals of sins when thou rebukest them, least thou be burnt in the fiery
flames of their sins. Neither offer to make friendship (says Solomon) with
the wrathful man, or man in his wrath, nor walk with the furious man least
thou learn his ways, and receive destruction to thy self, Prou. 22. 24. the
frenzy and strength of anger like the city Ai (Josh. 8. 5.) must be won by
retiring from it for a season. Go then to thy patient, not in his impatiencie
and hot fit of fury, but when the fever slacketh, and the heat is abated, and
then Phisitian-like apply thy medicine to his malady, and

Tell him his fault, (...), reprove him, says Math 18. 15.
Mat. (...) Tell him his fault.
sharply rebuke him, says Luke 17. 3.
Luke. The Apostle in his charge to 2. Timoth. 4. 2
Timothy joins both these together, (...), reprove, rebuke, as if he had
said, after rebuke, where first reproof will not prevail, and then power in
wine to search, when oil cannot salve. But in this private parley of
pacification, the former must qualify the later, (...) reprove him, or (as our
english translation moderatly renders that word) Tell him his fault, that is,
says Comment. in Mat. 18. 15.
Aretius, Lay his trespass before his eyes, the ground of his fault, the
quality and quantity of his offense. Non quaerendo quid reprehendas, sed
videndo quid corrigas, (says Sermon. 16. d^ verb. Dom.
Austine) not prying what thou can reprove, but marking what thou may
amend. For Chrysostom. hom. 61. in Mat. 18.
Christ here says not, accuse, rebuke, ask satisfaction and punishment, but
tell him his fault; as if he had said, Brent. in Lex. 17. 3.
Object not again contumelious terms; vpbraid not the injury with
reproachful words, but admonish him lovingly, reprove him friendly, and
entreat him gently, that he do so no more evil entreat thee. Brethren (says
the Apostle) if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one, (...), with the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self lest thou also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1. The Metaphor of
restoring the Apostle borrows from Surgeons or Bone-setters, (as Heming.
Aret. and Illyr. in Gal. 6. 1.
some think) who softly handle a member out of joint, that more nimbly they
may set it and restore the luxate member to his proper place: to teach them,
who must Surgeon-like set and restore a member out of joint, to handle it
warily and charily, with the spirit of meeknes: that is, Heming. ibid.
not snappishly but gently, not with delusion but commiseration, not rigorously
but meekly. And to induce thee thereto, the Apostle uses every word as a motive
of meekness, for each is pregnant and perswasiue says In hunc locum
Illiricus. Brethren, whom sympathy should move to commiseration: if a man,
whose humane nature Genesis 6. 5. Leuit. 6. 3. Hos. 6. ^
as he is man, prone to err, slip, and be deceived, must of men be borne with
and pitied: be overtaken, not through obstinatemalice, but Satan's subtlety
and the fleshes infirmity: in any fault, which is no notorious fall from his
God, but a slip toward his brother: you which are spiritual, 1. Cor. 2. 15:
discreet to judge all things, and Romans 15. 1.
strong to bear the infirmity of the weak: restore such a one, not broken
off from the body, but a little out of square: with the spirit of meekness,
who himself being the comforter, is Chrysostom.
pleased with this lenity of reproof: Calvin.
with thy spirit of meekness, lest thy gesture be mild when thine heart is
truculent and insulting: considering thy self, that thou art a (...) Iam. 5.
17.
man subject to like passions as he is, and must therefore have compassion on
his infirmities, (as in natural passions Heb. 2. 17.
Christ our Lord was made in all things like his brethren, that he might be
compassionate) that seeing thou may be tempted in all things that he is, thou
may be touched with the feeling of his infirmities, as that holy father in
Saint Sermon 2 de refur. Dom.
Bernard, who hearing that his brother had trespassed against him, condoled his
fall with this voice of pity, Ille hodie and ego cras, he is fallen to day,
and I shall (it may be) tomorrow: considering thy self by him, consider by thy
self him, that is by thee, and mark every thing, says Syracides, Eccles. 31.
15. Considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Let us first consider
says Lib 2 de sermon Dom. in monte cap. 30.
Austine, whether we have not, or had not, or might not have had the like
fault: if none of these, yet tangat memoriam communis fragilitas, let us
remember we are men subject to like passions, and there learn pity to temper
our reproof to win a brother, and policy to cover the hook of admonition with
the bait of pleasant speech, to catch a fish, and but tell him his fault. For
although when with Peter, Luke 5. we fish with the net to catch a multitude of
fishes, we may and must vtistrepitu and clamore, vt pisces cogantur in rete, as
one speaks, Esa. 58. 1.
Cry aloude, and spare not to lift up our voice like a trumpet, and Tit. 1. 13.
rebuking them sharply, Luke 14. 23.
compel them to come in, that his net may be full. (As he himself by this
showting drove those many Jews into the net, and enclosed a great multitude of
fishes, even three thousand souls, Act. 2. 41.) Yet when with him ( Mat. 17.)
we fish with an angle, Qua singularis est piscatio, and ad vnum tantum piscem
capiendum dirigitur, as the same author adds, which is for one fish in
particular, to convert a brother, and save a soul from death, we must not make
great noise with rebuke, and outcries with reproof, but use silence and
quietness of admonition: nor though we angle must we come with a (...) 1. Cor.
4. 21.
rod, but in the spirit of meekness; or if with the rod of the spirit, not
bait our hook of admonition with judgment, and that Mark. 9. 44.
worm that never dies. Therefore do but tell him his fault says Christ,
restore him with the spirit of meekness says his Apostle, count him not as an
enemy, but admonish him as a brother, 2. These. 3. 15. In this angling for one
to win a brother, the heathen could see that clamors must be left, and the
hook of reproof warily covered that no choler may appear. All care and
diligence must be taken, says Cicer. lib. de Amu^t.
he, Primum vt admonitio acorbitate, deinde obiurgatio contumeliae vacet, first
that our admonition be void of bitterness, then that blaming be without
reproach. And therefore Dialog. de ira coh^b.
Plutarch advises to use in this parley a point of Rhetoric, that if not
translating the crime, yet extenuating his offense, we remove the fact farthest
from contempt or violence, and rather impute it to some folly or lack of wit,
to perturbation, to necessity, or some misfortune. For if thou bring him a
glass only to show his deformity of life, allidet parieti, he will dash it
against the wall, and his mote of anger will grow thereby to a beam of hatred,
says Austine. If thou blow the spark it will burn, if thou spit upon it, it
shall be quenched; and both these come from the mouth, says the Wise man,
Eceles. 28. 12. for as water cast into the fire when it flameth, extinguisheth
the heat, so, says Homil. 50. in Genesis
Chrysostom, Verbum cum man suetudine prolatum, a word spoken with mildness
cools the mind incensed with anger. Neither can the Physician (says Homil.
29 ad pop. Ant^och.
he) by all his sedulitie swage so quickly his patients fever, as the mild
admonisher propriorum spiratione sermonum with the cooling breath of mild
instruction allay the quartaine yea quotidian ague of the impatients anger. For
whereas indeed the Natura contumax est huma n^s animus, sequitur potius quam
ducitur. Senec. lib. 1. d^ clem cap. 24.
mind of man is naturally stubborn, and rather willingly follows, then with
rough means will be led: and therefore Plus haec via proficitur, says Seneca,
it yields with mildness, and with austeritie rather breaks then bends:
so the same becoming more froward and perverse with perturbance, grows more
impatient of check, and less hopeful to be won, Plus itaque proficit amica
correptio quam turbulenta accusatio, says Lib. 8. in Luc. 17. 3.
Ambrose on these words: more therefore is anger assuaged by a friendly
admonition then by a turbulent accusation. Tell him his fault then, and go to
him not with a rod, but in the spirit of meekness; and surely such friendly
breath warmed with coals of love, like summer air opens the pores that it
self may enter: but if it be too sharp like cold winter air, it obdurates
the skin, shuts the pores, and stops its own ingresse and entrance. Go
not with a Prophets denunciation, but with the Apostles obsecration; go not
like Barrabas a son of confusion, but like Barnabas a son of consolation;
go and power in not wine to exasperate his ulcers, but oil of love to salve
his bile; go in the soft and still voice to angle for one fish, and go not in
thunder and earthquake, but when thou should drive a multitude into the net:
if in either of these thou go to thy weak and fuming brother, with thy
earthquake thou shall break the bruised reed, and with thy strong wind
inflame the smoking flax, do but tell him his fault. Between thee and him
alone.


Neither must this conference for concord, and parley of pacification be on the
house tops before all Israel, but in the ear, between thee and him alone
says our Savior: and therefore the Syriack Translator for reprove, uses a
(...) Abscondo.
word which signifies to reprove and hide, as a Fabric. dict. Syrochald.
Linguist observes. For indeed if thou diuulge private injuries by a public
reproof, thou art not a reprouer but a betrayer says Sermon. 16. de verb Dom.
Austine: debate thy quarrel with thy neighbor alone, (the holy Ghost
commands it by the mouth of Solomon) and discover not the secret to another,
lest he that hears thee put thee to shame, and thine infamy be irreuocable,
Prou. 25. 9. For as 1. Cor. 12. 23.
nature bids every man put more comeliness on, and not publish his uncomely
parts: so grace Mat. 1. 19.
taught Joseph to cover Mary's secrets, and not make her a public example: and
both may lesson thee to Col. 3. 14.
put on love Mat. 22 12.
the wedding garment, to 1. Pet. 4. 8.
cover a multitude of his private sins, nay all his trespasses, Prou. 10. 12.
and rather with Genesis 9. 23.
Shem and Theodor. hist. o^^l. lib. 1. cap. 12
Constantine to cover with thy cloak his faults from the eye of others, then
like cursed Cham, if not uncover with thy hand his shame to the eye, yet
discover with thy tongue his nakedness to the ear of all men. And therefore
must thou debate the matter between thee and him alone, vt fama conseruetur,
says 2. 2. Quaest. 33 art. 7.
Thomas and Ju Mat. 18. quas^. 97.
Tostatus discussing this by question, that his name be not defamed, and by
open rebuke through shame apologize his offense, says Com. in Mat. 28. 15.
Jerome, and Saint Sermon. 16. d^ verb. Dom.
Austine. And as Christ here by precept enioyneth us all to respect in private
reprehensions the fame of our brethren: so have the godly practiced it even in
their public rebukes, and tendered the name of their sisters, witness Saint
Luke, who uncovering Mary Magdalens faults, discovered not her name, but only
says, Behold there was a woman a sinner in the city, Luke 7. 37: but Saint
Mark recounting her devout service and sweet ointments bestowed on Christ's
burial, published her proper name: Mary Magdalen, says he, not a woman, but
Mary Magdalen brought sweet ointments that she might embalme him, Mark 16. 1.
Contrary to the practice of some, dealing with their brother as the Jews did
with Christ, who being forced with common rumor and report to admire his
miracles, yet of envy would at least conceal his name, Hic homo, This fellow
does many miracles, John 11. 47. not Jesus of Nazareth, but this man: and, the
John 12. 19.
world goes after him. But when they wrote the title of his fained crime on
the tree, then of malice they published his name, and cried it at the cross,
not with Hic homo, but Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews, John 19. 19. and
that in three most famous tongues, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that it might be
understood and read of all men; yea in Capital letters they made it plain,
that (as the Abak. 2. 2.
Prophet speaks) all men might run and read it.

Thou must rather follow thy heavenly Father, who reproving Psalm. 50. 22.
the wrath of the wicked, to win him to peace, tells him as it were between
them two alone, These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, therefore
thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am such a one as thy self; but I will
reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done, not before
others, but before thee, (...), before thine eyes, not in the sight of all men,
or as the word, I will set, imports Calu. and M^ll. in Psalm 50. 21.
rather, I will show thee a catalogue of all thy sins: to teach us that we
also show our brother only the bill of his offenses, and not reckon the score
before all men, least he either for shame deny the debt, or in anger and
impatience defer the payment, and run more on the score. Between thee and
him alone. And if thus seasonably thou minister medicinable instruction to thy
distempered brother, thou shall cure his fever if he receive it, and shall
win thy brother, says our Savior. He says not, thou shall win
satisfaction and recompense for his wrongs, but thou have won thy brother,
says Hom. 62. in Mat. 18. 15.
Chrysostom: showing thee thereby that this enmity was loss and de^riment to
you both, to the one of his brother, to the other of his own salvation, and by
thy means both shall be recovered, an helpful brother to thy self, and an
obedient son to his heavenly Father. This is Christ's dismission in my text,
Go thy way, amplified by that whole arrant in the 18. of Matthew, If thy
brother, by nature or grace, trespass, by word or deed, against thee, that
thou only art co^scious of his offense; go, in body, if he be near, or in mind
if he be far remote: thou in thy tempered mood, to him in the season of his
abated heat, and tell him his fault, in the spirit of meekness between thee
and him alone, tendering his fame; that if he hear thee, thou may win thy
brother. Thus Laban sought reconcilement with Iaakob, Genes. 31. Examples of
the doctrine.
44. Iaakob with Esau, Genesis 33. Iaakobs children with Joseph, Genesis 50. 17. and
even cursing Shime^ with David, 2. Sam. 19. 19. And of al other, famous is that
going of Abraham to Lot, who sought reconcilement of his nephew, and came to
this quareller like the Dove with an Olive branch of peace in his mouth, Genesis
13. Let there be I pray thee no strife between me and thee, neither between my
heard-man and thine, for we are brethren, for we are brethren; and if these
sugared words cannot win him to peace, see how he yields him the choice of
his own inheritance: Is not the whole land before thee, take which hand thou will, Pacis studio de suo iure cedit, says In Genesis 13.
Iunius, He goes to buy peace with resignation of his own right* O si inuenem
aliquem Iuristam adhibuisset in consilium, says Coment. in Genesis 13.
Luther, O if he had asked counsel of some young Lawyer, he would have advised
him not to go to Lot for unity, but to law for the lot of his inheritance: he
would have counseled him not to yield an inch, but have urged his right unto
him, and Apices legum.
every jot and tittle of the law: that to him was made the promise of the land,
that this right must be kept and defended, least he injury not himself alone,
but wrong his posterity, and impose perpetual bondage upon his children: an
honest and fair speech in show, but because it makes not for concord, it must
be rejected, though it seem to be drawn from the bosom of the law.

I wish our contentious te^^ers, Quibus trina no^ sufficient fora, (as use,
reproving going to law, when we should go to our brother for faults and
trespasses.
Seneca speaks of such) whose strife three Courts (I may ad threescore
terms) cannot decide, would follow Christ's precept or Abraham's practice, and go
to their brother for peace, rather then to the bench for pacification. If their
brother trepasse against h Lib. 2. de Ira. cap. 9.
them, they go their way indeed, but the way of peace have they not known,
when for trifles they go to law one with another. For as Christ here bids them
go to their brother, so Solomon forbids them this going to the bench, Prou. 25.
8. Go not forth hastily to sue any man, least thou know not what to do in the
end thereof when thy neighbor has put thee to shame, but debate the matter
with thy neighbor. They go indeed, but they run when they were not sent, for
our Savior bids them stay at home, Math. 5. 40. If any man (says Christ) will
sue thee at the law and take away thy Luke 6. 29.
cloak, let him have thy coat also, which is nearer unto thee, yea thy very
shirt, says Coment. in Mat 5. 40.
Aretius. Let them hear the Apostles check, expounding his Masters meaning,
1. Corinthans 6. 7. Now this is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law
one with another, why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather sustain ye not
harm? If they will not hearken to the mouth of wisdom, what their Advocate
with the Father teaches, let them hear the tongue of policy, what the
advocate for their brother pleads* let them hoth hear how with other men's
mouths they bite and devour, yea consume one another, that if the Gospel
cannot school them in this Christian precept, the Law, I say the law may be
their schoolemaister to bring them to Christ: not that with the Anabaptists I
make a question, whether Christians may go to law; for the Apostle allows it
in lawful manner, 1. Cor. 6. 4. and the P. Martyr. and Gualth. in 1. Cor. 6.
quaest. an liceat Christianis iudicio experiri.
learned have put it out of question, no, Currat lex and ^^uat Rex, as the
proverb ruuneth, The King by judgment (...)eth the country, Prou. 29. 4. and
we know it true of both divine and humane, 1. Tim. 1. 8.
that the law is good if a man use it lawfully. But we should not go forth
hastily to sue any man, says Solomon not for toys and trifles says Gualther,
but use it as physic for those diseases which cannot otherwise be cured. For
as he not only spends his purse, but spoils his constitution, that (...) the
(...) for (...) of his stomach, which by a walk might be (...) ^^ he also not
only mis-spendeth his (...), bu^ diste^pereth his mind, that goes to the
Counselor for every offense that he stomacketh, if by this going to his
brother it might be amended. And indeed if Lib. 3 d^ Rep.
Plato thought it a sign of a diste^pered body politic, when the citizens run
much to physic, and go often to law: how much more are their minds out of
temper, when for the one the Physicians shops (as he adds) are needlessly, and
for the other the Lawyers courts causlesly set open? The more blame and
reproof deserves he, who (as that Philosopher adds) not only spends in law
the greatest part of his life, being now a Plaintiff, now a Defendant, but in
his foolish mind thinks to win credit and reputation by his strife; that
though he wrong others with his will, yet by his wit can wrangle and wind out
himself through his quirkes of law, and draw others before Magistrates, Idque
sapenumero exiguarum a^q^e vilissimarum rerum causa, and that often for very
toys and trifles of offense: surely as such a one may kill his brother with
the law, so shall he find it at his death a killing letter to his conscience, a
dead letter to his good name, and may justly expect that wranglers Epitaph at
(...) specilog. in Pro. 20. 3.
Millain to be set upon his tomb, Ioh. Iac. Triultit^^ qut nunquam qui^uit, nec
alios quiescere passus est, hic tand^ qui^scit ipse, Here rests he in mould,
that took no rest for gold, nor suffered them to rest that would. How much
rather should thou follow Pro. 3. 29 30.
Salomon^ advice, to intend no hurt against thy neighbor, seeing he does dwell
by thee without fear; neither strive with (...)uslesse when he has done thee
no wrong: or if he has done thee some wrong, yet go not forth hastily to sue
any. Me thinks this good Physician counsels thee to walk within doors, and
take some kitchen physic of thy brother, before thou go to that hal physic,
which will purge thy purse be so reit ease thy stomach. We see how our Savior
the best Physician, advises thee first to go to thy brother if he trespass
against thee; and if he will not hear thee, then tell it to the Church, Math.
18. We see Abraham took this word Brother for his advocate to end strife
betwixt him and Let: and we hear how many impo^etishe^^y long law (like the
Mark 5. 26.
woman that was twelve years in the Physicians hands) have suffered many
things of many judicial Physicians, and have spent all that they had, and it
a^ailed them nothing, but became much worse, and at last were feign to take
this Lawyer for their Attorney, as she did Christ her elder brother for her
Physician. It is indeed these Possessiues meum and tuum (propieties banished
out of Plato his commonwealth) which sets us all by the ears, while every man
looks on his own things, and not on the things of other also. Howbeit if that
Christian community which those primitive Christians enjoyed, Acts 2. or if
that unity of mind and heart, wherein they joined, Acts 4. or (as the
Aristot. lib. 8 Ethic.
moral Philosopher could observe) if charity reigned among men, all laws and
statutes should be superfluous, and lawmakers might hang up their net, or
weaue the spiders web to catch flies: but seeing neither that community among
men (who look on their own things) nor yet common unity with them (who look
not on the things of other men, but to lust after them) is so to be expected,
but that some will sue thee forthy coat, Math. 5. 40. yea strive with thee
causlesse when thou have done him no wrong, and that nullo proposito lucro,
contendendi tamen studio, not so much for his profit contend, as for thy
disprofit through contention, as an Plut. lib. de Frat amor.
heathen in his days observed of some: better it were for thee in policy and
discretion to follow Saint Paul's counsel, Rather to suffer some wrong, rather
to sustain some harm, then (as a Beaux. harm. Euang in Man. 5. 40.
writer notes) for to win thy coat, to lose thy cloak, and other clothes
also: for adiudicent tibi licet tunicam (says he of their Lawyers) non prius
tamen quam and pallium and omnia tua exsuxerint, although they adiudge thee thy
coat, yet not before they have themselves gotten thy cloak and all thou have.
I speak not this to damme up the current of justice in legitimate decisions,
but only to persuade by Christ's precept and Abraham's practice to go to thy
brother who has offended thee, before thou run to the bar for mends of the
offense. I speak it, not to give this water any passage in the Court, no not a
little, least like that water in Cap. 47.
Ezechiel, at first it be but to the ankles, but afterward grow up to the
knees, and after to the loins, and in fine prove a river which cannot be
passed over. For the beginner of strife opens the waters, faith Solomon;
therefore or ever the contention be meddled with, leave off, Prou. 17. 14. I
speak it to persuade thee to stand pausing at this river Rubicon with Suet. in
vita Cas. (...). 31. ^
C^sar, before thou plunge thy self in this water of Marah and contention,
Etiam adhuc regredi possum^^, Brother yet we may go back again to our home,
and not open the waters upon our selves: Quod si ponticulum transierimus, omnia
^^mis agenda erunt: But if we pass through this river, we cannot go back til
one or rather both be undone. Take heed then of opening these waters, beware of
Caesar's rash resolution, Eatur quo inimicorum (...) vo^at ^acta est alta, Let
me go whither mine adversaries trespass calls me, the dice is thrown, come
what will come of the hazard and chance: perchance ye shall both play so long
at the bar till the box have all. Neither speak I this to censure the plea
of the faithful Advocates, but only to dissuade wranglers from their
unlawful lawing; and rather go to their brother for the wrong, least they
meet with an ambidexter Attorney, who like him taxed in the Epigramme. z
Martial. lib. 1. Epigram. 96.


Quod cl^ma^ semper, quod agentibus obstrepis Heli,
No^ facis hoc gratis; accipis vt taceas:
Either furbisheth up an old rotten cause with color of troth, and with
clamorous eloquence sets a good face on a bad matter, or through mercenary
silence betrays undertaken equity: much like Aul. Gell. l. 11 n^ct. attic.
cap. 9
Demosthenes the Counselor, who being entertained in the plea of the Athenians
against the Ambassadors of Miletum, first day indeed pleaded hard against them,
but when at night they had bribed him, vti ne contradiceret, that he would not
plead against their cause; the next court day coming forth to the citizens
with much furre about his neck, he told them and (...) pati, that he had caught
a cold, and had so lost his voice that he could not speak a word against the
Milesians. No Demosthenes (cried one of the company) Non (...) pateris, thou
have not caught cold but gold, and that has taken away thy voice. Neither
concealed be afterward this corruption, but vaunted of it proudly, says mine
author; for asking Aristademus the actor, for how much he sold his speech, and
he told him for a talent; but I (says he) have sold my silence for more. I
speak this, that thou would rather go to thy brother and make up the breach
at home, then to it, that for stopping up one hole in thy state, will perchance
make a greater gap in thy condition. For howsoever our gracious Sovereign (as
the report goes) has limited fees, and bounded the dependence of cases in the
Court, yet thou perchance may either meet with one of those sour insatiable
Prou. 30. 16.
gluttons, which cry, Give, give, and never say, It is enough: or at least
with one that can spinne out the thread of a suit so long, till thou will want
weft: or if he weaue the web to day, can by craft like Penelope, unweave it to
morrow. Thou may meet with a procrastinating, or rather proterminating
Advocate, who like him Prou. 3. 28. will say unto thee every day, Come again to
morrow, and will procure thy strife til the next, when this term he might
procure thy peace, because he has an action to thy purse, as the adversary to
thy land: Saepe causas tam diu deferunt, vt litigantibus plusquam totum
auferant, says De vi^it. hum. condit.
Innocentius of such pleaders, Often they defer the cases so long, that they
beggar their clients: he gives the reason, quia mayor est expensarum sumptus
quam sententiae fructus, because they spend more in the plea then the judgment
and sentence will profit them: Nec terminantur negotia pauperum (says he)
quousque eorum marsupia sint euacuata, neither is the poor man's suit ended
till his purse be drawn dry. Not as though all delaying of suits were
altogether to be condemned, says Coment. in 1. C^r. 6. quaest. supra cit.
Peter Martyr: for often in courts of judgment many things by delay are
detected, which through the craft and subtlety of wranglers were concealed:
and as truth is the daughter of time, so may a Judge like Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
Maximus, who ( cunctando restituit rem) by deferring of judgment bring things
to light which were hid in darkness. Which protraction of cases should yet so
deter you from the bar, ne litigatores expilentur, as he speaks, lest the
suitors purse be pilled: that rather ye should go to your brother to beg, then
to the bar to buy peace at so high a rate. The cost and charges whereof did
so affright Themistocles, that Aelian. var. hist. lib. 9. ca 18.
he plainly confessed, that if one showed him two ways, the one leading to
hell, and the other to the bar, he would far more willingly take that way
which leads to hell; too sharp a censure indeed against the court of justice.
I rather from Christ here advise thee, that if thy b^other trespass against
thee, first go unto him for amends, or if he has ought against thee pro
contumeli^ affectione, pro corporali l^sione, pro fam^ denigratione, pro anim^
l^sione, pro temper alium substractione, as Co(...)ns* in Mat. 5. 24.
Hugo speaks, either for hurting him in his body, or impeaching him in his
name, or impairing him in his soul, or impouerishing him* in his goods* go thy
way unto him first. And thou litigious quarreller, who had rather ride an
hundred miles to the law, then go a furlong to thy brother for agreement, let
me say unto thee, as our Savior does in the next words to my text: Agree with
thine adversary quickly, if thou can not quickly, before two or three
friends or daies-men at home, yet while thou art in the way with him in thy
long journey, lest thine adversary deliver thee to the law, and the law
deliver thee to the corrupted Advocate: verily I say unto thee, thou shall not
come out thence till thou have spent the uttermost farthing. Go to thy brother.

The private profit whereof, as it may much allure us, so 2. Use, exhorting to
go unto our brother.
should our Lords command more enforce us thereunto; and that also be more
forcible to all, seeing it comes with such emphaticall authority, as, I say
unto you, I who created you of nothing, I who redeemed you with my dearest
blood, I who will crown you with glory if you obey, or cloth you with
confusion if ye disobey my voice, I say unto you. This I, Abraham heard before
the law, and in obedience thereof went to his brother for agreement, and showed
thereby the effect of this law written in his heart: to shame Christian
gospellers, if in this they follow not the steps of their father Abraham, who
have both a menacing law to threaten the with judgment if they neglect, and a
promising Gospel to reward the^ with mercy, if they hearken to the voice of
this I. This one letter from Absolons mouth was more persw^siue to his seruant^
in wicked designs, then all the tongues of men and angels besides* 2. Sam. ^3.
Go and do it, Ego s^m qui pr^cipi^, for it is I that command you, and they
obeyed him. It was but a bare (...) from the tongue of Pythag^ras, which being
tied to the ^ares of his scholars, like a small rudder, turned about the whole
ship whither soever that governor lusted. It was I say unto you from the
Centurions mouth, that enforced soldiers to their duty, though a froward and
stubborn generation, Mat. 8. 9. I say to one, go, and he goes: and to
another, come, and he comes: and to my servant, do this, and he does it. And
surely as he spoke to the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. If thou knew or
remembrest rather who it is that says unto thee, Go thy way to thy brother, if
thou do not run when he bids thee go, more art thou disobedient then
Absolons servants, more refractarie then Pythagoras scholars, and more
undutiful then barbarous soldiers to their Lord, their master, and their
Captain. Howbeit, if neither our Lords command whose will is our law, nor the
practice of his servants whose steps we should follow, can induce us hereunto,
yet for shame of our profession, and discredit of our Gospel, let Christians
tread the steps of heathenish and ethnicke folk; who but mere moralists,
without divine law to instruct their understandings, without promising Gospel
to reward their well doings, if in this point of Christianity they prevent us,
shall go before us into the kingdom of heaven, and rise up in judgment at the
last day and condemn us. We read, that Plut. de ir^ cohib.
Aristippus the Philosopher in some choler raging toward Aeschines, when one
by asked him, where is now your love and amity Aristippus? It is indeed
asleep (quoth he) but I am indeuoring to wake it up again: and soon after
meeting with Aeschines his said enemy, What (says he) Aeschines seem I to
thee altogether so desperate, ungracious, and incurable, that you think me
unworthy of reproof for mine offense? No marvel replied the other, if thou
being more discreet in all other things then I, did in this also first move
unity, and see what was best to be done. Though sometime with Aristippus we
raise up our dead love, and waken our sleeping charity toward our brethren,
yet in this to go to our foes and entreat agreement, we often come short of the
pagane Philosopher; when his brother in a certain braule threatened Pl^tarch.
ib.
Euclide vengeance for his trespass, Peream, nisi te vlciscar, let me perish
if I revenge not this wrong: he replied with words of oil, soft as butter,
Ipse ve^^peream, nisi te ad c^ncordiam reconciliem, but let me perish, if I
reconcile thee not unto me* If thus the Gentiles which have not the law* do by
nature the things of the law, as the Romans 2. 14.
Apostle speaks, shall they not judge us who rest in the law, and know his
will, nor only have this 2. Pet. 2. 19.
candle to be a Psalm. 1^9.
lantern to our feet, but have also the Day Star of the Gospel to go
before us to Christ? Wherein yet it is a world to see, how the wisdom of the
flesh beholding her wealth, and glory, and the bright angel before her, is
afraid to go, and like Balaams Ass stands still when she is driven. For as
H(...)l. 18. in Mat.
Chrysostom noted a ridiculous Go greater ones to the less.
custom in some fools, Qui expectant vt prius salutentur ab ob(...)s, whose
greatness expects that others first put off to them, or else they salute not
the obuious, deeming (as Arbore^s in Ma^h.
another observes) that their authority is impeached, their glory eclipsed,
their dignity vilified, and their greatness diminished, if they prevent
others in giving good-day. So is it as notable a folly in some men of note,
when they stand so much upon their standing, that they deem it disgrace to
their person, pre-eminence, and place, if they make themselves so cheap, as to
become proloquutors for peace to their subordinates. Wherein yet if they either
remembered, that Prou. 15. 33.
humility goes before honor, they would with Zach^^s come down from their
height, and be Romans 12. 16.
not high minded, but make themselves equal to them of the lower sort, and
Ma^ch. 23. ^2.
humble themselves that they might be exalted: or if they considered the nature
of honor, that it is Arist. lib. 1. ^^hic. cap. 5.
rather in the giver then in the receiver thereof, as their Philosopher
teaches, they would at the Romans 12. 10.
Apostles advice: In giving honor g^ one before another for agreement; and
count it a man's honor with Solomon, to cease from strife, Prou. 20. 3. And if
Abraham would so descend from his greatness, as to go to Lot for agreement,
the father of the faithful to a then faithless son, the heir of the
promise to a brother without inheritance, the superior to the in^eriour, the
senior to the junior, the uncle to his nephew, the master to his scholar, a
Prophet and a Priest to a (...).
no^ice in knowledge, as a S^lu^e. ^^arrat in Genesis 13.
Writer speaks; surely whosoever will be the children of Abraham, must follow
the steps of their father Abraham, and though elder, higher* and more learned,
go first to their brother with oblivion of their years* descent from their
dignity, and ignorance of their learning in this behalf. Neither must we with
Charecrates in Xenophon. l^. 2. de fa^t. and dict. Socrat.
Xenophon plead Go lesser ones to the great.
iunioritie and indiscretion of years, expecting the elder to begin
reconcilement: whom when Socrates by many reasons urged to speak first to his
brother Ch^rephon, and prevent him with conditions of peace, Thou speak
absurdly Socrates, says he, who willest me that am junior to begin, seeing
good manners require that the elder go before. What? replied Socrates, does not
the junior when he meets him give his senior the wall, and rises at his
coming to offer him the better place? An times incipere ne turpe appareat, si
prior fratri tuo been agas? Art thou afraid to begin, lest it redound to thy
shame if thou prevent thy brother in well doing? No, no, (beloved brethren)
good manners it is in this, to go before our betters, and no shame to prevent
our elders in well doing. Our Savior without exc^ption of age, degree, place,
or person, sends each offender to seek reconcilement of his brother.

Yea but thou replyest: (says Homil. 11. in Mat. 5. oper. imperfect.
Chrysostom) He has hurt me, and I have not offended him, and therefore ought
he to come to me, and not I to go to him. O, says that Father, (for I suppose
such a golden saying must needs proceed from a i. A golden mouth.
Chrysostom, though it be counted a bastard) O says he, if thy Lord for the
greater glory of thy salvation commands thee to make Go to thine offender.
friendship with thine offender, being by him hurt, thou ought rather first
to entreat him, that thou may get of thy Lord a double reward. One, because
thou sufferedst the wrong: another, because thou first soughtest reconcilement.
For if thou have offended* and therefore entreated him, God will pardon thy
fault, sath first thou intreatedst him, yet no reward shall thou have, because
being faulty thou besoughtest him: but if he has wronged thee, and yet thou
first wentest to him for agreement, thou shall have great reward. Hasten
therefore to prevent thine enemy, lest thou foreslowing that opportunity of
gain, he go before thee and catch thy reward. Yea Christ himself (says that
Chrysostom* him. 17. in Mat 5. sic Theophilan Mat. 5. 24.
Father) L^s^m remittit, sends the offended to his brother for peace, and
seems to say to him, rather then to the offending these words of my text, Go
to thy brother, if he has ought against thee, he adds not, justly, or
iniustly, but agree with thine adversary, whether he be the plaintiff or
defendant, as the word in the Syriacke imports Iunius in Syriac. Test. Mat. 5
25.
both. Neither says he, reconcile thy brother to thee, as if he only sent him
who had offended, but to show that he dismisseth the offended to his brother:
he speaks in the passive, (...), go thy way and be reconciled: which agrees
offendendi and offenso to both parties, whether offending or offended, as Har^.
Euan. cap ^1.
Chemnitius observes on my Text. Which as he there does but insinuate, so
plainly expresses he this meaning Mat. 18. 15. If thy brother trespass
against thee (says Christ) go thou unto him. So Abraham who had not offended
Lot, but was wronged by him and his heardmen, went to him for peace, and first
sought reconcilement, Genesis 13. 8. So Genesis ^1. 44.
Laban with Iaakob, Genesis 32. and 33
Iaakob with Esau, Genesis 45. 1. 2. 3.
Joseph with his offending brethren, first begins to make friendship. Yea God
himself first seeks reconcilement with his enemies which dwell on the earth,
2. Cor. 5. 19. God in Christ (says the Apostle) reconciled the world to
himself, not God was reconciled, or reconciled himself, but he was the first
mouer of this peace, the agent of this amity, and reconciled the world unto
himself, yea comes unto them by his ambassadors, beseeching and praying his
enemies to be reconciled; as if he entreated them to be forgiven and pardoned
of their transgressions. Seeing then the King of kings goes to his rebellious
subjects for unity, the Creator to the creature, love it self to hatred it
self, the potter to his vessel of earth, God to man, the Almighty to a worm
crawling between heaven and earth; let us be followers of God as dear
children, and find them who sought us not, and manifest our selves to them that
asked not after us, yea all the day long stretch forth our hands of fellowship
and friendship unto a gaine-saying people. I have heard some brag (says Tom.
5. sermon. diligamus omnes ^id persequentes
Chrysostom) that they went not again to them, who but once did not respect
them, which yet their Lord sibi gloriae duxit, counted his great glory. For
how often did men spit at him? how often did they despise him? whom
nevertheless he neglected not to beseech often with tears, as he did
Jerusalem, quoties volui, how often would I have reconciled thee, and thou
would not? And in imitation of thy Savior say thou of thy brother, I will
never desist to win thee from hatred, though an hundred times I get the
repulse. For indeed as Xenoph ibid.
Socrates told the younger, and (it may be) offended brother, so does thy
Savior here to thee; If I thought him fitter then thee to begin this union, I
would have commanded him to go to his brother: but seeing thou art more like
to effect it, I say unto thee, If thy brother trespass against thee, go thou
unto him to seek reconcilement. Go then like the Dove with an olive branch of
peace in thy mouth: Is it peace my brother, is thine heart upright toward me,
as mine is toward thee? Seek him, solicit him in the Apostles phrase, Peace
be to this house, to this chamber, to this study; and if the son of peace be
there, it shall rest upon him; if not, it shall return to thee again. Go
offender, how mean soever; go offended, how great soever ye be: go your way in
the spirit of meekness, and as Genesis 43. 11.
Jacob advised his sons, Arise, go to the man, and take of the best fruit of
the land in your vessel, love, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, and
meekness, the fruits of the spirit, and bring the man a present: that which
ye have taken, carry back in your hands; that wrong which ye have done,
carry in your mouths, lest it were some oversight: arise and go again to the
man, and God almighty give you grace and favor in the sight of the man, that
he may deliver you your brother: Go thy way.

As thus thou art dismissed from the altar to seek reconcilement, 2. General
part when, first.
so must thou not return to offer there thy gift, till first thou be
reconciled: (...): first be reconciled, and then come and offer thy gift. O the
admirable goodness of God, and ineffable love toward men, says Homil 17. in
Mat. 5. 24.
Chrysostom on these words: He neglects his own honor, that he may move
charity toward thy neighbor. Let my service be interrupted (says he) that
thy love may be restored: therefore bids he not, after thou have offered, or
before thou offer: but, thy gift being brought to the altar, and sacrifice
beginning, go thy way, leave there thine offering before the altar, and first,
first be reconciled to thy brother. Whereby (says that Father) he teaches us,
that he counts charity the most acceptable oblation of Christians, and without
it no Christian sacrifice he will accept.

For has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and The doctrine.
sacrifices as when his voice is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better then
sacrifice, and to harken then the fat of rams, 1. Sam. 15. 22. Hear o my
people (says Psalm. 507.
God to the Jews) and I will speak, hearken o Israel for I will testify
against thee, Verse. 8.
I will not reprove thee for thine oblations and burnt offerings because they
were not always before me. 9.
I will take no bullock out of thine house, nor he-goates out of thy folds. 10.
For all the beasts of the forest are mine, and so are the cattle upon a
thousand hills, 11.
I know all the fowls upon the mountains, and the wild beasts are all mine.
12.
If I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the world is mine and all that is
therein. 13.
Think thou that I will eat bulls flesh, or drink the blood of goats? No,
no, 14.
offer praise rather unto thy God, and pay thy vowe^ unto the most high. For as
he is not a God of the dead letter but rather of the quickening spirit, so he
reiects this shadow till the substance does come.

Almighty God in the first of Esaias forgot his own people to be the children
of Iaakob, because they forgot this oblation of love to be the sacrifice of a
God. Hear the word of the Lord ye Princes of Sodom, (says Esa 1. 10.
he) hearken to the law of God o people of Gomorrhe: and asks them in
jealousy as hot a^ fire, Verse. 11.
What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices says the Lord? I am
full of your burnt offerings of rams and the fat of fed beasts. I desire not
the blood of bullockes, nor o^ lambs, nor of goats. 12.
When ye come to appear before me who required this at your hands to tread in
my courts? 13.
Bring no more oblations in vain: incense is an abomination unto me: I cannot
suffer your new Moons, nor sabboths, nor solemn days, (it is iniquity) nor
your solemn assemblies. 14.
My soul hates your new Moons, and your appointed feasts: they are a burden
unto me, I am weary to ^eare them. 15.
And when ye shall stretch out your hands. I will hide mine eyes from you and
though ye make many prayers, I will not hear, for you^ hands are full of
blood. This was the herb and root of bitterness that put death in the pot;
this was the dead fly that putrified their ointment, and made their sweet
odours and incense to stink. Thus loathed he the fat of their fed beasts, when
their heart was as fat as brawn. Thus spued he out the blood of their
bullockes, when their hands were full of blood. Thus refused he the flesh of
their lambs, when under this sheep clothing they were ravening wolves. Thus
checked he their treading in his courts, when entering into his house they
looked not to their feet, but gave the sacrifice of fools. Thus abhorred he
their new Moons, when the old man of malice was not changed, nor the new man
of charity put on. Thus hated he their appointed feasts, when they were not
(...), feasts of love. Thus their sweet perfumes stinked in the nostrels of the
most high: and their incense incensed his wrath when their hands were full of
blood. And as he began that Prophecy of Esai in this first, so in the Esa 66.
3.
last Chapter with the same tune he ends it: He that kills a bullock is
abominable as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, regarded as if
he cuts off a dogs neck: he that offers an oblation approved as if he
offered swines blood: He that remembers incense, is accepted, as if he blessed
an idol, when his heart or as hands are full of blood. For he desired mercy
more then sacrifice, and this knowledge of God more then burnt offerings, Hos.
6. 6. Thus he that is rather a God of the quickening spirit then of the dead
letter, requires more the quickening spirit of love, then the dead carcass of
any sacrifice whatsoever. I hate and abhor your feast days, (says Amos 5.
2^.
the Lord) and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies. verse. 22.
Though ye offer me burnt offerings and meat offerings, I will not accept them,
neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts. 23.
Take thou away from me the multitude of thy songs, for I will not hear the
melody of thy vials, till 24.
judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty river.

Wherewithal then shall I come before the Lord (says his Prophet in the
person of the people) and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before
him with burnt offerings and with calves of a year old? will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I
give my first borne for my transgression, and the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul? No, no, he has showed thee, o man, what indeed is good, and
what the Lord requires rather of thee, surely to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God, Mich. 6. 8. This shall
please the Lord better (says David) then a bullock that has horns and
hoofes, Psalm. 69. 31. And to love God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as
thy self, is more then all burnt offerings and sacrifices, says David's son
and Lord, Mark. 12. 33. Therefore would Genesis 4. 4. Heb. 11. 4.
Abel be in charity with Cain before he offered: therefore would Genesis 33. 3.
4. 20.
Iaakob be reconciled to Esau before he sacrificed: therefore would Psalm. 26 6.
David wash his hands in innocence before he went to the altar: therefore
would Act. 10. and 11.
Peter be in charity with the Gentiles before he preached: therefore would Romans
10. 1.
Paul be in charity with the Jews before he prayed.

For 1. Cor. 13 3.
alms without love, it is not accepted: Mat. 7. 22.
Prophecy without love, it is not respected: knowledge without love, it is not
approved: miracles without love, they are not regarded: burning martyrdom
without love, it is as if it freezed: prayer without love, it is rejected, Esa.
1. 15. yea it is abominable, Prou. 28. 9. nay no less then abomination it
self to the Lord, Prou. 15. 8. And it is impious that a wicked man in thought
or deed shall come to pray, as the vain Hesi^d. lib. 1. (...). Plat. and ex
Plat. Cicer. lib. 2. de legib.
heathen could observe. This love then is the fire which purified Abels
offering, for want whereof putrified Cains oblation: this is it which so judged
between the clean and unclean, that when two were sacrificing at the altar,
the one was received and the other refused. This is the sweet incense which
perfumeth our sacrifice of praise and praying, and sets them forth as the
incense, and the lifting up of our hands as an evening sacrifice. This is the
ointment and box of Spikenard which sweetneth the calves of our lips, and
makes them better then a bullock that has horns and hoofes. This is the
salt which like that in the Leuit. 2. 13.
law must season our sacrifice, without which it is unsavory, Mark. 9. 49.
and without this (like the Jews in the Prophet Hos. 5. 6) we shall go with our
sheep and our bullockes (I mean our Heb. 13. 15.
prayers the calves of our lips, Hos. 14.) to seek the Lord and shall not
find him, for he will withdraw himself from us: and though we stretch out our
hands, he will hide his eyes from us: and though we make many prayers, he will
not hear, if our hands be Esa. 1. 15.
full of blood.

The reason whereof our Savior gave the woman of Samaria: God which is a
spirit, will be worshipped in spirit, and the hour comes and now is (says
the Lord) when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in
truth, for even such and none other requires he to worship him, Ioh. 4. 24.

Whether then we offer the sacrifice of prayer or thanksgiving, 1 Use,
exhorting to vniue before we pray
in this must we lift up pure hands without wrath, 1. Tim. 2. 8. and in that,
out of one mouth must not proceed blessing of God, and cursing of our
neighbor, Iam. 3. 16. For Eccles 34. 15
when one prays and another curses, whose voice will the Lord hear? And
indeed how can thou ask God forgiveness of thy sins, when thou will not
forgive man his offenses? How can thou beg reconcilement with thy heavenly
Father, when thou art not reconciled on earth to thy brother? How dare thou
offer him a sacrifice of praise in those lips which are full of cursing and
bitterness? He will ask thee (says Sermon. 16. de verb. Dom.
Austine) What have thou here brought me? Offers munus tuum, and non es munus
Dei, thou offerest me thy gift, and give not me thy self for an offering.
Thou prayest against thy self, and through malice make thy prayers frustrate
before thou do make them: they are sin because not of faith; they are not
of faith, because they wrought not through love.

For if charity be (as Sermon. 24. in Cant.
Bernard speaks) quaedam anima fidei, as it were the soul of faith, or as
the Iam. 2 26.
Apostle more truly teaches, spiritus fidei, the breath and pulse of faith,
whereby we may feel if she be alive, and see if the maid be not dead but
sleeps, surely the divorce of these two which God has so coupled together
cannot be possible, but like Naomi and Ruth, they will live and die together.
And therefore if thy prayer be not of faith which works through love, it does
but solemnize the funeral of thy faith, which thou before killedst through
hatred. And as it was no marvel (says that Father) if Cain slew his brother,
who had killed his own faith and brotherly love before: so no wonder if God
respected not his offering, whose person he for that cause despised, Quia etsi
nec dum fratricida, iam tamen fideicidae te^ebatur, because though not yet he
had killed his only brother, yet now had he slain his own faith, whose
carcass and cation made his sacrifice stink in the nostrils of the Almighty.

This then (says Ser. 166. da Temp.
Austine) is the bond of peace, which both clerickes and laickes must bring
with their sacrifice, sine qua non suscipitur sacerdotis oration, nec pl^bis
oblario, without which neither the Priests prayer, nor the peoples praise is
accepted with God. For seeing we must as well with one mind as one mouth praise
and pray God the Father of Jesus Christ, Roman. 15. 6. surely unless both
(like those Apoc. 8. 3.
odours which were the prayers of the Saints) be kindled with this heavenly
fire, they cannot ascend to the Lord of hosts, neither thence will he smell a
sweet savor of rest. For as the Saints are said to praise God in choro, Psalm.
149. that is, in unity of love, as the Interlinear. in hunc Psalm.
Gloss descants on it, and to sing praises unto him with timbrell and harp,
in sign of concord and consort of love, as Lyra harpes on those instruments of
music: so must we with the elders, Apoc. 5. 8. when we offer up these odours
the prayers of the Saints, have every one his harp, (which is a symbol of
harmony, as Comment. in Apoc. 5. 8.
Aretius observes) and sing with one consort and consent of spirits before our
voice shall be heard, or our prayers get a blessing of the Lord. And therefore
when the Psalmist exhorted every Leuite in the temple to praise the Lord, Psalm.
134. 1. 2. he tells them, the blessing of the Lord is not given unto them
therefore, till they all be one, verse. 3. The Lord bless thee, not, the Lord
bless ye, but the Lord bless thee out of Sion. Plures hortatur vt benedicant,
and ipse vnum benedicit, says Euerrat. in Psalm. 133. 3.
Austine, he exhorts many to bless the Lord, and he blesses not them till
they all become one. Therefore came Christ to his disciples with a blessing of
comfort, when on the sea they were rowing together, Mat. 14. 27. Therefore came
he to his Apostles with a blessing of peace, when in unity they were assembled
together, Ioh. 20. 19. Therefore sent he not them the holy Ghost, till with one
accord they were gathered together, Act. 2. 1. Therefore filled he his Saints
with the holy Ghost, when in one soul and one heart they conuersed together,
Act. 4. 31. So true was his promise which he made to them all, Verily I say
unto you, that if two of you (...) shall with harmony agree in any thing upon
earth, whatsoever ye shall desire, it shall be given you, for where two or
three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them, Math. 18. 19.
And so needful it is that before we do offer the calves of our lips to our God,
we be first united and reconciled to our brother. Et quam diu illum placare non
possumus, nescio an consequenter muner a nostra offeramus Deo, and so long as
we cannot pacify and appease him, I cannot tell (says Coment. in Mat. 5. 24.
Jerome) whether after we may offer our gifts of praise and prayer unto God.

And if this sacrifice without precedent unity be not accepted, 2. use,
exhorting to charity before we communicate.
much less may thou hope for acceptance of thy self, if when thou receiuest
the body of the Lord thou be not first reconciled to thy brother. For if (like
the factious Corinthians) when ye come together in the Church to receive, there
be dissentions among you, the Apostle tells you, this is not to eat the Lords
body, but to eat of the bread and drink of the cup unworthily to your own
damnation, 1. Cor. 11. 29. Let a man therefore first examine himself of his
brotherly love and reconcilement; and till then not dare to eat of this bread
and drink of this cup.

We Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 1.
read that the ancient Romans ordained a feast, whereat men at enmity were
reconciled: and if any iar was risen up among them, apud sacra mensae
tollebantur, the breach was made up at that solemn feast by their friends,
which therefore they termed Charistia. The Saints in the Apostolical times
(whether they learned it from Christ's supper before the communion, or from the
Apostles as most suppose) at their receiving of the Lords Supper, had their
feasts also, 1. Cor. 11. 21. which S. Jude terms d Jude 2.
(...), feasts of love, and the faithful continued them in the Primitive
Church, as the ancient Tertul. apollog. 39. aduers. Gent. Just. Mart. ap. 2.
Fathers observe, wherein they ate their meat together with singleness of
heart, that so they might examine their mutual charity when they received.
Though we have not those Agapas, yet have we this great feast of love, before
which the Apostle requires (...), brotherly love, which we must examine before
we eat of this bread and drink of this c^p. 1. Cor. 11. 28. For if the Jews
might not eat the paschal Lamb, unless their loins were first girded up,
their shoes on their feet, and their staves in their hands, Exodus 12. 11. much
less may we eat of our Passover, which is 1. Cor. 5. 7.
Christ sacrificed for us, unless our loins be first girded about with
verity, our feet shod with the Gospel of peace, and the sword of the spirit
in our hands, Ephesians. 6. 14. And therefore let us keep this feast (says Paul)
not with old leaven, neither in the leaven of maliciousness and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1. Cor. 5. 8. as the
Jews while their feast lasted might eat none but bread unleavened.

It is Salomons lesson to every invited guest at a carnal supper, Prou. 23. 1.
When thou come to eat with a Prince, consider diligently what is set before
thee, or (as the Hebrew (...) will carry in Mercer. in Prou. 2. 31. Two motives
to examine our selves of charity before the communion.
both genders) quis and quid, consider who and what is set before thee. And
indeed whether we consider the feast-maker himself, with whom we sit at this
table as invited guests: or his most precious body and blood set before us to
our salvation if worthily, or to our damnation if unworthily we receive it; we
had need to take heed to our foot when we enter into the house of God, that we
put off our shoes and sandals, our injuries and scandals, seeing the place
whereon we stand is so holy ground. 1. The feastmaker.


And for the Prince with whom we eat, seeing he is King of kings, at whose
mess we sit (says Hom. 3. in Ephesians. 2.
Chrysostom) whereof even the Angels are attendants, with what diligence
should we consider him who is set before us? If Joseph durst not come being
invited of Pharao, till he had first shaven his head and changed his raiment,
Genesis 41. 14. how dare we come to this supper of the Lamb, before we have cut
off excrementa malitiae, those i Iam. 1. 21.
excrements or superfluity of maliciousness, and Ephesians. 4. 24.
put on the new man of a wedding garment of charity? And if Iaakobs sons did
with such diligence address and make ready themselves, because at noone they
should dine with Joseph their princely brother, Genesis 43. how should we first
prepare our selves, seeing we are to eat at the Lords table, who searches his
guests if any want the wedding garment of Greg. hom. 38. in Euangel.
love? Mat. 22. 11. We know him that has said: -- absentem qui rodit amicum,
Hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
He that back biteth his brother, shall not sit at my table. And Christ
himself has pronounced of such guests, They shall Luke 14. 24.
not taste of my Supper. He will not take the childrens bread and cast it to
whelps. He will not give these holy things to dogs, which return to their
vomit of rancor: nor cast these pearls before swine, which go again with the
sow to her wallowing in the mire. But as those dogs and these swine he excludes
from the holy city and supper of the Lamb, Apoc. 22. so from the holy
communion and supper of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. with that Noli me tangere of the
Col. 2. 21.
Apostle, touch not, taste not, handle not.

For albeit malicious Judas he admitted to his former supper of the paschall
lamb, Ioh. 13. 26. yet excluded he Judas from this last supper of the Lamb of
God, which was the banquet (as it were) of the former, and sent him out with
this prohibition, That thou do do quickly, v. 27. and as soon he had
received the soppe Mat. 25. 23.
dipped in the dish of the paschall lamb, (...), he went out immediately, says
John, verse. 30. before the supper of the sacrament: and though he was at supper
with the Lord, non interfuit coenae, yet was he not at the Supper of the Lord,
as Lib. 1. cap. 16. de cultu Dei externo, de caenae Dom. and cap. 19. in 4.
precept.
Zanchius sufficiently proves. Or if he admitted Judas to this table (as some
suppose) yet accepit panem Domini, non panem Dominum says Tract. 59 in Ioh.
Euang.
Austine, he received not the bread of life, but the bread of the Lord which he
ate to his own damnation, and after the soppe Satan entered into him, verse. 27.

Wherefore if the Lord would not talk at mount Sinai with the children of
Israel, till first they had sanctified themselves, and washed their clothes,
Exodus 19. 10. much less may we look for access to his own table, if we be
not sanctified through love, but come to eat with unwashed hands. And if for
their eating of the paschall Lamb, they must first put away from their houses
the Exodus 12. 15.
leaven of bread: much more should we in keeping this fast of the true
passover, purge out of our minds the old leaven of maliciousness, 1. Cor. 5.
7. And this we, rather then they that, because though by prescript he bid them
eat theirs with sour herbs, Exodus 12. 8. yet us by precept he forbids to
eat ours with roots of bitterness, Heb. 12. 15. wherefore let all
bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying and evil speaking be put from among
you, with all malitiousnesse, Ephesians. 4. 31.

Howbeit if the Princes person, at whose table we sit, we regard 2 The feast it
self.
not, but bring our leaven of malice to furnish out his table of unleavened
bread, and our viols of wrath to mix his cup of salvation, as if we meant to
drink of the cup of the Lord and of that 1. Cor. 10. 21
cup of devils; to be partakers of the Lords table and the table of devils: yet
should we at last consider what is set before us, the body and blood of this
Lord, which like the 2. Sam. 6. 6.
arc must not be touched with unprepared hands. For seeing this supper is like
that feast of reconcilement, Leuit. 23. 27. and a feast of charity, surely we
should first be reconciled, and examine our selves therein before we eat of
this bread and drink of this cup. Yea since as we eat of one loaf made of
many grains, and drink of one wine of many grapes: so we that are many are one
bread and one blood, because we are al partakers of one bread and one cup, 1.
Cor. 10. 17. doubtless this communion of bread and wine should cause a common
union of body and spirit, that we be all of one mouth and one mind. We Salust.
coniurat. Catalin. and Florus lib. 4 ca. 1
read of Cataline, that to make his conspirators of one wicked will and
affection, he caused them all to drink each to other goblets of wine mixed
with man's blood, that consanguinitie of one cup which nature had not given,
might unite their affections. And seeing contrariwise our Savior to make his
followers of one mind and of one accord in the Lord, has made them drink of
one cup of wine mystically mixed with no other but his own blood, saying, Mat.
26 27.
Bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye al of this, this is my blood of the new
testament: surely, this cup of blessing whereby we are made drink into one
spirit, (1. Cor. 12.) should more combine the hearts of Christians, then their
cup of deadly wine did the hands of those conspirators.

But if not the communion of his blood, which we come all to participate, can
fore-vnite us: yet seeing this new wine of the master of the feast (who in
this blood of the grape gives us the grape of his blood to drink, and keeps
the good wine till last) must not be put into old vessels, Mat. 9. 17. into
uncleansed bodies says Sermon. 11. in Psalm. 118. lit. 11. verse. 3.
Ambrose: 1. These 4. 4.
let every man know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, in
charity and love, that no man oppress or defraud his brother in any matter,
but 2 Timothy 1. 21.
first purge himself from the rust of malice and canker of envy, that he may
be a vessel not of wood or earth, but of gold and of silver, a vessel unto
honor, sanctified and cleansed, meet and prepared for the blood of the Lord.
Let us take this cup of his blood with pure hands, without wrath, and not with
hands full of blood. Let us put this new wine into new vessels, that so both
may be preserved. Let no man dare to put it into old vessels, ne corpus
scindatur and gratia fundatur says Loco supracit.
Ambrose, lest the vessel of his body break, yea perish, and the wine of his
grace be spilt. Experience may teach thee, sincerum est nisi vas quodcunque
infundis, arescit: That unless be scoured from rust and made clean,
whatsoever thou powrest in does wax sour and tastes of the caske: and let
truth persuade thee, that if thou powrest this wine into a rustie stomach and
cankred mind, it will turn to vinegar, and be bitter in thy belly as the gall
of Aspes, and the poison of Dagons. If thou use but a little of this wine
with a stomach to thy brother, and in such often infirmities of thy soul, it
will prove like Deuteronomy. 32. 32. 33.
the vine of Sodom and Gomorrha, as the grapes of gall, and the clusters
thereof bitter to set thy teeth on edge. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness
and superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with meekness the word, the
essential word to be grafted in you, which is able to save your souls. And if
there be any of the generation of vipers, under whose tongue is the poison of
Aspes, and in his heart the gall of Dragons, let him first cast up his malice,
lest he poison this drink to his own destruction: let him imitate the serpent
(says Tom. 3. lib. 1. haeres. 37.
Epiphanius and Tom. 1. de modo been viuend. ser. 28. de commun.
Bernard) which when she comes to drink of the river, Non accipit secum
venenum, sed in latibulo relinquit, brings not her poison with her, but leaves
it behind her in her hole, lest infecting her drink she interfect her self.
Proinde and ipsi hoc miremur, says Epiphanius, let us also in this be wise as
serpents, vt quando ad sacram Ecclesiam, aut ad preces, aut ad mysteria
venerimus, malitiam and inimicitiam in cogitationibus nostris ne feramus: That
when we come to the Sermon or to prayers, or to receive these mysteries of
bread and wine, we bring not our malice and hatred in our breasts. Let us
examine our love, and cast up our malice before we drink of this cup, lest
by unworthy receiving we poison the wine, and drink our own damnation. For
as the corporal meat and drink (says a Chrysostom. ^om. 3. homil de prodit.
Juda.
Father) if it find a stomach, opplet aduersis humoribus, with raw and
indigested humors, hinders more the concoction of those crudities, and hurts
both their digestions: so this spiritual repast of bread and wine, if it find
a mind fraught with hatred and malice, it will more hinder the health of his
soul, and hasten the death of his body. Witness those factious and malicious
Corinths, who did eat this supper with an humerous stomach toward their
brethren, and (...) says Paul: For this very cause many are weak, and sick
among you, and many sleep in their graves, 1. Cor. 11. 30. Wherefore before
thou come to this fountain, that is, to the communion of the body and blood
of Christ, imitate the serpent says Bernard, and cast up thy poison, that is,
thy hatred, thy anger, thy malice, thy envy, thy evil will, and thy hurtful
thoughts from thy heart, lest thou come to eat and drink thy damnation. Only
let us be rather innocent as doves, then wise as serpents, to resume our former
poison, lest if, once having escaped from this filthiness of the world, we be
yet entangled therein again and overcome, the latter end with us be worse then
the beginning. 2. Pet. 2.

Wherein it is to be feared, that as Plus reip. gene^d. pracept.
Themistocles and Aristides so often as they went Ambassadors, or to lead an
army together: Inimicitiam in finibus patriae deposuerunt, reuersique domum,
came resumpserunt, Laid down their mutual hatred in the borders of the
country, and left their enmity behind them til they came home, and then
resumed their old grudge again: so many when they go with their brother to the
supper of the Lord, leave their malice and hatred at home, or perchance at the
Churches door, and when they come out, with the serpent resume their poison
again, with the dog return to their vomit, and with the sow that washed,
to their wallowing in the mire.

But let such reuolters and leauers of their first love know, that Ferus lib.
2. in Math. 12. 45. Stella in. Luc. 1^ 26.
as a relapse in corporal diseases is most dangerous, so this of the soul is
so desperate, vt si relabantur, that if they fall back again and return to
their vomit, it is impossible they should be restored by repentance, Heb. 6.
6. seeing they crucify again to themselves the Son of God, and make a mock
of him in this Supper. For if we thus sin willingly after we have received
the knowledge of the truth, we tread under foot the Son of God, and count the
blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith we were sanctified; and
then there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for
of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the adversaries of of God
and their brethren. Heb. ^0. 26.

Wherefore as John 5. 14.
Christ when he had healed him that had been sick eight and thirty years,
like a good Physician prescribed him a diet for fear of relapse: so when thou
have cast up thy malitiam seculi (as the Prophet calls it) thy long and
inueterate malice before the communion, keep a good diet, and a good stomach
for digestion of any wrong, least thou fall back again. Behold, thou art made
whole, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

The unclean spirit of malice is now gone out of thee, man, take heed, if
after the sop Satan reenter into thee, if at his return to his house he find
it empty, without the love of thy neighbor, swept Are^. (...). in Math. 12.
441
from faith, hope and charity, and garnished with hypocritical color of good
will, then will he bring with him seven other spirits worse then himself,
which will enter in and dwell there; and the end of that man is worse then the
(...)ginning, k Mark 14. 15.
Mat. 12. 45.

But thou (beloved brother) like that good host in the Gospel, show thou thy
Savior the upper chamber of thy heart, trimmed and prepared for his body, for
this is the lodging where he will eat the Passover with his Disciples. And
seeing thou art not worthy he should come under the roof of thy mouth, take
heed least thy mouth eat unworthily. Let us open this gate, that the King of
glory may enter in. Let us sweep and garnish this house (says Ser. 1^5. de
Temp^re.
Austine) for the receiving the Lords body: let us adorn it with diverse
flowers of Christian virtues. Let us fill all the house with sweet and precious
ointments of chastity, with the incense of love and compunction, with the
balm of benevolence, and the sweet perfume of charity, Vt tam beatus hospes
nitido delectatus hospitio, stabilem a^ perpetuam in nobis factat mansionem,
that so blessed a guest delighted with his neat and sweet lodging, may abide
with us for ever, and say, Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. And
as Math. 27. 59. 60.
Joseph put Christ's body in a new sepulcher, and wrapped it not only in clean
clothes, but in linen, nay in a syndone, which is the finest and purest
linen: so let us put his glorified body in new hearts, in pure minds, which
are pure from the blood of al men. And if there has bin any jar betwixt us
and our brother, let us at least follow V^l. Max. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Scipio and Tiberius Gracchus, Qui ad cuius mensa sacra odio dissidentes
venerant, ab ea and amicitia and affinitate iuncti discesserunt: let us at this
table bury all our hatred that it never rise again, otherwise like Judas we
receive not his body to life, but his bread to damnation: neither find we the
body of the Lord, but like John 20. 6. 7.
them light upon the napkin and clothes wherein it was wrapped. Go thy way
then, and first, first be reconciled before thou come to offer thy gift. So
much of the intermission of sacrifice till thou be reconciled first.

The third general point, is a commission or joining of two, 3. general part:
commission. Di^ision.
Be reconciled to thy brother. Wherein we may observe both an act of
Reconciliation, and the party, with our brother.

First touching this act; as there is (says Ser. 2. de pao^ ad frat ^n erem^.
Austine) pax oris, operis Be reconciled.
and linguae, a peace of tongue, hand and heart: so when that peace is broken,
there must be (says that Ser. 9 ad frat. in er^m^.
Father) a triple reconcilement, Verbo, facto and animo, in word, in work and
in will. And therefore our Savior to his precedent division of a threefold
breach, by anger in the mind, disdain in the gesture, and reuiling in the
tongue, verse. 22. proportioneth a triple reconcilement, and paralele agreement,
in tongue, hand and heart, all three implicitly wrapped in this ^pso
reconc^li(...) vocabul^.
one word of reconcilement, says Com. in Math. 5. 24.
Musculus verse. 29. but by more equal correspondence (as I think) intended
and implied in the words (...), if he has ought against thee, that is, says
Oper. imper. ^om. 111. in Mat. 5. 23.
Chrysostom, when he is angry with thee in heart, or says to thee Raca,
grieuing thee by gesture, or calls thee fool, vexing thee in speech: if he
has (...) any of these three against thee, be thou reconciled (...) according
to each of these three: and therefore that Ibid.
Father meting out a just portion of reconcilement to the proportion of the
offense, counter poiseth both with this equality and aequilibrium, Qualis
praecessit offensio, talis debet sequi reconciliatio, wherein was the offense,
therein should be the reconcilement. If (says Jbid.
he) thou have offended him in thought, be reconciled in thought: if thou have
offended him in words, be reconciled in words: if thou have hurt him in deeds,
pacify him by deeds. Yea our Savior himself having censured a threefold
breach, in heart, behauior, Triple reconcilement.
and speech with our brethren, verse. 22. not only by analogy infers a
correspondent agreement in my text, when* he says Be reconciled, as out of
Chrysostom and Musculus I have showed: but explicitly proportioneth a
threefold reconcilement to these three, verse. 44. first as a Priest, the peace
and reconcilement of the heart, Love your enemies. Secondly as a Prophet, the
peace and agreement of the tongue, Bless them that curse you. Thirdly as a
King, peace and reconciliation in works, Do good to them that hate you. The
beloved Disciple, an Evangelist in his Gospel, an Apostle in his Epistles, and
a Prophet in his Apocalypse, prescribes from his masters breast this trinity
of unity, 1. John 3. 18. Let us not love in word or tongue only, but in works
and in truth from the heart. And all these three of necessity here must be
meant, seeing friendship requires benevolence of the heart, beneficence of the
hand, and concord of the tongue, as our Arist. lib. 9. 8. th^^. cap. 4.
master of morality teaches from the oracle of reason. Wherefore treading in
the steps of our blessed Savior, his holy Apostle, the grauest ancient
Fathers, our soundest modern interpreters, in the way of truth and natural
reason, give me leave (without censure of Eccles. 19. 24.
that fine subtilty, but unrighteous wresting of the law) to note here, and
hereafter handle a triple reconciliation, and that in the order and method of
Saint John, first verbal, secondly real, thirdly intentionall reconcilement.

For the first Verbapacis, words of peace must we give our offensive 1.
Reconcilement verbal.
or offended brother, to move and win him to concord: our speech must be
gracious always, and poudred with salt, Col. 4. 6. and like that word 2. Cor. 5.
19. 20.
of reconciliation, beseech and pray our enemies for Christ's sake to be
reconciled, as before in the dismission, Go thy way, and tell him his fault, I
have at large declared.

Thus Abraham having not the law written in tables of stone, but in the fleshly
tables of his heart, did by grace the things of the law, and showed the effect
of this law written in his heart: for when such brawling and debate was risen
betwixt his and Lots heard-men about grasing and pasture, that their master
Lot (like our quarelling Gentles) counting his servants supposed injury his
own indignity, began to be inflamed; Abraham that blessed peacemaker comes
to him like the Dove with an Olive branch of peace in his mouth, Genesis 13. Let
there be (I pray thee) no strife between me and thee, neither between mine
heardmen and thine heard-men, for we are brethren. Is not the whole land before
thee? If thou will take the left hand, then I will go to the right: or if thou will go to the right hand, then I will take the left. He Chrysostom. hom. 33. in
Genesis 13. 8.
says not, What stir is this my Nephew? Dare thy servants or any of thy
household open their mouth or mutter against me and my substance? Do they not
remember how far they are inferior to us? Whence have thou so great
abundance? was it not from my care and provision? Who made thee thus eminent
and glorious among men? did not I, who was to thee in stead of all? I was a
father to thee in all things, and do thou thus requite my service and
charges? Did I for this hope always take thee for my companion in my journey?
Be it so that nothing which I have done for thee come into thy mind, ought
thou not at leastwise to honor my crown of age, and reverence my hoary
hairs? No, Abraham says none of these things, says Chrysostom, but parleth
for peace with words of meekness and speeches of pacification. And although
Lot (as a Philo lib. 1 de Abraham^.
Jew notes) was Amicus suspectae fidei, no constant but a wavering friend, who
often Contemptim and superbe.
proudly and disdainefully used Abraham, yet see (says Chrysostom) how with
fair words he intreates his agreement; and prays him be reconciled. Let
there be no strife I pray thee between me and thee, neither between my
heardmen and thine. Amputauit fibiam discordiae, ne contagium so reperet, says
Lib. 1. ad. ^. ^rde. cap. 3.
Ambrose, he crusheth the serpent in the head, lest it creep and bring in the
tail: he lets not the root of bitterness spring up and trouble them, lest
many therewith be defiled. And if entreaty will not persuade refractarie Lot,
yet see what reasons he urges to induce him to concord: We are brethren, says
he, brethren in the flesh, and kinsfolks by blood, brethren in the spirit and
consorts in religion, in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, for yet
the Canaanites and Perizzites dwell in this land, whose dissentions our discord
will unite, whose idolatry this staining of our religion will advantage, and
cause these wicked nations to blaspheme the God of Abraham. And if this
inducement cannot draw, yet see with what a strong motive he haleth him to
unity, as with a threefold cord. Is not the whole land before thee? take which
hand of my inheritance thou will choose: and thus pacificis verbis with
peaceable words he would decide the controversy, and end the former strife,
says Philo.

This was the precept of God to Laban toward his offensive shepherd, Genesis 31.
1^.
Take heed that thou speak not to Iaakob ought save good: and therefore Verse.
44.
he said unto him, Come and let us make a covenant of peace, I and thou, which
may be a witness between me and thee. This was Iaakobs practice to his
brother Esau who sought his life, for he spoke unto him mildly by the mouth of
his Genesis 32. 18. 19 20.
servants, and submissiuely by his Genesis 33.
own. Let me find grace in the eyes of my Lord, for I have seen thy face as
though I had seen the face of God. And by these means he accepted him, and was
reconciled.

For indeed a soft answer puts away wrath, says Solomon, The reason of the
doctrine.
Prou. 15. 1. or (as with Jerome most read it) breaks wrath. A Metaphor (me
thinks) borrowed from two in a combat: wherein he compares a soft answer to a
soft buckler of a subtle champion, which accepting the blow into it self, so
breaks the weapon, that the adversary gives over. For a Prince ( Prou. 25.
15.
says he) is p^c^ified by (...), and a soft tongue breaks the ^oner, as
(...) does the f^^ce of a stone that as thrown against it. When the Ephramites
contended with G^deou for not calling them to ^arre against the M^di^nites, he
gave them this soft answer, that Verse. 2.
he preferred their exploits so far above his own, as the gl^^ing of grapes
of Ephraim was better then the vintage of Abi^ner. And when he had spoken these
words (says the Verse. 3.
t^xt) their wrathful spirits abated toward him. For as there is curatie
lingua, a cure that the tongue caust do on its patient, Prou. 15. 4. so (...),
says an old Erasm chil. 3. c^nt. 1. adag. 100
Poet: Fair language is a Physician for the disease of anger, which is
impatient, as that towne-Clearke of Ephesus, Ille regit dictis animos and
pectora mulcet, with his soft answer appeased the rage of those seditious
Citizens, Act. 19. ^5.

Which doctrine of verbal reconcilement, as Christ straightly 2 Uses of this
doctrine.
prescribes it, and the faithful have offectually practiced it: so may it
yield us two of the 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Scriptures vse^: one of instruction, to use words of peace to win our
brethren. Another of reprehension, to deter us from words of hatred to wound
our brethren. In application of which medicines, if I power in more wine of
reproof into old festred sores, as a biting corasiue to eat up the dead, then
oil of exhortation into bleeding wounds, as a lenitiue to supple the living
flesh, the 1. Cor. 4 21.
Apostles practice may warrant my doing, who came to exhort Rom 15. 14.
obedient Romans with the Verse 30.
spirit of meekness, and came to the Gal. 3. 1.
foolish Galatians with a rod, and prepared a rod for the f^^les, back, as the
Wiseman speaks. His charge to 2. Tim. 4 2.
Tinnibit may discharge me of censure, if I exhort the private sinner, and
rebuke them that sin openly, that the rest may fear. The Act. 2. 3.
cloven tongues may apologize me, if with Verse 37. 38.
Peter I sing not of mercy alone, but of judgment also. The Heb. 4. 12.
two eaged sword may defend me, if I use its double edge of August. lib. 20 de
(...). Dei, cap. 21. and in Ap^c. 1. 16.
both Testaments to mourn with the law, as well as to pipe with the Gospel:
if I use its double edge to cut Chrysostem. ho^ul. 26. in Matthew 10.
off either the sin or the sinner; as it is also two edged, because it Aquin.
in. ^eb. 4. 12.
reformeth the will, as well as informs the understanding. Wherefore let none
think I make my self a trespasser, and break down by reproof, the things
which before I builded by exhortation: if with Ier. ^
Jeremy I build and break down, plant and pluck up. For as the repairer of
that breach in Ierusalems wall, had a trowell in one hand to build, and a sword
in the other to cut down all resistance, Neh. 4. 17. so the restorer of the
breach of peace among the living stones of Jerusalem above, must both exhort
with wholesome doctrine, and rebuke the gaine-sayers and all gaine-doers too,
Tit. 1. 9. 1. Use, exhorting either party to reconcile his brother with gentle
speeches.


This doctrine then (beloved in Christ Jesus) may first lesson us from Christ's
precept and Abraham's practice, to entreat peace with our offending brother:
which better we shall effect, if we insult not over his offense (says Lib. de
frat. amore.
Plutarch) with speeches of reproach or aggrauation of the wrong, but in pity
and commiseration of his person, lessen and extenuate his offense, by imputing
it to folly rather then contempt: to necessity of offending rather then to
obstinacy of the offender: and to perturbation rather then wilful malice and
maleuolence. If he has slandered, backbited, railed or spoken evil of thee,
says Lib. 2 d^ ira cap. 23.
Seneca, think whether thou have not done so before, remember how thou have
spoken evil of many; and the same is Salomons advise: Give not thine heart to
all the words that men speak, for oftentimes also thine heart knows that
thou likewise have spoken evil of others, Eccles. 7. 23. 24. Let us think
(says that grave Philosopher) that some do not iniure us, but requite our
wrong, and (as it were) make restitution. Others do it prone and propense
thereunto: some ignorantly: and those that do it wittingly and willingly were by
us forced thereunto: either he slipped through vrbanitie and pleasantness of
jesting, or he said this not to harm us, but because he could not effect his
purpose without our repulse. Who so would thus retire into himself, how just
occasion of offense his tongue has given to others, should quicken and
extenuate his offenders speeches, and give him verba remissionis, words of
forgiveness, which is indeed the word of reconciliation.

This word of remission our Savior thought the best means Offended to forgive.
to win him from discord, and therefore commands thee to forgive him his
offense if he do repent, Luke 17. 3. forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another: if any man have a quarrel to another, Col. 3. 13. And albeit man's
corrupt nature requires a par pari in his recompense; an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth, and says like S^^nio, in the T(...). Adol. ^^^. 2. si^^. 2.
Comedy, Neque tac verbis solnes vnquam quod mihi re malefecoris: I will not
take thy payment of good words, for thy debt of evil deeds. Yet should we not
(says an Plut. de fr^^. (...).
heathen) thus neglect the offender, nor reject his entreaty: but as we
offending do anteuertere deprecatione iram, prevent wrath by deprecation: so
should we offended deprecationem danda venia, anticipate their entreaty by
giving the pardon of their offense. When Iaakobs children had loaded their
brother with reproaches and injuries, at their peccaui, it repents us, he
forgave them, and spoke kindly unto them, Genesis 50. 21. We (...). in o(...)
vi^a. (...). 27
read of Julius Caesar, though an heathen and an Emperor, that he never
conceived so great displeasure and privy grudge against man's speeches, which
upon offered occasion he would not willingly lay away: for when Caius Caluus
after his infamous Epigrammes against him, made suit by his friends for his
friendship again, vltro ac prior ad cum scripsit, of his own accord he first
wrote to him for reconcilement. Yea when Catullus the virulent Poet, who
diffamed him with some opprobrious verses, came to make him satisfaction,
adhibuit coenae, he bad him to supper, and would not forsake his fathers Inn
wherein he was wont to lodge. And when S^^^l. lib. 5. exemp. cap. 3.
Caius Memmius his professed enemy, whose bitter inuectiues he answered, stood
to be Consul, suffragator extitit, he gave him his voice to be Consul. Go then
to heathenish Caesar thou Christian, learn^ and consider his ways, who having
no guide of the sanctifying spirit, nor governor of grace, forgot yet, and
forgave his detractors, their ignominious libels, bitter inuectiues,
slanderous railings and reuilings. Shall a wild Olive tree growing upon the
barren mounts of Gilboa and nature, where neither dew of the spirit, nor rain
of grace falls, bear such fruit: and shall not thou, a green olive tree in
the house of God, planted beside the waters of comfort, bring forth this
fruit of the spirit?

And as when thou art offended, thou must win him with Offender to confess.
that word of reconcilement, I forgive thee: so must thou when thou art
offensive woo him with that speech of submission, I confess unto thee: or else
with David when thou labourest for peace, and speak to him thereof, he will
prepare unto battle, that thou shall not win thy brother. A brother offended
(says Solomon) is harder to win then a strong city, and their contentions
are like the bar of a palace which cannot be broken off. Woeful examples, as
of Iaakob and Esau, Isaac and Isma^l, Eteocles and Polynices, Charephon and
Chaerecrates, and many other both civil and spiritual brethren, manifest this
truth of the Wiseman. The Plut. d^ Pra^. a^er.
heathen man yields a reason, because great and weighty must needs be the
causes which dissipate and loose so near conjunction, whence their breach
becomes irreconcilable. For as things (says he) compact and joined, though the
glue be melted, may again be recombined and knit together: but a bodily
substance which nature has united, if it be cleft can hardly be glued
together, and be reioyned: so amity which use has contracted, after breach may
easily be reintegrated: but brethren which are most near united in body or
corporation, if they be rent asunder can hardly be reconciled, nor more
recovered, then an hand cut off, or an eye plucked out.

Nevertheless if thou come with this peccaui and confession in thy mouth,
brotherly love (as a Greg. N(...) de per. orat. 2.
Father resembles it) is like the gra^^e or cience of a tree, which though it
be plucked off from the stock, may be afterward ingrafted and bear fruit
again. Therefore when scandal is given, sends our Savior the stumbling
block to his brother with this peccaus in his mouth, It repents me, Luke 17.
4. And as the Lord would have all offenders to be penitentiaries, so his
Apostle confessors to their brethren, James 5. 16. Acknowledge your faults one
to another.

And although Quidam insultant instantque submissis (as Lib. 3. de Na. cap. 9.
Seneca speaks) some base natures insult and tread on them who lie prostrate
at their feet for their favor: yet quosdam preces vincunt (as he notes) good
dispositions are overcome with entreaty of forgiveness; and like their
heavenly father 1. Kin. 21. taking notice of their submission, will say, See
thou how he is humbled before me? because he submits himself before me, I
will accept him. Joseph's brethren who had sold him, came to their brother with
Forgive now we pray thee (...)respass^ of thy servants, and he was appeased,
Genesis 50. 17. Rebellious 2. Sam. 19. 19
Shimei who cursed David, came to him with a prostrate confession* Let not my
Lord (says he) impute wickedness unto me, nor remember the thing that thy
servant did wickedly, that the King should take it to heart, for thy servant
knows that I have done amiss, and he forgave him. Yea the vain heathens
have sucked these juices from the teates of nature. When Antilochus in Illad.
lib. 23.
Homer had incensed M^n^laus, and through some contention provoked his
displeasure; by submission of person, and confession of offense he recovered
his former favor: I will yield to thee Men^laus, says he, (...), for I am
far thy junior and inferior person, (...), and thou my elder and my better,
thou know the temeritie of youth and what be the faults of young men. And
with these words of submission be so appeased his fury, that Me^elaus yielded
unto him, and confessed (says the Poet) that Antilochus had overcome his rage,
and done that which no Grecian could have done but he. And thus even the worst
natures, like the unrighteous Judge, with importunity may be won.

But alas, how many of us come short of Joseph's brethren, nay wicked Shimei,
and think it disgrace to acknowledge our faults, but either apologize them
through pride, or extenuate them through shame? Surely they shall be our
judges: and if we come short of this heathenish pagan Antilochus, Nostri causa
doloris erit, he shall rise up in judgment and condemn us at the last day.

How many (says Homil 40.
Austine) have offended their brethren, and will not acknowledge their faults,
nor say Forgive me? Non crubu^runt peccare, and crubescunt rogart: non
crubescunt de iniquitate, and cruboscunt de humilitate: they blush not to
offend them, and yet are ashamed to crave pardon: they blush not at iniquity,
and yet are ashamed of humility. But I say to all men and women (says he)
small and great, laics and clerickes, if ye shall find that ye have spoken
that which ye should not have spoken, confess your fault, ask forgiveness of
your brethren, do it, be not ashamed to beg pardon. But as Agamemnon in Iliad.
lib. 19.
Homer, excusing himself laid all his jar with Achilles on Ate, (...), I am
not the cause or author of this garboile (says he) but Ate; (...), which
wrongeth al men: so many that are nocent and offensive, translate the crime
from themselves by denial, and impute to the innocent and harmless: worse
herein then that Grecian captain, that whereas he made but Ate the evil
spirit the cause of that discord, they say like 1. King. 18.
Ahab it is a ^e, it is thou my brother that troublest Israel, when it is
themselves and their fathers house: and thus make they their brother the
kindler of that fire, whereof themselves were the coal and bellows to
inflame. Which men, as they rather wound then win their brethren; so may such
virulent 2. Use.
tongues here justly be reproved, which cruelly, disdainefully, and
dispitefully speaking against the righteous, condemn the innocent blood. David
was pestered with the hissing of such serpents, Psalm. 109. 1. Hold not my tongue
O God, for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful is opened
upon me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue: they compassed me
about also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause. For my
friendship they were mine enemies, they have rewarded me evil for good, and
hatred for my good will. Job had his part of such friends, Job. 19. 2. 3.
How long will ye ve^ce my soul, and torment me with words? Ye have now ten
times reproched me, and are not ashamed: ye are impudent toward me. chap. 16.
^^.
They have opened their mouths upon me, and smitten me on the cheek with
reproach: they gather themselves together against me. Ier. 18. 1^.
Jeremy felt as much of their virulencie: Come let us imagine some device
against Jeremy: come and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give
heed to any of his words. Christ himself could not escape the scourge of their
tongue: John 7. 20.
Thou have a devil. In reprehension of which men, suffer me first to set down
a description of them; then a 1. their description.
proscription for them: and lastly a prescription against them and their bi^ing
tongues. Jeremy points them out by archers: O that 1. by Archers.
I had in the wilderness a cottage of wayfaring men, that I might leave my
people and go from them, for they be all adulterers, and an assembly of rebels,
For they have bent their tongue like a bow for lies, their tongue is as an
arrow shot out, Ier. 9. 2. 3. 8. David sets down all the weapons of their
warfare, Psalm. 37. 14. The wicked have drawn their sword, and have beat their
bow to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be upright in
conversation. It is worth much observance, how the holy Ghost here resembles
their tongue both to a sword and a bow, as Psalm. 57. 5. and Psalm. 64. 3.
elsewhere he often does. The Jeremy. 46. 9.
Lydians weapon of offense was a sword, and the Lybians was a bow: but these
Gods archers (as Job. 16. 13.
Job calls them) or rather the devils archers (as (...). 3. in Psalm. 36.
Origin terms them) like that king of Israel (2. King. 6. 22) fight gladio
and arcu, with the sword and with the bow: Arcu eminus sanciant absentes,
gladio cominus vulnera^s praesentes, says a writer: He that is near (as the
Ezekiel. 6. 12.
Prophet speaks) shall fall by their sword, and he that is far off shall die
by their pestilent arrow. As David here paints them, so having been the but and
mark of their aim, he points them out Psalm. 11. 2. Ecce, L^e the wicked bend
their bow, and make ready their arrows within the quiver, that they may
secretly shoot at the upright in heart. Which metaphor and allegory Origin
fitly thus expounds: the bow (says he) is their tongue, the arrows are their
intents and devices, or (as David expounds it) bitter words, and the quiver is
their heart: Ve^e^at is grauida sagittis, full of poisoned shafts. They draw
their arrows of bitter words out of the quiver of their heart (for Mat. 12. 34.
out of the abundance of their heart their mouth speaks, and Math. 15. 18.
those things which proceed out of the mouth come from the heart) and they
shoot them out with their tongue, which they bend up to wound their brethren:
yea they aim them so cunningly, that not like 1. Sam. 20. 20.
Jonathan they shoot at thrice three arrows on either side and miss the
mark; but like Z^sim. lib. 2. in fine vid.
Menelaus Colonel of the Armenian archers, they can (...), at one loose shoot
often three arrows, and hit three men at once. And so long as there is a Caine
in Adams house, a Char^ in Noes family, a Dethan in Moses policy, and an
Absalom in David's house, so long will they shoot out their arrows, even
bitter words, feathered with swift revenge, and headed with wildfire of
contention. For as God (says L^co supracia.
Origin) did set his bow in the clouds for a sign and covenant of peace, that
such deluge should be no more, but such stormy tempest should hereafter
surcease, Genesis 9. 13. 16. so contrariwise the devil has set his bow in these
Iud. 1^.
clouds without water, to suscitate and stir up tempests, to trouble
serenitie and calmness in the soul of others, to discomfite peace, to make
garboiles and war, to raise up whirlwinds and storms: and such clouds are
carried about with a tempest, to whom the black darkness is reserved for
ever, 2. Pet. 2. 17. For when thou see one passionibus agitatum, tossed of
contrary winds, and carried headlong in his passions, that he roue and rave
with his tongue: Doubt not (says that Father) but that the devil has bent
that man's tongue for his bow, and shoots out for his arrows that man's bitter
words to hit them which are true of heart. And their virulent arrows were
less poisonous, if only in secret as our Psalm. 11. ^.
English reads, (...) as the 70. translate, in obscura luna, as Austine with
others render it: if only they shot their arrows at the darkness of the Moon
and eclipse of the Church: but seeing as archers shoot at the white in a but,
so they shoot at the Apoc. 4. 4.
white raiment of the Elders, of Vide. Are^. ^ Apec. 3. 4.
whom the Lord himself has said: They shall walk with me in white, for they
are worthy, Apoc. 3. 4. Seeing they shoot at the virtue and innocence of
their brethren, at the Psalm. 11. ^.
upright in heart, at the Psalm. 37. 14.
upright in conversation, at the Psalm. 64 ^
innocent in soul, (as David who was their white complained) surely as the bow
in these clouds is opposite and against the Sun, so like that fool who shot
his arrows against the Sun, they do but shoot against the sun of
righteousness. Such Iun. in Genesis 49. 23. Isti iaculaeteres costinendo ad eum
velut seopum perd^re eum ^^nati sun^.
archers shot against Joseph as at a white, whom they meant to hit and strike
dead. The archers grieved him, and shot against him, and hates him, says old
Iaakob, Genesis 49. 23. Those archers were his brethren, says In hunc loc^.
Abulensis, even his own brethren, says Homil. 67. in Genesis 49. 23.
Chrysost^me, who conspiring together against him, accused him with joint
consent to their Father, grieved him, shot against him, and hated him; they
grieved him iniuria operis: they shot against him blasphemia oris: and they
hated him inuidia cordis, says Hugo: with injury of the hand, blasphemy of
the tongue, and malice of the heart. But his bow abode strong, and the arms of
his hands were strengthened by the hands of the mighty God of Iaakob, says
his father, verse. 24.

This indeed i^ (...) understood of Iosoph^ brethren, says Lyr^, but
mystically must be meant of other insolent young men, who vex with their
tongues any who is not like to themselves: young men indeed and children in
understanding, but in malitiousnesse of ripe years (as 1. Cor. 14. ^0.
the Apostle count^ their age) whose tongue in preaching peace and glad
tidings, is like the Genesis 9. 13. 16.
rainebow without an arrow and chosen sh^^^: the bend of their bow like the
arch of that, (as Zauch. lib. 3. de oper. err^. ^ap. 3.
one observes) is then turned from us, their quiver is then empty and their
tongue starts aside like a broken bow; but like the children of Ephtaim,
carrying bows in the day of battle and contention: L^ the^ they hand their bow
(says David,) and make ready their arrows within the quiuet, that secretly
they may hit them which are upright in heart, to smite the bird while she
sings of peace; and like that fouler in the fable, to wound the Eagle with
that shaft which was feathered with her own quill. David the sweet finger of
Israel, unless he would fly away to the mountains and be at rest, could not
escape the holts of these fools, but when like the Nightingale he sung sweetly
of peace, then they bent their bow and made ready their arrows within the
quiver to shoot at this upright in heart: When he spoke to them of peace, they
prepared themselves unto battle, Psalm. 120. 7. Jeremy when he preached
conversion, and prayed for their rebellions, these bow-men of Belial bent up
their bow, and shot out their arrows, even bitter words: Come and let us
imagine so^* device against Jeremy, come and let us smite him with the tongue,
and let us not give heed^ to any of his words, Ier. 18. 18. Stephen when he
preached peace to the stif-necked Jews, they had bent and drawn it so far,
that they brake their bow: their hearts (...) (...) and Ac^ 1. 54.
burst for anger, says By dogs.
S. Luke, and they could not shoot an arrow of bitter words: but g^ashed at
him with their teeth, and threw bow, quiver and all at this bird, they ran
upon him all at once. Thus the bird while she sings of peace, is smitten by
these archers, which then prepare themselves to battle.

Sometime the holy Ghost compares them to dogs, Psalm. 22 16. Many dogs are
come about me, says David. Who are these dogs says Austine, but they qui
canine more latrant, nihil illis fit and l^trant: who had naught done to them,
and yet bark at their brother? Quid fecit cani transiens via^ (...)? tamen
tatrat: what hurt did he the dog which did but go on his way? and yet he
barks at the passenger? It may seem indeed an uncouth name for them, and they
will ask me as did Hazael, 2. King. 8. Am I a dog that I should do this
thing? howbeit seeing with 2. Sam. 16.
Shimei they bark at a David, and with that Cinicke snarle at every man, they
may be termed with the one conuiciorum c^n^s, and with the other be called a
dead dog. For as we Plin. noc. hist. lib. y cap. 2.
read of some monsters in Scythia, which though they have man's feature
beneath, yet having canina capita, heads like dogs, whose speech is no other
but barking, may truly be termed dogs. So we read in the Psalms, that
although David's reuilers were men in shape that could talk, Psalm. 59. 7. yet
he says they barked like dogs, verse. 6. And thus indeed, they grin like a
dog as did Psalm. 52.
Doeg against David. Like the dog they Cauina litera iram indicat.
I at their brethren with that snarler in the Terent. Adel. Act. 2. Se^. 1.
Comedy: Vah, quibus illum lacerarem modis?
Sublimem medium arripere^, and capite primum in terram statuerem:
Adolescenti ipsi eriperem oculos: post hac praecipitem darem,
Caeteros ruerem, agerem, raperem, tunderem, and prosternerem.
Thus they who dare not imbrue their hands, (for law and statute binds them)
yet die their tongues (for they are their own, and who is Lord over them) in
the blood of their brethren. I wish that as these dumb dogs cannot bark
against the wolf, Esa. 56. so they could not snarle at the sheep neither.

Sometime the holy Ghost likeneth them to the raging sea, 3. By the raging sea.
( Esa. 57. 20.) which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. They
should be indeed aequor, even a calm as naturally is the sea: but when anger
(as Lib. de ira De^, cap. 5.
Lactantius notes) falls upon their minds, like that boisterous wind in the
first of Jonah, it causes a mighty tempest, it raises the waves, and
alters the whole state of these men, the eyes they wax fierce, the mouth it
trembles, the tongue it faltereth, the teeth they gnash, and like that sea
which wrought and was troublous, neither could be calmed by any prayer till
Jonas was cast out. More implacably in this raging then that, that if Jonas
were cast out of the ship to the mercy of these raging waves.

If one with Ruff. Eccles. hist. Job. 2. cap. 9.
N^zianzene, who because at Constantinople he labored more abundantly then
they all, glo^^am subsequnta est inuidia was envied for his pains, and urged
by proscriptions to gi^e over his place. If for my sake (says he) this tempest
is upon you, take me and cast me into the sea, so shall it be calm ^^to you.
If he were cast out into the sea, it would not cease from her raging, but her
waters would cast up mire and dirt, and these raging waves of the sea (the Iud.
13.
Apostle there baptiseth them with that name) would still foam out their own
shame. For as one wave thrusts away his fellow, vndaque expellitur vnda, and
cast^ his mire and dirt upon the next: so these would sp^e their foam one upon
another, if they wanted a rock whereon to beat and disgorge it. And therefore
as Plutarch in his book De capienda ex inimicis vtilitate, advises such
raging waters to keep still some enemies, on whom they may disgorge their
choleric affections, lest for want of other vessels, they cast upon their
friends: So politickly wise was his counsel, who like Plutarch. de capiend. ex
ini^^c. vtilit. and reip. gerend. pracept. and AElian. var. hist. lib. 14. cap
25.
Onomademus in the sedition at Chios, advised his fellows of the stronger
part, that they should not expel all their adversaries of the other faction,
alioqui periculum feret, ne omnibus amicis sublatis, cum amicis ipsis extiturae
essent controuersiae: Else I fear (says he) if we have no enemies to wreake
on, we wreake one upon another, and fall out by the ears among our selves. O
that these raging waves would remember how much they mire themselves, while
they cast up their dirt upon another. For though the sea raging in a tempest
casts up mire and dirt, yet here i^ the difference (says Di^l. de ira ^ohib.
Plutarch) Mare tunc purgatur, the sea is then purged of her froth, which is
sp^ma maris, the foam and scumme, the spuing and spittle of the sea: but the
heart when it raging with wrath casts her stomach of dirtie speeches, ^^
dicentis primum conspurcant, says he, False testimonies, slanders, reuiling
and backbiting, these coming out of the heart within through the mouth, first
defile a man, Mark. 7. 23. and foam out first their own shame, Iud. 13.

Thus in my triple description, these archers bolt out their arrows at their
brethrens name: thus the tongue of these dogs is red through the same: thus
these raging waves foam out their own shame.

Whose proscription that I may in brief proclaim, let me 2 their pr^scription.
show these archers Gods arrow of vengeance, stemd with judgment, and feathered
with swift destruction. God shall suddenly shoot at them with a swift arrow
(says David) that they shall be wounded, Psalm. 64. 7. Their sword shall go
through their own heart, their bow shall be broken, and their arrows shall be
rooted out.

These dogs that cast up their rancor, and return to their vomit, that bark
like a dog, and gnash their teeth at their brethren, shall be without the holy
city, Apoc. 22. 15. Mat. 8. 1^.
where is nothing but howling and gnashing of teeth.

These raging waves that cannot rest, as they have no internal, nor will have
external, so shall they have no eternal peace and rest: Esai. 57. ^1.
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. In tossing their brethren, they
do but throw them on the rock which is higher then themselves, as Psalm. 61. ^
David speaks, and beat themselves on the rock Christ Jesus, on which
seeing they dash, it will break them in pieces, Math. 21. 44.

And thou innocent Dove, whosoever art smitten with these 3. our prescription
against these.
archers, that I may give thee a prescription against their deadly arrows.
When they whet their tongue like a sword, to slash in thy presence, and slice
thy good name, keep thou thy mouth (like David) with a bridle, while these
ungodly are in thy sight. Put up thy sword into his sheath, and suffer them
thus far. Their tongue is indeed a sharp sword, Psalm 57. 4. and cutteth
like a sharp razor, says David of Doegs tongue, Psalm. 52. 2. Howbeit it shall
but cut off thy hair and superfluous excrements, says E^orra^. in Psalm. 51.
Austine, and perchance thy James 1. 3^.
excrementa malitiae, the excrements and superfluity of maliciousness. Doeg
was but David's barber to top off his crest and luxuriant locks, when he meant
to cut his throat with this razor. Yea it shaued the head himself, Et te
caluum factura est, says that Father, and it shall but cut thee on Caluary
with thy Christ.

Or if these archers bend up their bow, to shoot at thee far off 1. archers. By
suffering the^
in thine absence with their arrows, even bitter words: Ctyp^^ p^ti^^^^ frange
^agitt as contume^^^^, prabe sc^tum conscientiae contragladium linguae, is
Sermon. 40. de modo been (...).
Bernards advice: for this take the complete armor of God for thine armor of
defense, take the brestplace of righteousness against the sword of their
tongue; the helmet of salvation, and the shield of faith, and a good
conscience, wherewith you may quench all the fiery darts of these wicked, as
Hom. 3. in Psa. 36.
Origin well applies it. Reject the reproaches of offered contumelies, says
Sermon. 42. de modo b^ne (...).
Bernard, by despising them conquer the rebukes of mockers, by dissembling them
contemn the errors of detractors, though every one irritate thee, though he
incite thee, though he exasperate, though he insult, though he rail and
revile, though he accuse falsely, though he provoke thee to strife, though he
challenge thee to quarrel, though he belch forth scoffing and taunts, though
he injury and wrong thee, though he load thee with reproaches, T^^ si^e, ^^
ta^e, ^^ dissimula, ^^ contemn, ^^ non loquaris, Hold thy tongue, keep
silence, speak not, be dambe with Psalm 39. ^.
David, keep thy mouth bridled while those ungodly are in thy sight, Vt
capistro fren^tis a^entium ho^^^^um ignorantium, that with thy bit and bridle
thou may hold the mouths of these horse and mule (which have no
understanding) least thy fall upon thee. Away then with Zophars retaliation;
Job 11. 1. Should not the multitude of words be answered? should men hold their
peace at thy lies? and when thou mockest others, should none make thee ashamed?
No, no. Thy Savior charge thee to hold thy peace at their lies, or if to
speak, to bless them that curse thee, Math. 5. 44. A grave Se^^. ad Seren.
cap. 19.
Philosopher, even he can tell thee, that though these archers shoot out their
arrows, yet a wise man will bear contumel^es, reproachful speeches,
ignominies, and other disgraces as the clamor and shout of enemies, and will
endure bittter words as shafts shot at randon, rustling without wounding about
thy helmet and head-peece; yea will stoutly sustain injuries, as wounds, some
in the arms, and some stuck in his breast, without deiection. ^^m. de Dauide
and Saul.
Chrysostom in this point gives thee a Christian resolution: Some body has
slaundred thee, or railed on thine offense: this, if he said truly, correct;
but if falsely, deride: if thou art conscious and guilty of his imputations,
repent: if thou art not, contemn it. Nay neither contemn nor deride it, but
be glad and rejoice when men causl^sly revile thee, and say all manner of evil
aginst thee falsely, for great in heaven is thy reward, Matthew 9. 11.

Or if these hawling Shimeis snarle and bark at thy good name, contumelious
words (says a Ierom. prelog. super Mich.
Father) must be heard as 2. Dogs.
the barking of curres which are not regarded. Thou must dialogue with thy
self in Lib de Re(...) for^^it.
Seneca his Soliloquio, and put on his resolution. Men speak evil of thee,
but evil men. It would grieve me if Marcus Cato, if wise Laelius, if the other
Cato, if either Scipio should speak so of me.

Now to be disliked of evil men, is to be praised, their words 1. By not
m^^king them.
want credit, where the guilty condemn. Men speak evil of thee: it would
grieve me if they did this from judgment, but now they do it of spleen. Men
speak evil of thee, they cannot speak well of any. They do it, not that I
deserve it, but that which is their custom: for some kind of dogs have it
natural, that not so much of curstness as of custom they bark at
passengers. And indeed the chief, if not only way to make them give over, is
to take no notice of their barking, nor regard their baying. For as Li. 28 hist
not, c. 8. and l. 26. c. ^.
Pliny observes them, who wear a tongue under their foot, Non latrari a
canibus, that they are not barked at by dogs: so the best means to stop their
mouths also, is Linguam sub pede habere, to tread their tongue under foot, or
not give heed to all words that men speak, as Solomon advises, Eccles. 7. 23.
And therefore wisely did that Doroth. ser. 7. d^ accus. and re^^
Father, who contemning all their railings, said, I use my self toward these,
as travelers do at bawling curres. For it is not convenient (says Lib. 3. de
Ir^.
Seneca) to hear all that men say. Let many injuries and reproaches pass us,
most whereof he receives not that takes no notice of them. For who so is
inquisitiue what is said of him in private, he who searches out malignant
speeches, though spoken in secret, disquieteth and ve^eth his own soul. And
therefore Senec. ib 2. ^^ Ira. cap. 23.
Caesar did wisely, when having in that civil garboile intercepted a packet of
letters written to Pompey from his favorites, brake them not open, but burnt
them immediately. And though he could moderate his wrath, and in sobriety be
angry at his followers, Malui^ tamen non poss^, faith mine author, yet would he
not know a cause that he might be angry. When one had unawares hit Cato in the
bath, and came after to ask him forgiveness, I remember not (quoth he) that I
was struck: Melius putauit non agnoscere quam ignoscere, Ibid cap. 32.
says* the same author. It was not without mystery (as some observe) that our
Savior when he should be Math. 27.
spitted on, buffetted and reviled, would be blindfold before, that as man he
might not know his smiter and reuiler, least with Act. 23.
Paul he might be provoked to reply, as after he did when he beheld his smiter,
John 18. Lessoning us (it may be) to blindfold the eyes of our understanding
when we are smitten with the tongue, and be as stocks and images at reproach,
which though they be railed on and reviled by their enemies of imagery, yet
have ears and hear not, noses and smell not, hands and revenge not, feet and
are not swift to shed blood, no nor so much as flow to wrath, neither is there
any breath in their mouth to reply, Psalm. 115. David was as deaf and dumb at
reproach as any of these were, Psa. 38. 12, 13. They that seek after my life lay
snares: and they that go about to do me evil, talk wicked things all day
long: but I was as deaf (says he) and he ard not, and as one dumb, which
does not open his mouth: I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth
are no reproves. They talked wicked things of him, not once, but all day long:
and this innocent Do^e was so wise as a Serpent, that he stopped his ears, and
refused to hear the voice of these blasphemous in chaunters, charmed they
never so skilfully. For both he was deaf at their reproaches* and as one that
heard not the talebearer, who raises contention among br^thren, Pro^er. 6.
19. Teaching us thereby, that not only we our selves be deaf at reuilings,
but also neither hear it from the talebearer, without whom strife cease, as
without wood the fire is quenched, Proverb. 26. 20. And indeed seeing a Prouer.
16. 2^
Talebearer makes division among Princes, and (as the Greek interpreter
reads it) (...), diuides friends themselves, we should not be talehearers,
like kans (as Bion called them) which are carried up and down by the ears
whithersoeuer their informer lusts, nor take information from our
intelligencers and Abish^^s, of the barking of these Shimeis and dead dogs: for
as they are forbid to walk about with tales among the people, Le^is. 19. 16.
so are we advised by wisdom, Eccles. 28. 13. to abhor the talebearer and
double tongued, for such have destroyed many that were at peace; and who so
hearkneth unto it, shall never find rest, and never dwell quietly. Which the
rather we should do, because when thus hucksterlike we take our notice at
second hand, the reporters tongue proves often that secunda lingua (as some read
it) and adds more then the first did relate. And therefore I wish that our
tale-bearers, who never receive a voice which they do not resound, would like
the Ovid. Me(...)
echo, that true teltale, either carry nothing but what they heard, extremave
verba remittant, or extenuate reproaches by an half relation. I wish these
pratlers and busi-bodies in other men's matters, which like those 1. Tim. 5 13.
women in Ephesus, being idle, go from house to house speaking things which are
not convenient, would follow Monica Saint Austins mother, who (as he Lib. 9.
Confess. cap. 9.
confesses) was such a peacemaker among disagreers, that when she heard many
most bitter things spoken of the one party in the absence of the other, nihil
alteri de altera proderet, would not disclose a word of the one side to the
other, but that which might help their reconcilement. But we (as there he
adds) not only carry speeches of angry men to their enemies, but add to
their sayings some root of bitterness, which puts death in the pot.
Whereas we should not only not stir up men's hatred by relation of truth, nor
augment it by that word, which as wood increases the flame, but strive to
extinguish it by welspeaking. And howsoever these informers, which like spies
are sent out to note the weakness of the land, bring us of the fruit thereof
in their mouths: yet should our ear, which tries words as the mouth tastes
meat, be stopped at their report, with that of the Apostle, Touch not* taste
not, handle not: or if we give ear, yet give not our mind to all words that
men speak against us, Eccles. 7. 23.

Wherefore let us not (if but the hemme of our good name be touched) look
back in wrath, and ask our informers Quis me tetigis? who has touched me
behind my back? least if there be no fear of God before our ears, Satan open
our throats as sepulchers to send out Ephesians. 4. 29.
that (...), rotten speech, and stinking breath, which is a sign of inward
corruption, and that our inward parts are very wickedness. Least he tip our
tongues with deceit to misconster; least he put the poison of Aspes under our
lips to revile; least he fill our mouths full of cursing and bitterness to
reproach, and make our feet swift to shed blood. And thus taking no notice by
our own ears or others tongues, we shall stop the mouths of these barkers,
and be stayed our selves from answering a fool to his folly, and barking
again.

A second prescript or counterpoison against their virulent 2. Not suspecting
them.
tongues, may be this, if we be not too suspicious of their baying at us.

The cause of wrath indeed and toong-warre, is opinio iniurio (says Lib. 2. de
J^a cap. 22
Seneca) conceit of injury, when too credulous we apply men's propositions in
gross, and in our consciences assume what they proposed in general: yea
eftsoons from very iesture and laughing, as Ibid. cap. 23. ^
he notes, (so censuring, a phisiognomist is a suspicious conscience) we
interpret worse then their words in charitable construction might import.

When the men of Syria were at feud with the Romans, they sent them but these
four letters by an Herald, S. P. Q. R. which in too much suspicion of defiance
they misconstrued, Syris populis quis resistet? who will resist the people of
Syria? And answering them back with the same characters, S. P. Q. R. too
credulously they mis-expounded, Senatus populus que Romanus, the Senate and
people of Rome. Which letters the Romans after that conquest ingrauing as an
emblem of triumph in the forefront of their Temple for all to read, a
traveler reading them without understanding, and asking what they meant; one
of the citizens expounded them by this question, Sancte Petre quare rides?
Saint Peter why do you laugh? And answered the foolish question backward with
as wise an answer: Rideo quia Papa sum: I laugh because I am a Pope. Thus
witty malice in the Syrians and Romans from not significancie collecteth
enmity, charity in either (which thinks not evil) might have expounded,
Sapiens populus quaerit, (...), Wise men seek strength by unity. Thus the
credulous stranger from darkness of letters conceived falsehood thereby.
Charity (which rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth) might with Bid
have interpreted them, Stultus populus quaerit Romam, Foolish people seek to
Rome. And indeed, as sores and ulcers are grieved not only at a light touch,
but even suspitione and dubio tactus, with suspicion and fear of being
touched: so (says Lib. 3. de Ir^. cap. 10.
Seneca) an exulcerate mind with misconceit of touching, is often aggrieued so
far, that even a salutation, an epistle, a letter, a speech, and a question
has provoked them to enmity. And as small letters offend bad eyes, so least
words, says Dial. de ^ra co^ib.
Plutarch, I may say a Raca, yea an if and an and, or a no of contradiction,
will grieve uncircumcised ea^es. Our ears are like Mice and Emmets, at which
if one point but the finger, and offer but to touch them, they turn their
mouths to bite us: Imbecilla se laedi putant si tanguntur: Silly things (says
Senec lib. 2. de Ira. cap. 34.
he) they think themselves hurt if they be but touched. A fault taxed by the
Apostle in the wicked Gentiles, who were full (...), Romans 1. 29. which the
Arist. l. 2. R^^*
Philosopher defines (...), to take al things in the evil part, as our English
translation well renders it. With which sinister affection Plutarch bitterly
brandeth Herodotus in his book, entitled (...), of Herodotus taking all things
amiss. And I fear I may not only brand with Plutarch, but condemn with Paul,
some wicked Gentiles, that are as he calls them full of his Paronomasiaes,
(...) and (...) and (...) and (...) and (...): so have they their minds opplete
and gorged with this humor also: Et suspitiosi omnia ad contumeliam accipiunt,
as he speaks in the Teren^. A^el^.
Comedy, being too mistrust full and suspicious, take all things in the evil
part* like Seen ad Ser^. cap. 18.
Caius the humanist, Qui omnia contumelias putabat, who thought every word was
spoken to his disgrace: Et fuit sicut ferendarum impa^iens, ita faciendar^m
cupidissimus, and was as unwilling to bear as forbear reproaches. The Apostle
calls this suspitiones malas, evil r 1. Tim. 6. 4.
surmises of corrupt minds, which when men's tongues like bells give an
indefinite and not significant sound, imagine them ^o speak and mean
whatsoever their guistie conscience frame^^ in their s^^sie, and whispereth in
the eure strange warriers are their lusts, fighting in their members, which
when the trumpet gives an vnocrtaine sound, prepare their selves to battle.
Wherefore seeing (as Lib. 2. de Ira. cap. 24.
So^^ca truly avouched) credulity breeds so much evil, his advice is
heavenly, suspicion and conjecture, those two falcissima irritamenta, most
false incitements of anger, must as roots of bitterness be weeded out of the
ground of the heart: He saluted me not kindly, he brake off talk abruptly, he
in^ited not me to supper, his countenance seemed auerse, or he touched me
darkly in his allusion; thus suspicion never wants an argument of enmity.
Simplicitate op^^ est and benigna eorum aestimatione, here the Doves
simplicity is better then the Serpents subtlety: here to be simple without
understanding is learned ignorance: here charity must censure, which believes
all things to be well meant, and thinks not evil of an evil intent: for if
thou truly be magn^nimous, thou will never judge that contumely is offered
thee: thou will ^^y of thine enemy, He has not hurt me, but only had a mind
to harm me. And this is true magnanimity, says Lib. 3. de Ira. cap. 25.
Seneca, Non sentire se percussum, to say wisely with that fool in the 23. of
Proverbs, They have stricken me, but I was not sick: they have beaten me, but
I felt it not: or as Plu^. de Ira (...).
Diogenes answered his informers of some that derided him, I am not derided.
We (...). ^^. 2. de ira. cap. 24. supra (...).
must believe no report, but from our eyes relation, seeing our ears like
false aduertisers do often mis inform: and when our suspicion proves vain, let
us chide our credulity: so our charity believing all things well meant, shall
not be credulous to think evil: and so enduring all things of our foes, shall
not be provoked to anger, 1. C^^^ith. 13.

Howbeit if their barking be so clamorous, as if thou woldst not, the very
stones in the wall would hear; and so notorious, 3. By suffering them.
that if thou did not, the beam in the house would reply: the third way
says ^^ Ira. (...).
Plutarch, is peaceably to bridle thy mouth, and quietly compose thine
affections, when thou perceiuest foming anger like the falling sickness to
fall upon them. Suffer the evil man patiently says Paul, as Christ and his
servants in patience possessed their souls, with a meek spirit, when their
enemies were possessed with an evil spirit of wrath, which cried out upon
them, Idem ibid.
Socrates when he was reviled, was wont to slake and remit his voice, and
smiling with his countenance, mildly to behold them. Antigonus when he
ouerheard his own soldiers r^ile on him near his tent and pauilion: Good
Lord (quoth ^e) will ye not get ye further off and speak against us? Seven.
lib 3. de ira, cap. 38.
Cat^ when he was pleading, and Zentulus had cast his stomach and uttered his
mind in his face, only wiped it with a napkin: And I will avouch before all
this company, Lentulus (says he) that they are deceived who deny thee to have
a mouth. Shall I say with the Iam. 5. 10.
Apostle: Take, my brethren, the Prophets, nay if we take but these heathen for
an example of long patience, we may count them blessed that endure. O remember
2. Sa^ 16.
David's patience of Shimei his cursing: Let him alone, for the Lord has hidden
him curse David.

But such Adders poison (say thou) is under their lips, that as Plu^. de
ira cohib
serpents inflame them with heat, whom they bite with the tongue: so Iam. 3. 6.
their tongue being set on hell fire, will set on fire the course of nature:
and thou complainedst with Psalm. 39. 3.
David, that though long thou have been dumb and kept silence, yet it is now
pain and grief unto thee, thy heart is hot within thee, and when the fire
kindled thou spakest with thy tongue. Indeed the tongue is fire, and an unruly
beast which no man can tame: behold how great a matter this little fire
kindles: Paruum est and magna cupit (as Tom. 1. de inter Dom. cap. 61.
Bernard speaks of the heart as little a member) vix ad vnius milui
refectionem sufficere posset, and totus mu^dus ^i non sufficit: It is but a
little member, and yet boas^eth of great things, says James, it would not
serve a crow for her breakefast, and yet is it no less then a world of
iniquity. Therewith rightly bless we God, and therewith unrighteously curse
we men. It is grande malum aut grande bonum, non habet medium, says Comment.
in Psalm. 119.
Jerome: No mean it brooketh, but death or life are in the power of the
tongue, Prou. 18. 21.

And therefore when Amasis the Egyptian king requested (...) to reserve the
best and worst piece of the sacrifice which he slew, linguam ^^stulit, he took
the tongue of the beast, says In (...). 7. s^^.
(...): as the servant in Aesops apologues, being commanded by his master
Xanthus to buy the best and worst flesh in the shambles, linguas solas emit, he
only bought tongues, says the Author. So true is that of Solomon: A wholesome
tongue is as a tree of life, but the frowardness thereof is like the breath of
the wind, Prou. 15. 4. Nevertheless this raw piece of flesh which offends so
many queasie stomachs, thou must with Christ and his members digest through
the heat of his spirit, and thy warmth of love which endures all things, 1.
Cor. 13. 7. We must smile at their reproaches, says Ad Serenum cap. 11.
Seneca; and Cap. 12.
as we suffer children to nickname and mis-call us, yea to spit in our face,
so should we tolerate all reuilers, though they spit their poison in our ears:
or as ye suffer fools and idiots to least and play upon you, so should ye
suffer these fools gladly, because that ye are wise, 2. Cor. 11. 19. Cap. 13.
for who will be angry at a mad man? who will take in evil part the reproaches
and reuilings of a man in his fever? The mind and affection should a wise man
(says Seneca) carry toward his impatients outrage, which Physicians bear to
their raging patients, whose dishonest parts, if need be, they disdain not to
handle, whose basest parts they willingly view, and whose railing and reuiling
they patiently endure. Yea a wise man (says Cap. 14.
he) if by fair words he cannot pacify his reuiler, contumeliatorem tanquam
acrem canem obiecto cibo leniet, will like our Savior give this for a soppe to
appease his wrath, and give the dog a loaf to stop his mouth, as Aeneas in
the Virgil. lib. 6. (...).
fiction Melle soporatam and medicatam frugibus ^ssam
Obijcit. --
Did cast Cerberus the helhound a sweet morsel, that he might not bark
against him: For they will go to and fro in the evening, they will grinne like
dogs, and go about the city, they will run here and there for meat, and
grudge if they be not satisfied, Psalm. 59. And thus if either thou take no
notice of these Doegs, of these Shimeis, and dead dogs that revile: or if
observing their currish custom to bark at all passengers, thou be not
credulous to suspect they baule at thee; or if too suspicious, thou yet bear
reproach, and strive to mitigate their woodnesse, thou shall not be bitten with
the tongues of mad dogs; or if bitten, yet shall thou not ru^ne mad thy self
to bite again. And seeing as there is the worm Plin. hist n^^ lib. 29 cap. 5.
Lytta under the tongue of some curres, which unless it be taken off will make
them run mad: so under their tongue is ungodliness and wrong, (as David Psalm.
10. 7.
speaks) which unless if be taken out, will make them run mad, and bite
even their own domestickes. Pray with David in that place, verse. 15. that he
who is curator linguae, the healer of the tongue, would in mercy worm them,
and take away their Lytta: Take away their ungodliness and thou shall find
none.

Thirdly and lastly, though these raging waves of the sea cast 3 Raging se^.
up mire and dirt, even those five rocks of offense, and stones to stumble at,
(as Saint Tomb 4 lib. 4. de amic^. cap. 13
Austine calls them) Reuiling, Nickname, Swelling, Revelation of faults, and
privy detractions: though the tongue of these wels without water, like a Iam.
3. 10. 11.
fountain send out salt and bitter water, Exodus 15. 23.
waters of Marah and Meribah, Cap. 17. 7.
bitterness and contention, yet let thy well of living water send out sweet
and wholesome water into these saltish waves, to sweeten their bitterness, and
not like noisome rivers, which to purge out their filthiness, empty
themselves into the sea, and replenishing it with mire and dirt, make it more
rage, and foam out it own shame. It was devilish counsel of Lib decap. ex
(...). vt^l.
Plutarch, that he shall exceedingly benefit himself, who emptying and
pouring out these turbulent affections of brawling, scolding, reuiling,
wreaking, fretting, fuming, and chafing, on his enemies, does so purge himself
of these bitter waters, and making his foes as channels and gut^ces to convey
them away, and as sinks to receive them, and derive them away from his friends,
associates, and familiars. Isti enim in inimicos insumpti praui affectus, minus
molesti erunt amicis* for these filthy affections (says he) being exhaust and
spent upon our foes, will be less noisome to our friends. He gave better
advice before, if he had not forgot it: That it is better to bestow our best
affections on our adversaries: for being accustomed to do right to them, we
shall never deal unjustly with our friends. No, no, (beloved Christian) as it
is good in a fever, so much better in anger, to have a soft, smooth, and
render tongue: for the tongue of ague-sicke men, if it be distempered with
heat and fu^ie, with blacknes, signum est melum non causa, it is only an
evil sign, and not the cause of internal inflammation, says Plu^. di^^
(...) ira (...).
Plutarch: but the tongue of angry and raging men is both an evil sign that
they are set on fire of hell, and will be the cause that they shall be set in
fire of hell. Let these waves then and waters of contradiction cool thy
tongue, and wash away its filth: Audisti conuitium, ventu^ est: iratus es,
fluctus est: Thou have heard a reproach, it is a wind: thou art angry, that is
a wave, says Sermon. 3 in Festo Pasch. and Sermon. 3. in fest. Epoph.
Austine. The wind therefore storming, and the wave tossing, thy ship like that
of the disciples Mat. 8. is in ieopardie of wrack, and ready to make
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. And why so? says that Father:
because Christ within thee is asleep, awake him up therefore, stir up his
gift that is in thee: and cry, Master save, for we perish. These raging waves
shall but cool thy concupiscence, like Jordan wash away thy leprosy, and
heal thy infirmities like the poole of Bethesda: with Israel thou shall
safely pass thorough the midst of them, and the wicked with Pharao shall be
drowned in those waves, thorough which they persecute and pursue thee.

They may dash into thy boat and fill it full, that thou may be like to
perish, but they shall not swallow up nor devour thee: for thy head is still
above these waters, and though the waves of the sea rage horribly, yet the Lord
that dwells on high is mightier, says David, Psalm. 93. 4. yea thine own
head shall be above these waves, swell they never so much: as David did assure
him: He shall set me up upon a rock, and now shall he lift up mine head above
mine adversaries round about me, Psalm. 27. 6. Only like the disciples Mark. ^.
41.
call on him who being alone the true Aeolus, can more then he command the
winds and waves of the sea, and they obey him: he will rebuke the wind, and say
to these raging waves: Tantane vos generis tenuit fiducia vestri?
Iam c^lum terramque meo sine numine venti
Miscere, and tantas audetis tollere fluctus?
Peace and bestill, and so will there be a great calm: for he Psalm.
only stilleth the raging of the sea and the noise of his waves, and the
madness of his people. Howsoever it be these waves hear not his voice, nor
will cease from their raging: yet as the disciples in their ship rowed
through the waves of Genezareth with a contrary wind, Mark. 6. 48. so must we
in this ship sail through these raging waves with that contrary breath, 1.
Pet. 3 9. Not rendering rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise, bless. Christ the
Pilot and master of the ship has charged all passengers bound for heaven,
to sail with this contrary wind: Bless them that curse you, and pray for
them that hurt you and persecute you, Luke 6. 28. Et quam id sancte praecepit,
tam integre ser^auit, says a Sal(...). lib. 3. exemp. cap. ^.
Writer: His word and his work like mercy and truth met together; his
praecept and his practice like righteousness and peace kissed each other. For
when the Jews cried (...). ^^. ^
Crucifige, he cried (...) 3^.
Ignosce. O wonder (says ^ ^ pas. D(...).
Bernard) Iud ^i clam^nt, crucifige, ille conclamat, ignosce: o charitas
patiens sed and compations: The Jews cry, crucify him, and he outcries,
Father pardon them: o patient and compassionate love! Being beaten with rods
crowned with thorns, pierced with nails, nailed to the cross filled with
reproaches, unmindful of all his grie^es, he prays for his persecutors. This
Lamb of God as a sheep was dumb before his shearer, coram tondentem? yea
coram occidente obmutuit, not only before his shearer, but even before his
slayer and butcher was he dumb, says Homil. (...) la^d. v^^gin.
Bernard. When he was thus vilified and reviled, he reviled not again: when he
thus suffered he threatened not, but committed it to him that judges
righteously, says his Apostle, 1. Pet. 2. 23. And see what he committed to
that righteous Judge: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. O
love of God passing all understanding! He now hung upon the cross compassed
with his mortal enemies, destitute of his own friends, mocked with taunts,
loaded with obloquies: now ready to give up the last gasp, and yet as
unmindful of himself and mindful of his foes, he prays for them: he
complained he was forsaken of his Father, and he forsakes not his enemies: he
was crucified by them, and he entreats his Father for them: he saw their
treason, and he excused it by their ignorance: he felt their deadly hate, and
he sued for their pardon. O love! strong as death: o heat of love! cruel as
the grave, which never had enough of tortures, which never said Ho, but still
cried, Give, give. The blood indeed of Christ (says Lib. 13. moral. cap 21.
Gregory) is well said by the Heb. 12. 24.
Apostle to speak better things then that of Abel: for the blood of Abel Genesis
4. 10.
called for vengeance, but the blood of Jesus for forgiveness: Father forgive
them. Here is an example for thee thou tossed with waves: Exemplum sum vnicum
atque omnium praestantissimum: Take the most excellent and only example, which
if a man rightly observe says Loco supracitat.
Sabellicus, he may become far more like God himself then a man: He shall be
perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5. 48. He has left us an
example, (...). 1. Pet. 2. ^. 1.
a copy to write our alphabet and Christs-crosse rows after, that we should
follow his steps, when we are reviled, not to revile again. For how small are
our sufferings of rebuke in comparison of his passions of reproach, says Lib de
conflict. vit. and virt. cap 9.
Austine? He willingly sustained reuilings, derisions, contumelies, buffets,
spittings, scourges, thorns, yea the ignominious crosses and we miserable
wretches to our confusion and shame of face, are wearied and faint with one
word, we are with one word of reproach cast down and dejected. Seeing then that
his name was like ointment of love powered out, Cant. 1. 2. which blasphemies,
reproaches and reuilings those dead flies could not cause to stink, nor
putrify the ointment of this Apothecarie, as Loco supracit.
Bernard out of Eccles. 10. 1.
Solomon alludeth: let us run in the savor of this ointment powered out on
our head, and running down to the skirts of his clothing, and lowest members
of his body. Let us be followers of God as dear children, and walk in love,
even as Christ has loved us, who when he was reviled, reviled not again.

Thou will say perhaps, How can I do this, which the Lord could do? But mark
(says Sermon. 170. de Temp.
Austine) who did it, even thy Savior as he was man: and remember where he
performed it, even upon the cross, in midst of all his torments and reproaches,
where he showed himself like a city on an hill for all to behold as an example
of humility, in blessing their blasphemers. He could have prayed for them in
silence, sed it is non haberes exemplum, but thou then should not have had an
example. Nevertheless if thou can not learn of thy Lord who was humble and
meek, yet imitate Stephen thy fellow-seruant, who says thee in Paul's words:
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ: whom when the stif-necked Jews ^
stoned triplici lapidatione, with a triple stoning: with stony Verse. 5^.
hearts which burst for anger: with stony mouths, which 5^.
gnashed at him with their teeth: and with 5^.
stony hands which rained showers of stones upon him, as Austine speaks; yet
he 60.
prayed for them, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Nay, see how he prayed
for these his reuilers says Sermon. supracit.
Austine. When he prayed for himself he Act. 7. 59. compared with 60.
stood on his feet, because the just when he prays for himself is easily
heard: but when he prayed for his enemies, he kneeled down, to show that he
prayed with all earnestness and intention of spirit: yea, whereas for himself
he did but call on God, saying: Lord Jesus receive my soul: for them (...) he
cried out, and that with a loud voice, with all vehemency and contention of
voice: Lord lay not this sin to their charge, and when he had spent the last
breath for them to his God, when he had thus spoken, he slept. Whose name
Stephanus, as it signifies a crown, so coronam accepit suo sibi nomine
impositam, says Austine, he has gotten that 1. Pet. 5. 6.
(...), the incorruptible crown of glory suitable to his name.

As sailed the master and Pilot Christ Jesus with his servant and first Martyr
Stephen, so rowed the Apostles, mariners of this ship with a contrary wind,
with a contrary breath, 1. Cor. 4. We are reviled, and we bless; we are
blasphemed and evil spoken of, and we use gentle words. And the master has
charged all passengers for heaven, like Paul's Act. 27 4.
mariners to keep a straight course though the winds be contrary: Bless them
that curse you, and pray for them that revile you, and say all manner of evil
against you, Mat. 5. 44. Pray for thy most virulent reuiler, to morrow of a
blasphemer, he may become a blesser, and thou f Prou. 27. 1.
know not what a day may bring forth. He that is now thine enemy in
slaundering, railing, and reuiling thee, may to morrow be converted to
repentance, says homil. 6.
Austine, and thy fellow Citizen in heavenly Jerusalem, and perhaps greater
therein then thy self. Saul was Stephens greatest foe, for it was too little
for him to stone him with his own hands alone, omnium man^bus lapidabat, says
that Father, he stoned him with all their hands that threw stones, in keeping
their clothes that better they might throw: and yet behold, with that contrary
breath, with that one prayer of Stephen, was he of a foe made a friend, of Saul
a Paul, of a persecutor a preacher, of an impostor a pastor, a doctor of a
seducer, of a pirate a prelate, of a blasphemer a blesser, of a thief a
shepherd, and of a wolf a sheep of Christ's fold: therefore says Ibid.
that excellent Father: Non homo, sed peccator te insequitur, roga pro homine
vt extinguat Deus peccatorem, cum enim mortuus fuerit peccator, tibi homo non
aduersabitur: not the man but the sinner does pursue thee, pray for the man,
that God may take away the sinner; for when the sinner is dead, the man shall
not impugn thee. Thy Chrysolog ser. 139.
brother rages, impute it to his sickness, ascribe febri non fratri, ascribe
it to the fever, and not to thy brother, dabisque prudenter infirmitat: culpam,
fratri veniam: and thou shall wisely lay the fault on his infirmity, and give
pardon to thy brother, seeing it is only the fever of his soul, that thus
hates thee, says August tract. 8. in Epist. Joan.
a Father. Away then with your quid pro quo, and rebuke for rebuke. It was the
wicked resolution of that requiter in the Terent. And. Act. 5. sc^n. 4.
Comedy,

Si mihi pergit quae non vult dicere, ea quae non vult, audiet. If he begin, I
will declare his deeds which he does, pra^ling against us with malicious
words, as the 3. Ioh. 10.
Apostle spoke of D^trephes in a better requital. It is that resolute
retal^ation of natural men, Hom. I ha^. lib. 1.
(...), Then shall hear again such words as thou speak: men so far past
shame, that as Aeneas told brawling Ibid.
Achilles, we may hear them scold in the ears of all, (...), even like women
that scold (...), as they go in the open street. Thus are our hearts, not soft
to break the force of reproach which is objected, but hard and stony, to send
back and resound the echo of rebuke: like Plut. reip. geren^ praecept.
Epaminondas, who hearing Callistratus vpbraid the Thebans with Oedipus his
parricide, who killed his father, and the Graecians with the murder of Orestes
who slew his mother, rendered this rebuke for rebuke: (...) vero ipsos a nobis
^iectos re^ipistis, But ye received them when we for this did exile them. Or
like M^r^^ AE(...) and V^later. A^thr. lib. 14. cap. 2.
Phocion, on whom Demades crying out, The Athenians will kill thee when they
begin to be mad: But they will kill thee (replied Phocion) when they begin to
be wise. Not much unlike that great g^rd of Crassus the Orator, whom when
Domitius taunted with weeping for the death of a Lamprey which he fed in a
pond: But thou (replied Crassus) shedst not a tear at the burial of thy three
wives. Which quipping and taunting speech, as it is but the ^ome of wit, so is
such jesting justly censured by the holy Ghost for foolish talking, Ephesians. 5. 4.
Seeing it is that (...), Ephesians. 4. 29. as it were a stinking breath, which as
Physicians observe, is a sign of inward putrefaction: and when our throats
are thus open sepulchers, Psalm 5. 9. to belch out such unsavory breath, it is
an argument that like graves we are full of dead men's bones within, and all
filthiness, and our inward parts are very wickedness.

Lastly to conclude this point, as we must not render rebuke for rebuke; so
neither blasphemy for blasphemy, nor curse for curse, but bless them that
curse us. I know indeed David wished evil unto his enemies, and prayed for
their ruin, Psa^me 69. And when Saul's flatterers like miscreants combined
their tongues to accuse him with one voice to the King, he did imprecate and
wish evil to those foes, Psa. 109. He prays against their person, verse. 6. 7.
8. Set thou an ungodly man to be ruler over him, and let Satan stand at his
right hand: when sentence is given upon him, let him be condemned, and let his
prayer be turned into sin: let his days be sew, and let another take his
office. He bent his tongue like a bow, and shot out his bitter words against
their family, Ver. 9. 10. Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a
widow: let his children be vagabonds, and beg their bread, let them seek it
also out of desolate places. He curses their external goods and riches, verse.
11. 12. 1^. Let the extortioner consume all that he has, and let the stranger
spoil his labor. Let there be no man to pity him, nor to have compassion on
his fatherless children. Let his posterity be destroyed, and in the next
generation let his name be clean put out. Yea he curses their soul unto
death, and prays for their damnation. Verse. 14. 15. Let the wickedness of
his fathers be had in remembrance with the Lord, and let not the sin of his
mother be done away. Let them always be before the Lord, that he may root out
the memorial of them from off the earth. Behold here indeed as many
imprecations of David against his enemies, as ever Callimachus the virulent
Poet spent execrations on his mortal foe Apollonius, and as bitter cursings as
Ovid ever spent on his envious foe, whom in imitation of him he titled Ibis:
yea as that banner ended his imprecatory inuectiue with this summary
execration, Haec tibi, quae precibus justice mea deuouet, ira
Eueniant, aut his non leuiora malis,
so concluded here David his with not unlike imprecation, verse. 20. Let it thus
happen from the Lord unto mine enemies, and to those that speak against my
soul. Which practice of David, though it may seem at first to give allowance
and warrant to words of bitterness, in cursing our blasphemers, yet if with a
single eye we more nearely look into it, we shall find that this imprecation
was non optantis voto sed spiritu praeuidentis, as Saint Lib. 1. de sermon. Dom.
in most* ca. 4^.
Austine resolves it, not so much from a desire and wish of their ruin, as
from the spirit of foreseeing what would befall them. As our Savior, when
vpbraiding the unthankful cities in the 11. of Matthew, he anathematized the
inhabitants of Corazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, Non maleuolentia optabat, sed
diuinitate cernebat, did not as men from malice wish it, but as God foresee it.

For David (as a grave Call(...) in Psa. 69. 23
writer notes) was not herein carried with a turbulent passion of choler to
power out his bile, (as most men wronged by their enemies intemperatly give
their tongue the raines) but the spirit of God did dictate these imprecations
to his Prophet, in wisdom to discern these reprobates from curable
believers, and in uprightness to respect Gods glory rather then his own
private revenge in confusion of his enemies, and in moderation to execrate his
and Gods enemies without turbulent passions of hatred, malice and maleuolence:
which three, if like him we could observe, Probe ^um imitaremur, we might
lawfully do as he did. But seeing our understanding is not so mollified, that
we have that 1. Corinthians. 12
gift of discerning spirits, but the Lord only knows who are his, and who
are reprobates: nor our wills so rectified, but that under zeal for Gods glory
we revenge our own wrongs: nor our affections so sober from disturbance, that
we are angry and sin not: M(...) in Psalm. 10^.
Non est hoc cuiuis vsurpandum Christiano and in exemplum trahendum, this
practice of David is no pretense for our cursings, nor his example to be
usurped of any Christian, as ^
Bala^ of Rome does in hiring his Baalams of Saint Francis order daily to
pronounce this spalme in execration against those whom they hate, and to curse
Israel, whom the Lord would have to be blessed. If any for farther satisfaction
require a larger discourse of these imprecations, I refer him to Martin
Bucers disputation of prayer, in his explanations on the fifth Psalm, and to
Mollerus his Lecture on the seventh verse of the 54. Psalm, where this at
large is discoursed. I conclude this point with Musculus in the place before
cited. It is a common prescript to all, which Christ the King of heaven has
commanded, Math. 5. Bless them that curse you, and pray for them that
persecute you. His Ambassadors, the Apostle of the Gentiles from his masters
mouth has enjoined it, Romans 12. 14. Bless them that persecute you, bless (I
say) and curse not. The Apostle of the Jews, has from his Lord given this
charge, 1. Pet. 3. 9. Render not rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise bless. By
which iniunction of both, al, both Jews and Gentiles must bless for cursing,
and pray for their reuilers: and what else should they pray for them (says
Lib. 4. d(...) cap. 44.
Gregory), but 2. Tim. 2. 25.
that of Saint Paul, that God may give them repentance to know the truth, and
come to amendment of life, out of the snare of the devil, of whom they are
taken at his pleasure to do his will. And let both the offender confess, and
the offended forgive, and testify his reconcilement by words of friendship and
love to his enemy, though he continue yet in his unrighteousness of reuiling.
So much be spoken of this first, namely, verbal reconcilement, Be reconliled in
word.

But here (beloved brethren) we must not stay, In atrio reconciliationis, in
the utter court of reconcilement, where men like the Luke 1. 10.
common people stay without, and like the Act^. 5. 12.
vulgar Jews are with one accord in this Salomons porch and portall of peace:
but all being priests by our Christian profession, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, 1. Pet. 2. 5. we must enter sancta, the holy places of peace and
amity by this beautiful gate of the temple of our body, and offer to our
brethren not only the calves of our lips, but the sacrifice of our hands, to
manifest our real reconcilement. For we have a 2. Sam. 3. 27
Ioab that will speak peaceably to Abner, and yet upon advantage smite him for
the blood of his brother Asahel: that will give 2. Sa. ^0 9. 10.
Amasa words softer then oil, Art thou in health my brother? and yet with his
precious balmes break his head, yea st^b him deadly, and shed out his bowels
on the ground. For thus lip loving Ioab spoke friendly to his neighbors 1.
Kings 2. 5.
Abner and Amasa, two captains of the host of Israel, but having war in his
heart, with the sist of wickedness he smote while he smiled, he killed while
he kissed, and (as David there told his son Solomon) shed the blood of
battle in the time of peace. And therefore if our love and unity will speak
truly, we must pass from this atrium to the sancta, from word to works, from
the tongue of friendship to the deeds of agreement: and secondly, be reconciled
in deeds to our brethren.

Our Savior (as before I showed) by symmetry and proportion Second
reconcilement real.
in my text inioyneth it, and with the ancient Fathers (our modern
expositors) by like correspondence then collect it, and his charge hereof is
plain without deducement, and peremptory without insinuation, verse 44. where
he exacteth of all, not 1. Test.
only the diligite of the heart the treasurer of love, Love your enemies; nor
only the benedicite of the tongue, loves broker and interpreter, bless them
that curse you: but also and chiefly the benefacite of the hand, which is loves
factor and agent, Do good to them that hate you.

In which triple iniunction (me thinks) our Savior sets man like a clock,
whose primum mouens and master wheel only must not go right within, nor the
bell alone sound true above, but the hand also point straight without. For thus
Math. 12. 34.
out of the abundance of the heart, both the mouth speaks and hand works,
Mat. 15. 19. And therefore he who is (...) Job 7. 20. the keeper of man as a
clock, he seeing all the motions of his heart to be out of course and only
evil, (...) all day long, Genes. 9. 5. for the motion and setting of the
wheel within, he says to the heart, Love your enemies: for the stroke and
sounding of the bell above, he says to the tongue, Bless them that curse you:
and chiefly for the pointing of the hand and index without he says to the
hand: Do good to them that hurt you. And although this bell as it did in Ioab,
sound right above, yet if the hand smite and point wrong without, it is not
only an argument ad hominem 1. Sam. 16. 7.
to him that looks on the o^^ward appearance as a passenger on the Dial; but
even ad Deum too, to him that sees not as a man sees, but beholds the heart
and Ier. 17. 10.
tries the reins, that the clock goes wrong within, that all the thoughts
and turning wheels of the heart, yea all the imaginations and palpitations,
all the momentanie motions of this watch be out of course: who since he will
censure with eternal doom, and judge every man secundum opera (as the phrase
in Scripture still runs) according to his handi-worke, and will judge the
spiritual Luke 13. 7.
fig tree, as he did that earthly fig tree, Mark. 11. 13. not according to its
leaves, but fruit which it bears: doubtless the hand and branch of the tree
which brings forth the fruit of peace, is most required in brotherly
reconcilement. And therefore as God himself who beholds the wheel within,
and tries the reins, asks of his enemies their heart, Give me thy heart,
Prou. 23. 26. so man which looks only on the outward appearance, and judges
of the clock by the dial, asks the hand of his enemy, as Glaucus Homer.
Ilia^. lib. 6.
and Diomedes when they would make sure amity each to the other, (...), or
they gave right hands of fellowship to manifest their agreement: as we say to
our foe, Give me thy hand if thou will be friends. As if nature had taught man
the reason, that to reintegrate amity, the hands are therefore mutually given,
because their deeds are not only the signs but factors of friendship, and
must therefore do good to them that hurt them.

His ambassador Saint Paul requires the like beneficence ^. Test.
of the hand toward his enemies, Roman. 12. 20. If thine enemy hunger feed
him, if he thirst give him drink: under which two terms of bread and water,
(say the Mart Cal^. Illyr. Gualth. and Myl. in hunc l^cu^.
learned) he comprehends all kind of corporal maintenance, as in G^n. 21.
^4. 2. Reg ^ 22. 23.
Scripture the Hebraisme does usually imply: as he promised his friend in the
comedy, Terent. H(...) act. 1. Sce^. ^.
aut consolando, aut consilio, aut re iuuero, I will either sustain thee with
comfort, or aid thee with counsel, or maintain thee with my goods. And to
our ability this must we do abundantly to our enemy: for we must coaceruate
and heap these benefits upon him as coals on his head. And therefore Solomon
who had this praecept at first-hand from the Almighty, bids thee give him (...)
bread, Pr. 25. 2^. which usually in As Ge. 3. 19. and 18 5. and 21. 14. and 31.
^4. and 35. 25. and 43. 25. Exodus 2 20 and 18. 12. Deuteronomy. 8. 3 and many more
places of both Testaments.
Scripture by an Hebraisme imports any or all kind of sustenance, and being
panis with the Latins of the Greek (...), which signifies all, implies there
any thing necessary to his maintenance, as in the Lords prayer it does
comprehend, Matthew. 6. 11. And this beneficence as it must be largeous and
liberal, so must it be tenderly with love toward our enemies: and therefore
for feeding the Apostle uses the emphaticall word (...), which (as Annot. in
Romans 12. 20.
Erasmus well observes) signifies either favorably to feed with a soppe
dipped in the dish, as Christ did Judas at the supper: or to carue for him, and
cut his meat small at the table, as we do for him whom we favor at the feast;
yea so to feed him as to Steph. Thesaur. Grac* ling. and Bez Annot. ma^or in 1.
Cor. 13. 3.
put meat into his mouth, as nurces do to infants, and keepers to their
patients: or, as some feed birds, which cannot swallow the grain, (...), says
Lib. 8. hist. animal. cap. 3.
Aristotle, if one feed them, and put it into their mouth. And this is the
bountiful beneficence which we are commanded lovingly to prohibit to our
enemy if he hunger Examples.
or if he thirst: practiced in some resemblance by our father Abraham, who gave
iarring Lot the choice of his own inheritance 1. Abraham.
to buy peace thereby, Genesis 13. practiced by his children, who walked in the
steps of their father Abraham: practiced by Genesis 32. 14. 15
Jacob, who sent presents to his hostile brother Esau who 2. Iaakob.
sought his life, even two hundredth she goats, and twenty heegoates, two
hundred ewes, and twenty rams, thirty milch camels with their colts, forty
kine, and ten bullockes, twenty she-ashes and ten foales, to see if by these
gifts of love he might heap coals of fire on his head, as indeed he did, Genesis
33. practiced ^. Joseph.
by good Joseph his son, who when of Theodore^. quest. 93. in Genesis
envy, because he was his fathers darling and youngest by birth, the son of
Rachel, eminent in virtue, and preferred before them, his brethren proffered his
sale to the merchants of Midian, and Cal^i^. in Genesis 37. 28.
they went away and would not buy him, then they sold him to the Ismaelites for
twenty pieces of silver, Genesis 37. 28. and they to get by the bargain carried
him with their other wares into Egypt, and to make their gain Lyra and T^st.
A^ul. ^n (...) locum.
raised the price, and sold him again at second hand at a higher rate to
Potiphar king Pharaohs steward, verse. 36. But though Joseph, whom they sold to
be a bond-slaue in Egypt, became afterward Psalm. 105 21.
lord over all Pharaohs house, and ruler of all his substance, yea governor
throughout all the land of Egypt, Genesis 45. 8. and was now armed with power to
revenge: yet see how he recompenceth them good for evil; see when his enemies
did hunger how he fed them, and when they were thirsty gave them drink. For
whereas they had Genesis 37. ^^.
stripped him of his parti-colored coat, in recompense of that Genesis 45. 2^.
he gave them all change of raiment, he gave them a measure running over into
their bosom. They sold him for twenty pieces of money and put him in their
purse, and in recompense of that he would not sell them corn, but gave it them
freely for naught, and put their money in their sackes, Genesis 42. 25. he gave
them a good measure pressed down and shaken together. They cast him into a pit
to feed him with bread and water of affliction, Ge. 37. 24. and in lieu thereof
he brought them into his own lodging, and feasted them sumptuously with
delicate fare, and sent them dishes from his own princely measse, Genesis 43. 33.
34. and with what measure they had met to him, he would not mete to them
again. Holy David trod the steps of good Joseph: for ^. Daui^.
when Saul had bent his bow, and made ready the arrows within his quiver to
Psalm. 1^. 2.
shoot at this upright in heart and sweet singer of Israel, yea when this
fouler 1. Sam. 26. ^0.
hunted him like a partridge to the mountains, so that his soul was feign to
ask for the wings of a Dove, that he might ^lie away and be at rest; yet see,
when his mortal foe was delivered into his hand in the cau^ where he covered
his feet, he would not lay hands on his enemy, nor suffer his bloud-thirstie
followers to fall upon him; but only to give his notice what he could have
done, cut off the lap of his garment, and rendered him good for evil, as Saul
himself confessed, 1. Sam. 24. 18. Yea again when he sound him asleep in the
field, and took him napping, he spared his life which was in his hand, and to
give him a second warning, took away his pot of water and his spear that was
sticked at his bolster, 1. Sam. 26. and therefore might this Dove safely
contestate his harmless mind and innocent hands to Cushies accusation, that he
sought Saul's life, Psalm. 7. O Lord my God, if I have done this thing, or if
there be any wickedness in mine hands: if I have rewarded evil to him that
had peace with me, (yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine
enemy) then, then let mine enemy persecute my soul and take me, yea let him
tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. No, no,
when he found but one Egyptian rouer in the field, he gave 1. Sam. 30. 11
him bread to eat when he was hungry, and when he was thirsty he gave his
enemy drink.

And as did David, so did his son and Lord, Christ Jesus 5 Christ.
the son of righteousness, from whose brightness these stars borrowed this
light of grace: whose words of truth as they were instructions to their minds,
so were his works and actions medicines and cures to the bodies of his deadly
foes, healing their sick, cleansing their leapers, restoring their lame to
their legs, making their blind to see, though they would not behold the light
of the world, making their deaf to hear, though they stopped their ears at
the wisdom of the world, making their dumb to speak, though they blasphemed
the God of the world. Yea when their sin was a bloody sin, a scarlet
sin, a crimson sin, Esa. 1. 18. of a double die, dyed in the thread, being
a seed of the wicked and corrupt children: and dyed in the web be, being a
sinful nation laden with iniquity, and therefore worthy of that double die.
morte morieirs, of the first and second death: yet how did he shed his most
precious blood to make their crimson sins like wool, and their scarlet
sins white as snow? Yea when with the malice of hell, in greatest industry
they went about the act of his condemnation, most mercifully with greater
diligence he went about the work of their salvation: when they shed his blood
to quench their malice, he swet water and blood to wash their souls. Thus the
sun of righteousness shined on the evil and the good, though it softened the
wax and hardened the clay. Thus the rain of righteousness descended on the
just and unjust, though the blessed earth brought forth herbs meet for the
dresser, and the reprobate ground, briers and thorns, whose end was to be
burned.

Yea God the Father, though he be debtor to none, does benefit 6. God.
his foes to testify his love. The Father of lights makes his Sun to arise
on the evil and the good; and the fountain of grace sends rain on the just
and unjust, Math. 5. 45. A blessing indeed not much esteemed, nor justly
weighed as it ought, even of the godly themselves, as Zanch. lib 5. do Not. Dei
cap. 2. quaest 3.
one notes, yet in it self of great estimate and value, seeing by these two,
Sun and rain, all things (as Ib. c. 1. quaest. 1.
he notes) are begotten and bred, and they be the parents of earthly
blessings. For seeing the whole condition of man's life depends on these two,
Christ did fitly instance in them, says In hunc. locum quast. 353.
Abulensis, because the former being the cause of siccitie and heat, the
latter of moisture and frigiditie, (which four qualities, as our Ari^^. lib.
2. de an^^. cap. 3.
master in the school of nature teaches, the food and nourishment of all
living creatures) they comprize omnia bona nostra, al our earthly blessings as
the causes of their effects: and by a synecdoche co^prehe^d innumerable other
benefits, says Calvin, even those which Musculus on these words recounteth;
that he gives life to the evil as to the good; that he bestows necessaries
for life on the evil as on the good; that he has given the earth to be
inhabited of evil as of good: for the Psalm.
earth has he given to the children of men, and Acts 17. 26.
made all mankind to dwell on the face of the earth, his fire warmeth the bad
as the good, his bread does feed, and his wine drink both alike, his raiment
does clothe, and his cattle serve both alike. Yea the wicked his enemies
receive these blessings from his hand and almes-basket, in greater abundance
then his children do enjoy, as both Job 21 6 ad ^^
Job and Psalm. 7^ 3. a^ 15.
David with admiration complained, he gives (...), Act. 17. 25. all things to
all kind of persons, 1. Tim 4. 10.
He is the Savior of all men temporally, as he saves both man and beast,
Psalm. 36. 6. though specially and eternally of them that believe Ephesians. 5 13.
of his body Mat 1 21.
and of his people. He makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and his rain to
fall on the unjust, though specially on the good he makes his Mal 4. 2.
Sun of righteousness to shine, and sends down the Io^l 2. ^^
rain of righteousness upon the just, even the first and the latter rain, as
the Prophet speaks, the first rain of precedent, and the latter rain of
subsequent grace, as Ju lac. 5. 7.
Hugo moralizeth those words, the first rain of present grace, and the latter
rain of future glory, Romans 6. 22. The fruit in holiness, and the end
everlasting life. Thus common blessings and good turns, God himself bestows
on his ennmies, evil men and unjust, to testify his love, and reconcile them
to their Creator. Howbeit if any miscreant of them all, shall open his mouth
against heaven, and barking at the Sun, plead against his bountiful
benefactor, that the Sun and rain are not his special favors to them, but
indifferent and general donatiues due by the law of nature and necessity, let
him know from the mouth of wisdom, that these are not natures donation, but
Gods donatiues; they are ^or^^.
his Sun and his rain, says our Savior, as Lib. 1. de fer. Dom. in mont.
cap. 46
Austine well observes: and this possessiue his, shows that not nature, but
the God of nature, is the owner and possessor of them, as Musculus well notes.
Neither are they the blessings of fate and necessity, falling on his enemies
by his leave and permission (as Erasmus mi^rendred that word Exoriri sinit) he
gives leave and suffers the Sun to rise on the evil and unjust (though in
his notes on this place, better observing the force of the word, he makes God
not only a permissite, but an efficient cause of them both) for Christ says
not, his Father suffers the Sun to rise, and rain to descend, but (...)
and (...), which being (as Bez. Che^^it. and Pisca. in hunc locum.
some observe) in the form of the conjugation of Hiphil with the Hebrews, it
intends the words as the Syriacke and our English translator well rendered
them, He makes his Sun to arise on the evil, and sends rain on the
unjust. Though these natural effects then of sunshine and raining, in
themselves be necessary, and determinate from the Genesis 1. 7. 18.
day of their creation, wherein he gave them a law which shall not be broken,
Psalm. 148. 6. yet in God their author, their Lord and director, are they wholly
free and spontaneous, says Totaliter liberi and spontanti in Mat. 5.
Abulensis, and wait on his word to execute his will, as the Psalmist
speaks. And though the wicked impute them to necessity, nature and destiny,
and extenuating his bounty and love, vpbraide him with unkindness, like them
in the first of Malachy, Wherein have thou loved us? yet are they in truth his
greater favors toward the evil and unjust, then to the godly and just men,
because by their enmity and rebellion they are farther from deserving them, as
notes Abulensis.

Foolishness then was the wisdom of that wise and disputer of the world,
S(...). lib. 4 de benefic. ca. 20. ^^ 28.
who confessed that indeed, Sceleratis sol oritur, and Deus quaedam in
vniuersum humano generi dedit, a quibus excluditur nemo, that the Sun arises
on the evil and unjust, and God has communicated somethings to mankind
indifferently and in general, from which none are excluded: but the wicked
(says he) being mixed with the godly, of necessity receive them, Quia ex
corpore singulos non potuerunt, because they could not miss the ungodly, nor
single out the godly to bestow themselves on them alone: and therefore God
being forced by necessity of this mixture, thought it better to let them fall
on the wicked for the godlies sake, then to deprive the godly of these
blessings for the wicked and ungodly. No, thou errest ( Seneca) not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. These two parentblessings fall not on the
evil by any such necessity of commixture with the godly, as thou supposest.
The Almighty can withhold his Sun from the wicked, and send a black darkness
for three days in all the land of Egypt, that no man saw another, neither rose
up from his place in three days, when the children of Israel had light where
they dwelt, Exodus 10. 22. And he can withhold his rain from the evil and
unjust for three years and six months at Elias entreaty, and send it again
at his Prophets request, Iam. 5. 17. as himself avouches by the mouth of his
Prophet, I have withholden the rain from you, and have caused it to rain upon
one city, and have not caused it to rain upon another city: one piece was
rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered, Amos 4. 7. We see
then God himself, though debtor to no man, yet beneficial and bounteous daily
to his enemies, to show them his favor and friendship. Thus the stars and
Saints of God have caused their face and favor to shine on their foes: thus
the Sun of righteousness himself shined on the wicked, and thus the Father
of lights makes his sun to arise on the evil, whose steps thou should
follow, to feed thine enemy if he hunger, and to give him drink if he thirst.

The reason of which doctrine, Saint Paul from Solomon subnecteth, The reason
of the doctrine.
For in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, Romans 12. 20. not
for his greater judgment, as most imagine, says Tom. 3. lib. 1. aduer.
Pelagian.
Saint Jerome, but for his amendment and repentance: that being overcome at
length with thy good turns, and inflamed with the heat of thy love, Inimicus
esse desinat, he leave off wrath, and let go displeasure. Some indeed are wont
(says Ser. 168. de Temp.
Austine) to take this precept to satisfy their fury and satiate their
revenge, resolving with themselves, Behold I feed mine enemy vt ardeat in
aeternum, that I may heap coals of hell fire on his head; but we must not
follow the killing letter, but the spirit that gives life: for thou shall thus
heap coals of fire on his head, that when thou often from thine heart do
good to thine enemy, though he be wicked, cruel, barbarous and bloody, yet
seeing thy continual beneficence, he will be at length ashamed of his malice,
and becoming sorry for his misdoings repent of his wronging thee. Some Theoph.
Zuing. Il^yr. Bez and R^ll. in hunc loc.
interpreters indeed, both ancient and modern, understand it of coals of
judgment and vengeance. Orig. Aquin. Lyrae. Hug. Anselm. Hyp. A(...) and
Piscat. in Romans 12. 20.
Others interpret it of coals of love, to inflame his frozen affection and
charity waxen cold. And it cannot be meant of coals of vengeance and hell
fire, says Thomas, because that intent of feeding him is contrary to charity,
whereunto the Apostle in this whole chapter exhorts. Howbeit though the
former probably collect from the phrase of heaping on his head, an increase of
his judgment, and the latter sort from coals of fire, gather it to be meant
of inflaming his love; yet with the most and not worst Ierom. Calvin. H(...)g.
Gu^lt. F^r Ole^i^ My* (...) vid. Ju^us in Prou 25. 22.
expounders may I admit both expositions. With the heat of thy love, either
thou shall try him as silver is tried in the fire of what sort he is, if he be
gold and silver, or ever had in his election the Lords image and superscription
upon him, and was then coined in that mint for a current Christian, thy fiery
coals of love shall burn out his dross till it be pure from rust and rancor,
and take away all his tin. Or if he be a vessel of earth, and reprobate
silver, wood, hay or stubble, fuel for hell fire, and meat for burning
Topheth, thou shall then heap those coals of hell fire on his head that never
shall be quenched. Assuredly thy feeding him shall not be in vain, but either
shall thou heap on his head those fiery coals of love and flame of God to
inflame his affection, Cant. 8. 6. or those fiery coals of Gods wrath, Psalm
140. 10. which will burn up the ungodly.

Which may lesson us (beloved brethren) to show our foes 2. Use.
the deeds of amity, if we will conquer their malice, and reconcile them unto
us by feeding if they hunger, and giving them drink if they thirst. By
performance whereof, we shall show our selves to be like our heavenly Father,
who makes his sun to 1. Our fathers example.
arise on the evil, and sends his rain on the unjust. Do good to your
enemies, says Christ; and he subnecteth his strongest motive thereto, That ye
may be the children of your heavenly Father, Math. 5. 45. Peacemakers (...)
shall be called the children of God, ver. 9. but by doing good to your foes,
(...), ye may be made the children of this father, and heirs of his kingdom;
for all Gods sons are Romans 8. 17.
heirs and coheires with Christ. Ye may be. Hearing of this precept indeed is
an earemark of Christ's sheep, as witnesses the chief shepherd, John 8. He
that is of God, hears Gods word: and he of an uncircumcised ear that wants
it, is one of the devils goats, and hears it not because he is not of God.
But his sheep must not have this earemarke alone, but an hand-marke too, Math.
7. 24. James 1. 22. and therefore (...) by this (says he) shall all men know
that ye are my sheep, John 13. not so much (...), if in word and will ye love
one another, verse. 34. as (...), if ye have love in your hearts one toward
another, whereby ye shall be made his children. For wherein shall it be known
and discerned (says Hom. 13. ^p^r, impers^^ hunc locum
Chrysostom) that we are Gods children, unless we be like our heavenly
Father. Natural children resemble their parents, and are often like their
earthly father in face or in speech, in some feature and frame of the body; but
our heavenly Father like Genesis 27.
Isaac tries his son, not by his voice, but by his hands, Come near and let
me feel thine hands my son: and therefore (...) in likeness of his hands
latitudo and fortitudo as Tom. 1. ser. 7. super Cantic.
Bernard calls them) must we resemble him: his right hand latitudo, qua tribuit
affluenter, which is spread out all day long unto a rebellious people, to give
largess to his enemies, Esai. 65. 2. and his left hand fortitudo, qua defendit
potenter, which is stretched out all day long to protect a gainesaying people,
Romans 10. 21. and they that will show they are his children, must kiss them,
and be like him in both these hands, says Bernard, but chiefly his hand
latitude of bounty, which hand when he opens, he fills al things living
with his plenteousnesse, Psalm. 145. 16. For as his love to his foes consists
in donando and condonando, in giving and forgiving, Psalm. 103. 3. and 5. so his
childrens love must both bear and forbear, give and forgive, be bountiful
and patient, 1. Corinthians. 13. And as the Italians say of Dutch-mens dexterity
in cunning hand-crafts, that their wits dwell in their fingers ends: so
skillful Christians that will work out their salvation, must not only have
that verbal, but also real charity, Iam. 2. 16. not to dwell in the tongues
end, but in their finger ends; and love not in word and tongue only, but (...),
in work and indeed, 1. John 3. 18. and by this shall they be made the children
of their heavenly father, who acknowledges none for his sons here on earth,
says Saint Austine, who have not this affection of their Father in heaven. For
as the Plin. not. hist* lib. 10. cap 3. Ierom. lib. 12. in Esa. 40.
Eagle opposing the eyes of her ambigeous bird to the beams of the Sun,
tries him to be genuine, if without twinkling and conniuence he can behold
that splendant luster, Et filius agnoscitur, and she acknowledges him to be
her brood, says Tract. 36 in Euang. Joan.
Austine: but if without watery eyes he can not gaze upon that light,
adulterinus iudicatur, he is then counted spurious and adulterate: even so this
our heavenly Father, as with the Eagle, he stirs up his neast, fluttereth
over his birds, and bears them on his wings of mercy, Deuteronomy. 32. so like the
Eagle also he sets here the eyes of his children (who must be tried Math. 24.
Eagles also) on the Sun of righteousness, and on himself the father of
lights. He says to his children as did Gedeon to his followers, Judge 7 17.
Look on me, and do as ye see me do. Do good to your foes, as ye see me do to
mine enemies, that ye may be like your father, and prove your selves not to be
bastards but sons. And indeed if as those Indian Pli^. not. hist. lib. 7. cap.
2.
Philosophers could gaze on the Sun with steadfast eyes, we could with Eagle
1. Ioh. ^^.
John not only videre but spectare, stand looking on this bright glory, and
do as himself did, we should be like our heavenly Father, and children of the
most highest. Otherwise if without waterie eyes we cannot behold him to do as
he did, then are we bastards and not sons: for (...), by this are Gods
children known, and the children of the devil, 1. Ioh. 3. 10. Noble men's sons
(says ^
Chrysostom) are not so well known by their chain of gold, as Gods children
by this golden chain of charity.

Let all sign themselves with the sign of the cross* says Tract. ^. in
Epist. Joan*
Austine, let them answer Amen at thy giving of thanks, let all sing Alleluia,
let all be baptized, let all go to church and hear Sermons, yea let them build
Cathedral churches; yet for all this the children of God are not discerned
from the children of the devil nisi sola charitate, but only by this real
charity. They which have it are borne of God, they which have it not are not
borne of God, Magnum iudicium, magna discretio, so great a distinction it
makes between the children of God and the children of the devil. This mark
(says Comment. ^^ Psalm. 103. and lib. 15. de T(...) cap. 18.
he) the wicked cannot participate with us, they may be partakers of our
baptism, they may communicate with us at the supper of the Lord, they may
join with us in prayer, they may be mixed with us in the Church: but this
foe-feeding charity they cannot participate with us. For in this says Christ
( Ioh. 13.) and in this August. tract. cit.
alone shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have this love one
toward another. As if he had said (it is S. Tract. (...) ^uang. Joan.
Austines paraphrase) Other my gifts have other with you which are not my
children, not only nature, life, sense and reason, but also the gift of
tongues, mysteries prophecy, knowledge, miraculous faith, and such like: but
because they have not this love, they shall profit them nothing. And indeed
(dear Christian) though thou speak with the tongue of men and Angels, nay, if
like Herod thou have the voice of God and not of man, if thou had Prophecy
with Saul, if thou know all secrets with Judas, if thou had all knowledge with
Scribes and Pharisees, if thou had perfect faith with those diuel-driuers in
the 7. of Matthew, if thou gave thy body to be burned with Arius, these iffes
and ands shall profit thee nothing if thou have not this love. No, no, thy
bloody mind of Herod shall make thy tongue of Angels but sounding brass, and
like a tinkling cymball, it shall not profit thee: thy persecuting mind of
Saul shall turn thy spirit of prophecy into an evil spirit of frenzy, it
shall not profit thee: thy treacherous mind of Judas shall make thy knowledge
of all secrets like Vrias letters which secretly he carried against himself, it
shall not profit thee: thy envious mind of Scribes and Pharisees, shall make
thy all knowledge a rod to beat thee with many more stripes, it shall not
profit thee: thy iniquitie-working of those miracle-mougers shall but cast a
devil out of others into thy self, it shall not profit thee: and thy
scismatical spirit of Arius shall make the burning of thy body but the kindling
of that fire which never shall be quenched, it shall not profit thee. Without
this thou art not a son of Seth but of Caine, not of Abraham but of Abadon,
not of grace but of wrath, not of pity but perdition, not of Gods church but
of the synagogue of Satan, not of the Mat. 8. 12. vide Bez. annot. mayor.
king though outwardly of the kingdom, not a son of God but of Satan: for
in this and in this alone shall all men know, that thou art his disciple, if
thou have this love to thine enemy. But if thou be his child, be like thy
father, who seeing he makes not the sun, but his sun to rise on thee, and
his rain to descend on thee, it may teach thee (says Lib. 1. de S^r. dom. in
mont. cap. 46.
Saint Austine) how bountiful to thy foes thou should be of his basket,
whereof thou art but almner, and an eleemosinarie thy self. And seeing he
makes the one to arise on both good and evil, and the other to descend on the
just and unjust, it may lesson thee (says that Tom. 4. lib. de salut. dec.
cap. 46.
Father) to communicate thine alms, thy beneficence, thy good turns, thy
charity, and all thy good to all both good and bad, friends and foes. Then
which nothing will more make us like our heavenly Father, and therefore whereas
Christ does in many places warn us of many things, yet in no place (says Tom.
5. Sermon. vi^tut. progen. vt confid.
Chrysostom) he infers, we shall be like our heavenly Father, but where he
speaks of doing good to our enemies. And he puts us in mind of our Chrysostom.
hom. 20. in M^t. 6.
heavenly Father by this, to shame us, if being borne of God and so royally
descended, we degenerate from our Fathers nature, from the godly nature 2. Pet.
1. 4.
whereof we are partakers, into brutish cruelty: and by that to confound us,
if being called to an heavenly conversation, we become vile with earthly
affections. Wherefore seeing this foe-feeding love and real reconcilement
makes us children most like our heavenly Father, let us hear his voice, who
says to his children as 1. Cor. 4.
Paul to his Corinthians, I write not these things to shame you, but as my
beloved children I admonish you: for though ye have ten thousand instructors in
Christ, yet have ye not many fathers; and though ye call men on earth your
fathers, yet none but I am your heavenly Father: for in Christ Jesus my son I
have begotten you through the Gospel: Wherefore I pray you be ye followers of
me, Ephesians. 5. ^.
be ye followers of God as dear children, and walk in this love.

As Christ has loved us. For if we cannot like Henock walk 2. Our elder
brothers example.
with God, nor tread in the steps of our heavenly Father, (for who can take
such a step of love as did God, from heaven his throne to earth his
footstool?) yet as that boy Ascanius followed his father, non passibus aequis,
let us follow him though with unequal paces: let us walk with Christ our
elder brother, who in this path went before us, and left us an example that we
should follow his steps, 1. Pet. 2. 21. For as the oil of love (wherewith he
was anointed above his fellows) descended from this our head to all his
members, and went down to his enemies, as to the skirts of his clothing; so in
the savor of that good ointment should we run even with the oil of gladness
to our foes: and therefore shapeth Paul our wedding garment of love according
to his white robe of mercy, Col. 3. 12. Now therefore (says he) as the elect
of God, holy and beloved, put on the bowels of mercy, kindness, modesty,
meekness and long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, sicut, even as Christ forgave you. As the elect of God: that is, if ye
have any internal seal to your souls of your election: holy, if any
external sign of sanctification to make it sure to your selves: beloved, if
any experience of the love of God to his Saints: put on, not for a forenoon
like your cloak which in heat straight goes off again: nor for an hour, like
your hat which goes off at every wrong that meets you in the way: but (...)
(...), put on Beza (...). (...). in Col. 3. 12.
never to put off again, the bowels of mercy toward the unmerciful,
kindness toward the unkind, modesty toward the immodest: meekness toward the
cruel: and long-suffering toward the hasti-minded man. After whose example?
sicut, even as Christ forgave and loved you his enemies: as himself gave them
this new commandment, Ioh. 13. that we love another, sicut, even as he loved
us, that we love one another. A new commandment ^erus (...). in Ioh. 13.
because by him renewed from that Pharisaicall tradition, Mat. 5. 43.
Thou shall hate thine enemy. New, because oftener and more excellently
commanded in the new then old Testament: new, because otherwise in the new
then the old commanded; in that with a sicut teipsum, love thy neighbor as thy
self; in this with a sicut ^go dilexi vos, as I have loved you, that ye love
one another. New, because now confirmed with greater examples of God the Father
and Christ his son: new, because though judicial and ceremonial, yet this
evangelical love remains for ever: and new because though to day discharged,
tomorrow it must be renewed, to love one another, sicut, even as he loved us.
And what was the measure (dear Christian) of that sicut? His Apostle meteth it
out by four adjuncts of our baseness and demerit: Christ when we were yet of
no strength died for the ungodly, Romans 5. 6. Christ the only Son of God,
died the most shameful death of the cross, for us when we were yet of no
strength by nature, yea sinners by profession, yea ungodly by defection, nay
enemies by rebellion. We had neither strength to stand in judgment, nor
righteousness to satisfy the law, nor godliness to move mercy, nor
friendship to procure pardon: and yet (says the Apostle) yet notwithstanding,
or rather withstanding all these, Christ when we were yet all these died for
us. Christ suffered (says 1. Pet. 3. 18.
Peter) the death most ignominious: for sins, the cause most odious: the just
for the unjust, the persons most unequal: that he might bring us to God, the
end most glorious. This sicut of his love, himself measures out with a sic
dilexit. Ioh. 3. 16. as if he had been sick of love, as the spouse Cant. 2. 5.
k speaks, and that sickness of love with those four dimensions, br^adth,
length, height, and depth of his love, Ephesians. 3. 18. himself meteth. The
only Son of God, there is the height, was sent down, there is the depth:
into the world, there is the breadth: that it might have everlasting life
without end, there is the length of his love. Saint Ser. t. de Ad^^ Dom.
Bernard measures the quantity of his love with the same dimensions: what was
the cause (says that Father) Vt maies^as tanta, there is the height: De tam
longinquo, there is the length: Descenderet, there is the depth: In mundum,
locum tam indignum, this is the breadth of his love: Quia misericordia magna,
quia miscratio multa, quia charitas copiosa, because his mercy reached unto
the clouds, because his mercy was for ever without end; because it reached to
the deep below; because his mercy was over al his works, as the Psalmist
speaks: it was a sic dilexit, a loue-sicke affection, strong as death, that
he should love us, Tantus and tantum, tantillos and tales, he so great, us so
little, such enemies and with such love, says De dilig. D^o.
Bernard, alluding to those four dimensions of Saint Paul, O that I had the
tongue of men and Angels to decipher his love to thee his enemy, that this 2.
Cor. 5. 14.
love of Christ might constrain to do good to thy foes! O remember, we in the
loins of our father Adam, like strangers from God, were going down from
Jerusalem to Jericho* from heaven to hell, and fell among thieves who robbed us
of our raiment and robe of righteousness! O remember how they wounded us, so
sore, that from the top of the head to the sole of the foot there was no whole
part in our bodies and souls, but wounds and swellings, and sores full of all
corruption, leaving us not half (like that traveler) but quite dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. and forget not (dear Christian) how then
this good Luke 10. 33.
Samaritane, as he iourneyed and came from the bosom of his father, cured us,
when both Priest and Leuite like Jobs friends, Physicians of no value, passed
by us, no eye pitied us to do any thing unto us, or to have compassion upon us,
nay no creature in heaven or earth, Psalm.
no man could deliver his brother or make agreement unto God for him, for it
cost more to redeem their souls, so that they might let that alone for ever.
Then, then this Sun of righteousness being in the Phil. 2.
form and glory of God, went back ten degrees in our nature, as the Sun
did in the dial of Ahaz, and took on him the form of a servant, that in the
rags of our flesh he might C^drus-like taste death for his people. He then came
unto us, when like Ezekiel. 16.
Israel we lay tumbling in our blood and bloody sins; bound up our wounds,
and said, Ye shall live; powered in not oil and wine, but sweat and blood into
our sores; set us on his own beast, nay 1. Peter 2. 24*
carried our sins on his own body on the tree, made provision for us, and
took out not two pence, silver and gold, or 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19
corruptible things, but his precious blood, that great price of our
redemption, 1. Corinthians. 6. saying for man his enemy to his offended father,
like that good Samaritane, to the host for the stranger, Whatsoever he has
spent, I will recompense it: or as Philem. 17. 18
Paul gave his word to Philemon for his vagabond servant, Father if thou count
our things common, receive him as my self: if he has hurt thee, or owes thee
ought, that put on mine accounts: I Jesus have written it in blood with mine
own hand, I will recompense it: and therefore might truly say with Psalm 69.
David, The rebukes of them that rebuked thee are fallen upon me; I paid them
the things that I never took. This he performed for us sinners, and said
indeed for his enemies as Nisus for his friend, Whom seek ye? Coram quem
quaeritis, adsum, I am he whom ye seek to be crucified: Adsum qui feci, in me
conuertite ferrum O Rutuli: I make my self sin for them, Esai. 53.
wound me for their transgressions, break me for their iniquities, and lay the
chastisement of their peace on me, that by my stripes they may be healed. Here
for them Esai. 50.
I give my back to the smiters, my cheeks to the nippers, and will not hide my
face from shame and spitting. When sinful man, that like a wandering sheep was
caught in the briars, and with the Ram might have truly bin sacrificed for
this, Isaac might truly have replied, Mea fraus omnis nihil iste nec fecit nec
p^tuit, he did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. Quid
meruisset ouis? This sheep and lamb of God, what has he done? Let thine hand
(I pray thee) be against me and my fathers house. Thus the partition wall of
ordinances between Jew and Gentile was broken down by him who made of two
people one man, Ephesians. 2. Thus the partition wall of our Esai. 5^.
sins, which separated between us both and our God, was taken away by him
who reconciled both to one God, and preached peace to us far off, and to them
that were near. Thus our Ios 17. 1^
Joshua made sin or inbred Cananite, which Rom 7. 18. 20
dwells in our mortal body, and cannot quite be cast out, Romans 6.
tributary unto us, that we may reign over it, and bring it into subjection.
This is the manifold love of Christ to us his enemies, his real love, his love
indeed with a witness, and to witness it the more, styles he us with all
names of love, as servants, John 15. 15. if that be too little, his friends; if
that be not enough, his Mark 3. 11*
kinsmen: if that be too little, his Math. 25. 40.
brethren: if that be not enough, his Math 12. 50.
sisters: if that be too far off, his Mark 10. 15
children: if that be not enough, his Luke 8. 21.
mother: if that be not enough, his Cant. 5.
spouse, which is the greatest, and passing love of women: and all this to show
he loved us with all kind of loves possible, the servants love, a friends love,
kinsmens love, brethrens love, sisters love, childrens love, mothers love, and
spouse-loue, which is as strong as death, and cannot be quenched with floods of
water, Cant. 8. 7. This was Christ's love to us his enemies, as high as heaven,
as deep as the earth and hell it self, as broad as the world, and as long as
life eternal.

Wherefore as him self spoke of washing his Disciples feet, John 13. 14.
Siego, If I (says he) I your Lord and Master, have stouped to wash your feet,
ye ought also to wash one another feet: for I have given you an example, that
ye should do as I have done to you: so may I reason strongly with his Apostle,
Beloved, if God, if Christ so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1.
John 4. 11. And indeed (beloved Christian) thou can never love truly, and do
good to thy foe, until thou remembrest what Christ has done for thee while
thou were his enemy. Let this love of Christ constrain thee then, who
commanded it for thy practice, and practiced it for thine example. If
considering thine own weakness and infirmity, Deficis sub praecepto,
comfortare in exemplo, says M^dit. in Psalm. 56.
Austine, if thou think the precept an hard saying to flesh and blood, who
can bear it, be comforted in the example of him who performed it. Christ did
it as man in thine own nature, to teach thee he commands no impossibilities,
and he is present with thee, vt praebeat auxilium, qui praebuit exemplum, says
that Father, to Cant 1. 3. John 6. 6.
draw thee after him, who bids thee 1. Pet. 2.
Come follow his steps. Let us run when he draws, and let us love really
our foes as he loved us while we were not his friends. If we cannot, sic and
sicut, so infinitely as he did us: (for consider, behold, and see, if ever
there was love sicut amor eius, like his love) if we cannot go with him in his
sicut and quantity yet let us run after him in the sic and quality of his
love, as T^m 1. Ser. 13 in cana Dom. Dil^^te ^nuicem fie^t ego d^lex^ vos: ^^c
aduerbium sicut non qua^^tat^s sed qualitat^s simil^^ud^em nota^. Idem ser. 5.
in caen. D^m.
Bernard does distinguish.

Howbeit if we cannot walk with God, nor follow our elder brother in his great
steps of love, yet let us ambulare cum Dauide, go cheek by cheek with David
our fellow-seruant, who rendering good for evil to his arch-enemie Saul, made
him ashamed of his enmity, and heaped such coals of fire on his head, that he
kindled his affection to cry out in admiration, Is this thy voice my son
David? and weeping he lift up his voice, 3. Our fellow-seruants example.
and said to David: Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have rendered me
good, and I have rendered thee evil: and now thou have showed this day, that
thou have dealt well with me, for as much as when the Lord had enclosed me in
thy hands, thou killedst me not; for who shall find his enemy at such
advantage and let him go free with a good turn? Wherefore the Lord render thee
good for that thou have done to me this day, 1. Sam. 24. Yea when afterward he
repented of this repentance, and with the dog returned to his vomit, yet
David again overcame his evil with goodness, that he cried out with a
peccaui in his mouth, I have sinned, come again my son David, for I will do
thee no more harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day:
behold, I have done foolishly and erred exceedingly, 1. Sam. 26. 21. With such
love was David anointed when he was anointed with the horn of oil to be
king, this was the strength of his love, when he had the oil but not the horn;
when he was elected, and not yet inducted into the kingdom: and yet behold,
when after Saul's death he had gotten sceptrum pro pedo, a scepter for a
sheep-hooke, and was taken from the sheepe-folds to feed Iaakob his people, and
Israel his inheritance: when the Lord had now exalted his horn, whereby he
might extirpate Saul's house, and root out all his enemies, yet asked he Zyba
after Saul's death, 2 Samuel* ^. ^.
saying: Remains there yet none of the house of Saul, on whom I may show the
mercy of God? the mercy of God, (...), which signifies bountifulness and
largess, not ordinary, but proceeding from most ardent affection, as Pet.
Mar^yr. in hunc (...).
Martyr well observes. And when Mephibosheth Saul's nephew was brought unto
him, he said unto him: Fear not, for I will surely show thee kindness, and
will restore thee all the lands of Saul thy Father, and thou shall eat bread
at my table continually: and this beneficence to his enemies nephew presently
he performed. Indeed he well called it the mercy of God: for he is kind to the
unkind, and merciful to the merciless man. And thus with David, if our enemy
hunger, should we feed him; and if he thirst, give him drink at our table:
though he feed and drink us with bread and water of affliction, and like
David's enemies give us gall in our meat, and in our thirst give us vinegar to
drink, Psalm. 69. 21. Our love must be miscricordia Dei, the largess of God,
who makes his sun rise on his enemies, and with David a man after Gods own
heart, must we cause our sun to shine on our foes, and freely give them
dimidium spherae solemn simul and canis iram, the half circuit with the sun
and anger of the dog, that is, cor, the heart, and not like angry Doeg cause
one sun to rise on our friend Saul, and our canis iram and bile on our foe
David, nor afford him a c of our beneficence and bounty. This is not the
mercy of God, but of Publicans and sinners, who love, lend, and do good to
their friends to receive the like again, Luke 6. This is love bought and sold,
and mercenarie mercy, which has then verily received all its reward. But now
(alas) every man says like him in the 2. of Sam. 10. 2. I will show kindness to
him who has showed me kindness before: or as Xenoph. lib. 2. de fact. and
dict. S^cr.
Chaerephon answered Socrates: I know how to use my brother benefacienti
benefacere, to do one good turn for another: but he that will wrong me in
deed, I neither can nor will do him good. Thus our will cannot, and our can
has no will nor water in it to give him drink if he thirst. Like him in the
Plaut. Au^^:
Comedy, in one hand we bring bread for our friend, and in the other a stone
for our foe; in the one an egg for our lovers, and in the other a serpent for
our loathers; in the one a fish for our favorites, and in the other a scorpion
for our scorners. Which partial affection, if it only were found in the tail
and dregs of the people, which like Moab are settled upon their lees, it were
less lamentable: but alas it is seen in the ancient and honorable man, who
is the head, and like I had. lib. 24.
Homers Jupiter has two tons standing in the entrance of his palace, out of
one setting abroach his favors to his friends, and out of the other his vials
of wrath to his foes, and gives them a drink of deadly wine. Yea, which is
most lamentable, Balaam has a blessing for his friends, Come ye blessed, and a
curse for his foes, Go ye cursed, and to these when he stands on mount Gerizim
deals abroad his blessings, and to those on mount Ebal scatters his
cursings. Whereas our tongue should bless, and our hand deal a blessing where
the Lord has even cursed, and do Gal. 5.
good to all though specially to the household of faith; to the one in God, and
to the other for Gods sake, and say like our Mat. 20. 13.
heavenly Father who does good to friend and foe: Friend, I do thee no wrong, I
will give to this other as much as to thee.

Let no man say unto me (says Homil. de David. and Saul.
Chrysostom) I have a wicked, an ungodly, a desperate, and an incorrigible
enemy: whatsoever thou shall say, yet is he not worse then was Saul, who once,
and again, nay being often preserved by David, whose life a thousand ways he
sought, yet for all so many benefits perseuered in his malice. What therefore
have thou to accuse thy foe of? that he has taken part of thy land, that he
has wronged thee in thy grounds, that he has transgressed the bounds of his
house, that he has wiled away thy servants, that he has offered thee
violence, that he has detained thy goods unlawfully, that he has beggered
thee? but yet he has not taken away thy life, which Saul did attempt. But and
if he has labored to take away thy life, peradventure he durst it but once,
not twice, not often, as Saul did endeavor. But if this once or twice, or
thrice, or often he assayed, yet not rewarded of thee with so many good turns
as Saul was of David, yet not preserved and his life saved, when once and again
he had fallen into thy hands. And if thou have done all this to thine enemy,
yet David excels thee, that he under the law performed this, thou under the
Gospel of peace. God spoke to him, and commanded this but by his Prophets, to
thee has he enjoined it by his only Son, Heb. 1. He came as it were, but to
mount Sinai, to burning fire, to blackness and darkness to serve in the
oldnesse of the letter, but thou art come to mount Sion, and to Jesus the
Mediator of a better testament, stablished on better promises, to serve in the
newness of the spirit, Heb. 12. He was but a son of Agar the bondwoman, I
mean the law which engendered unto bondage, but thou art a son of the
freewoman Sara, the Gospel which is free, that liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, Gal. 4. He was directed but with the law, a 2. Pet 1. 19.
light shining in a dark place, and had but a Psalm. 119.
lantern for his feet to be a light to his paths: but thou art led by that
day star the Gospel, which like the Wisemens star goes before thee to
Christ: yea thou art directed by the Sun of righteousness himself. who says to
the: Follow my steps, and love thine enemies as I have loved thee. O if David
(says that Father) had heard Christ's precept, Do good to your enemies, Mat. 5.
or the Lords prayer, Forgive men their trespasses as your Father shall forgive
yours, Mat. 6. or the judgment of the merciless debtor, that would not
forgive his fellow-seruant an hundred pence when his master had forgiven him
ten thousand talents, Mat. 18. or Christ giving his life for his enemies, Mat.
20. or his innumerable sermons of loving and helping our foes, Luke 6. how
great would his love have been with these, who without them did so recompense
his arch-enemie Saul, and reward his posterity? Here is an example for us to
follow: even the Publicanes and sinners do good to those who do good to them
Mat. 5. 47.
says Christ, and if ye go no further what reward shall ye have? This is but
imperfectae charitatis, says 2. 2. Quaest. 27 art. 7.
Thomas out of Euchir. cap. 73
Austine, a point and sign of imperfect charity; nay, vsura charitatis, but
the usury and gainefull use of love. For shame then of our profession, at least
for fear of losing our reward, let us go before Publicanes and sinners in the
kingdom of grace, lest Publicans and sinners go before us into the kingdom of
heaven. For how great punishment shall we be worthy of Homil. 18. ^^ Mat. 5.
says Chrysostom, if when we should as children follow our heavenly Father,
and be perfect in this as he is perfect, we be found but equal and perchance
inferior to the very Gentiles that know not God? if when we are commanded to
exceed Scribes and Pharisees in our righteousness, we come short of the
Ethnic pagans, what torments shall we suffer?

We read that even heathen men have done good to their very enemies. Li 5
exem. c. 3.
Sabellicus and Li. exemp. c. 2.
Fulgosus bring a cloud of witnesses, as of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian to
Alexander a boy, whom, when by chance he had struck out his eye, he took
home, entreated him courteously, and instructed him wisely. Of Caesar to
Catullus, whom, notwithstanding his defaming verses, he invited to supper and
fed his foe. Of Augustus his bounty to his enemy L. C^nna: Vespasian to
Vitellius: and Titus his son ^o those two patricians that affected his Empire.
These were their humani affectus, says mine author, a part and point of
humanity; but ours should be more, Pietatis and religionis partus, the birth of
religion and the fruits of the spirit. But what do I speak of men's reason,
when the unreasonable beasts are friendly to their feeders? The Ox knows his
owner, and the stupid Ass not only the crib, but his masters crib. What shall
I tell you of horses, as of Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 42.
Alexanders Bucephalus, who in peculiar affection and love to his loving Lord,
would suffer no man but him to ride him: and though when being wounded at the
Theban siege he was unfit for the saddle, yet suffered he him not to get upon
another for that service: in reward of which brutish kindness he made him a
tomb at his death, and called the town Bucephalon after his horses name, as
many histories report. What shall I tell you of Antiochus his horse? who to
revenge his masters death by Centoratus, when that enemy after conquest
triumphantly ascended him, head-strongly gallopped to a steep, and from thence
did precipitate him and his rider, as the same author and Lib ^ de hist. an^mal
cap. 43.
Aelian does relate. And therefore when Homer. I ^ad* lib. ^.
Hector had fed his horses for the Trojan war, Now rush stoutly into the
battle (says he) (...), now remember your masters cribbe, and repay me my
prouender, my strong wheat and sweet wine. And if we go no further then
these, our gold is but dross and horse-gold, our charity is but usury and
horse-loue, who claweth his fellow to be clawed again.

Saint Hexam l. ^. c 4
Ambrose gives as great witness to mastiues and curs, as we shall to our
friends thus perform: for when Ful^e^ lib. 5. exempl. cap 2.
T. Sabinus was imprisoned, his dog whom often he had fed would never forsake
him in his bonds, but when his Lord was brought forth to be cast headlong into
Tyber, like a mourner (kind curre) he stood howling beside his master; and when
the standers by gave him bread to stop his mouth, Ori domini admouebat, he held
it up to his masters mouth, and leapt after him into the river to hold up his
head. But why show I that at home which daily your eyes may behold? Let us go
into the wilderness, and there shall you see both the Plin. hist not. lib. 8.
cap. 59.
Serpents in Tyrinthe and snakes in Syria, though strangers they destroy, yet
spare the inhabitants in whose land they are nourished. There shall ye see,
that an Elephant grievously wounded with Porus in the war against Alexander,
neglected his own hurts, softly with his trunk pulled the darts out of his
masters body, till by extreme bleeding he perceived him to faint, and then
little by little, and softly bowed down himself, least Porus his body falling
too high, should more be grieved with so great a fall. But why do I speak of
these milder beasts? the very ramping and roaring Lion, who Prouer. 30. 30
fears not any, at whose roar the beasts of the field do tremble, is not
behind men in this behalf. For when one Androcles a servant, for some notable
misdemeanure in Rome, had run from his master into the wilderness of Africa,
there to shade himself from the scorching of the sun he entered a cave which
was a Lions lodging gone about his prey; whereto the savage beast after raven
returning with a thorn in his foot, he mildly beheld this fugitive, and held
him his foot to pluck out the prick: after which cure, the Lion for his fee
fed him as his guest, and gave him his diet of his pray (if Aelian. li. 7. de
hist. animal c. 43 vide Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16.
stories store not up untruth) for three years together. After which this
vagabond leaving his solitary life, and rouing about Rome, was apprehended by
his master, and cast (as those bestiarij were in Rome) to this Lybian Lion
which by chance had then been caught: who seeing his old guest, acknowledged
his benefactor, and in sign of requital fawned upon him, and lay prostrate at
his feet, yea tore a Pardale to whom his friend was exposed. Thus beasts in
reason favor their friends, when men become unreasonable. And therefore when
some (...).
Courtiers about Alphonsus defended, that some beasts excelled many men, as the
Turtle in chastity, the Emmet in providence, the dog in sagacitie, the Storke
in piety, and the Be in industry and reverence toward his King: that good K.
of Arragon answered wisely, that whether these virtues were inbred in beasts
by nature, or given the^ by Gods donatio^, surely they were granted them for no
other cause but to shame us; if reason shall not exceed sense, and men beasts
in the works of humanity. Wherefore except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, who hate their enemy; except it
exceed (says Christ) the charity of Publicanes and sinners, who love but
their friend; nay surely except it exceed the righteousness of savage beasts,
and your charity the love of cruel Lions, how can ye hope to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, when ye do but as horse and mule which have no
understanding, and as Dogs or Lions beasts that perish?

It was devilish policy which that Florentine Com. 3. 32.
Machiuell (one that has done much evil to politicians of our age) gave his
statist, that one should never offer nonis benefi^ ijs veterem iniuriarum
obliuionen^ inducere, to benefit or do good to him whom notoriously he had
wronged, least (says that match-deuil who seldom found his match in evil) he
which never truly but fainedly will be reconciled, when thou art secure of his
love, revenge upon advantage: but rather (says that Achitophel) Insigni
iniuria aduersarium vi^la, continue on doing him some notable wrong, and keep
him still in enmity, least being forced by his friendship to trust him with
thy self, he deceive thee at a lype. But this wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God, and is twelve times infatuated by the wisdom of God, Romans 12.
fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed by the renewing
of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God, acceptable and
holy. Let love be without dissimulation: abhor that which is evil, and
cleave unto that which is good. Be affectioned to love one another with
brotherly kindness. Bless them that persecute you: bless (I say) and curse
not. Be of like affection one toward an other. Recompense to no man evil for
evil. If it be possible as much as in you lies have peace with all men.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but give place to wrath: and which is
the vpshot of all, if thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him
drink: for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not
overcome of evil, nor be led by Machiauell, but overcome evil with goodness.

Howbeit, if neither our heavenly Fathers example, nor Christ our elder
brothers example, nor David our fellow-seruants samplar, can move us to exceed
either Publicanes and beastly men, or the beasts of the field, yet with Heb.
11. ^6.
Moses let us have respect to the recompense of reward, seeing by this we Mat.
5. 48.
shall be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, and have great reward in
heaven, Luke 6. 35. For whereas (says a Cmys. st. Homis. 18. in Mat. 5.
Father) he blessed the meek but with inheriting the earth, Mat. 5. 5. and the
poor in spirit but with appropriating to them the kingdom: and the mourners
but with hope of future comfort: and thirsters after righteousness but with
satietie and fullness: and the merciful but with obtaining mercy: and the
pure in heart but with hope of seeing God: and peacemakers but with the
appellation of the children of God: and sufferers for his sake but with
fruition of the kingdom: by this last of doing good to our enemies, we shall
not only enjoy all these, but we shall be perfect as our heavenly Father is
perfect: and though these many virtues, these many daughters have done
valiantly, yet this surmounteth them all. To help up his enemy that lies
upon the ground, and increase his former dignity with good turns, could even
Orat. pro M. Marcello.
Tully tell his Emperor: Haec qui facit, non ego illum cum summis viris
comparo, sed simillimum Deo iudico: The deed of God and not of man, he shall be
perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect. Perfectorum sunt ista (says
Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 73.
Saint Austine) this is not milk for babes, but meat of strong men, who are
grown to the full age of Christ's stature. For see (says L^co cirat. and. Fer^^
in Mac. 5.
Chrysostom) how he puts this as crown on all the other virtues, and adds
this the last as the perfection of all, ye shall be perfect. The ranges of this
Iaakobs ladder he set down before: the first step is, not to be angry: the
second is, not to exasperate with behavior: the third, not to revile in
speech: the fourth, not to do wrong in deed: the fifth, not to requite evil:
the sixth, not to resist injury: the seventh, to bear it with patience: the
eight, to prepare for more wrong then was offered: the ninth, to love our
enemies: and lastly, which is the end of all, to pray for them, and do them
good, and this is the top of the ladder that reaches up to heaven.

Which doctrine as it instructs us to love our foes in deed and 2* Use.
in truth, so reproves it justly them who love in tongue only, and in word
alone. And as it requires the hand of friendship in the tongue of friends, so
vnmasketh it all face-taking friendship, which in word pretends amity, but
in work extends enmity to foes as they were their friends. Grievously
complained David of such familiar treachery, Psalm. 55. 12. It was not mine open
enemy that did me this dishonor, for then I could have borne it. Neither was
it mine adversary that did exalt himself against me, for then I would have
hid my self from him: but it was thou my companion, my guide, and mine own
familiar friend, which took sweet counsel together, and walked together as
friends. My familiar friend whom I trusted, which did eat with me, has lift
up his heel against me, and laid great wait for me, Psalm. 41. The Prophet
Jeremy felt no less of false friendship: Even thy brethren (says God to his
Prophet) even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they have dealt
unfaithfully with thee, and they have cried out all together upon thee, believe
them not though they speak fair to thee, Ier. 12. 6. And therefore compares
David them to bees, Psalm. 118. They came about me like bees: and very fitly
faith a Ioh. Hus. in hu^c locum.
Writer: for the Be (as Lab 5. de hist. ^ ^nal. cap. 22.
Aristotle notes) carries honey in her mouth and a sting in her tail. Such
Bees were the Jews to our head Christ Jesus (says John Hus.) Mat. 22.
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly: behold
the honey in their mouths, tell us therefore is it lawful to give Caesar
tribute? behold their sting in the tail. But he knew their thoughts, and
pulling the vizard of false friendship from their face, Why temptye me (says
he) ye hypocrites? And the dux of this swarm was no other but even Judas, who
was Act. 1 16.
guide to them that took Jesus. He came to his Lord with honey in his mouth,
Aue, Mat. 26. 49.
God save thee master; but in his tail was a sting, which cried, Cave, God
save thee from me mais^er, for he betrayed him with a kiss into their hands.
And see how our Savior in grea^est indignation vpbraideth his treachery and
unkindness: Judas (says Luke 22. 48.
he) betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Every word is ponderous, and
an argument of unkindness: Judas, what? my steward, and mine almner, yea mine
own disciple: Judas, surely he is not our enemy though he come with swords and
staves, Friend wherefore art thou come? Yes (blessed Savior) it is Judas thy
burser, who was a thief and carried the bag: betrayest thou? who before
confessed: yes, he betrayeth who before professed: for though in words he
confessed thee, by works he denied thee. Thou whom I chose out for one of my
twelve Apostles, thou for whom alone I carved at my last Supper, and I gave
thee a soppe dipped in kindness: betrayest thou the son of man? a servant thy
Lord, a disciple thy master, the son of man without sin, and sellest him
for thirty pence, who is the price of the world, and the ransom of mankind?
and that with a kiss? with a Ambros. l^^. 10. in Luc. 22.
pledge of affection do thou give a wound? with a kiss of love do thou
execute hatred, and with a sign of peace do thou inflict death? Thus the
Wolf devoured the Lamb of God under sheep clothing: thus Christ's burser
that carried the bag was a thief to his master, and in punishment of his
treachery, like a thief in the Castle yard, he walks up and down the
Scripture with this bolt at his heels, Judas Iscariot one of the twelve, which
also betrayed him, the gingling of which bolt at his heels, tells all that
hear it, he is in that infernal 1. Pet. 3 19.
prison Iud. 6.
kept up in chains of darkness, because when he brought honey in his mouth, he
brought a sting in his tail, and with his precious balmes brake our head.
Atque vtinam solus Judas tam horribiliter peccasset, and would God only Judas
(says a Brent. Hom^i* ^^ pass. Christi.
Writer) had so perfidiously betrayed: but now (alas) with Io. Fer^^ part. 2.
pas Dom.
another we may stand in a gaze, or rather in a maze admire, Bone Deus, quam
plenus nunc est mundus huiusmodi proditorum! Good God, how full now is the
world of such Iudasses and betrayers, nemo a^ his securus, none can escape
them. Help Lord, for there is not one godly man left, for the faithful are
minished from among the children of men, they speak deceitfully every one to
his neighbor, they do but flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their
double heart. Psalm 12. 1. The faithful man is perished out of the earth, and
there is none true hearted among men. They all lie in wait for blood. Every
man hunteth his brother with a net: the best of them is as a brier, and the
most righteous of them is sharper then a thorn hedge. Trust ye not in a
friend, neither put ye confidence in a counselor. Keep the door of thy mouth
from her that lies in thy bosom: for the son reuileth the father, the
daughter rises against the mother, the daughter in law against her mother in
law, and a man's enemies are they of his own house, Mich. 7. 2. Which caution,
that better he may imprint, Comment in 7. cap Mich.
Ierom exemplifieth it with several instances of unkindness: Trust not a
friend (says he) for false 2. Sam 15.
Achitophel deceived David; and Math. 26.
Judas the true Achitophel his master Jesus. Put no confidence in a counselor,
as did the Judge. 9.
Sh^chemites in Abimelech, whom when they had advanced, he oppressed them.
Keep thy tongue from her that lies in thy bosom, for Judge. 16.
Dalilah betrayed Sampson, when he dallied her in his lap. For the son reuileth
the father, as 2. Sam. 16.
Absalom did David. The daughter rises against her mother; a testimony
whereof, though in Scripture thou can not find (says he) yet are there so
many examples thereof in daily experience, that rather we should weep there
are so many, then search them out. The daughter in law against her mother in
law, as Genesis 26. 35.
Esawes wife against Rebecca. And a man's enemies are they of his own house:
here I seek not examples, for they are more (says Jerome) then can be numbered.
Abel is persecuted of none but Cain: Isaac of Ismael: Iaakob of Esau: Moses of
his brethren: David of Saul: Elias of Iezabel: and Christ of his own, who
should have bin the man of his peace. Which enmity as it was first laid and
begun in the Gen 3.
Serpents seed and the seed of the woman, so ever since out of the Churches
bowels, like the womb of Gen 25.
Rebecca has two manner of people, like her twins been divided out of her
bowels, which being as contrary as the flesh to Gal ^.
the spirit each to other, like Iaakob and Esau struggle in the womb, and
being come to strength Gal 4
like the sons of the bondwoman and free, persecute one the other. And as he
that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit,
even so it is now. Thus a brother is most deceived by his brother whom he
trusted: thus he is Mark 6 4.
despised of his own, and not without honor in another country, Genesis 37.
Joseph is afflicted in his fathers house among his brethren, and sold into
Egypt, and king Gen^^. 41.
Pharao exalts him. Exodus 2.
Moses is cast out by his parents into the river, but though his father and
mother forsook him* yet the Lord takes him up by the hand of Pharaoes
daughter, who nourished him for her own son. Jeremy is cast into the
dungeon by Jeremy. ^8. ^.
Zedechias counselors, and by verse. 9 2^. 12, 13.
Ebedmel^ch an Egyptian is delivered out of prison. And as it was then, even so
is now, when we are fallen into the worst times, into the last part of
Nebuchadnezzars image, whose feet were of iron and clay, into the last age,
whereof Ovid li. ^. Metam. ^^b. 4.
he speaks, De duro est vltima ferro, which is of hard iron, and in it men of
stony hearts: that the nearer they are in affinity, the nearer they are in
treachery: as the heathen there experimently complains of this age:

-- Non hospes ab hospite tutus,
Nec socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est.
Imminet exitio vir coniugis, illa mariti,
Lurida terribiles miscent Aconita nou^rcae,
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos.
From henceforth (says our Savior) there shall be five in one ^ Luke 12. 5^.
house divided, three against two, and two against three: the father shall be
divided against the son, and the son against the father: the mother against
the daughter, and the daughter against the mother: the mother in law against
her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. Thus
the man of our peace whom we trust, often lays great wait for us: thus
counterfeits under the color of gold, and false brethren under the vizard of
friendship eftsoone, betray us. It was a common trick in his days, who
beholding it complained, Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nome^: and
he gave his censure of such cosining: Tuta frequensque licet sit via crimen
habet.

A safe and common way it is, by friendship to deceive:
But safe and common though it be, its knavery by your leave.
And as it was then, even so is it now in these perilous times, wherein (as the
2. Esdr. 5. 10.
Scribe speaks) unrighteousness and voluptuousness have gotten the upper
hand upon earth, wherein the land shall be barren from faith (as he prophesied)
and iniquity shall be increased more then thou have seen, or have heard in
time past, that all friends shall fight one against another, when wit shall hide
it self, and understanding depart into his privy chamber. Our Savior
foretold the like cause of not unlike effect, Math. 24. Because (says he)
iniquity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold, because of a
flood of iniquity (as Calui. in hunc locum
one expounds it) where men are frozen in their dregs, the love of many shall
be cold, or frozen (as Enarr. in hunc locum
Bucer does interpret it.) For as an inundation of much water, freezeth in
those regions from which the Sun is fare remote; so a flood of iniquity in
those parts from which the Sun of righteousness is far distant, has made
such a frost of charity, that frater infidelis (to use the words of Hugo)
fratrem fidelem, one brother betrayeth another* as our Savior prophesied Math.
24. 10. and breaks the knot of friendship, Etia^ cum familiarissimis, even
with their dearest friends and familiars, as Theophylact a most ancient
Archbishop nearest the Apostles times, on these words observes.

And if Judas brought up in Christ's bosom, if the worm bred in virenti ligno,
in the green timber, did thus fret and consume that tree of righteousness: quid
fiet in arido (as himself reasons) what will this worm do in dry wood, Luke
23. 31. If the head drink deep of this wormwood from the hands of his own,
who gave him gall in his meat, and vinegar in his drink: what may the members
of his body expect, but to pledge their head, in receiving that potion into
themselves? If these Bees of his own hiue, brought our head honey in these
mouths, and a sting in their tail to wound it unto death: what might David
look for, but that they come about him also like bees, to give good words with
their mouth, but curse with their hearts, Psalm. 62. 4. What might 2. Sam. 20. 9
Amasa look for from lip-louing Ioab, but mel more, verba lactis, honey in the
mouth, or buttered words, (as the Psalmist speaks) Art thou in health my
brother? And felin cord and fraudem in factis, an heart full of gall and
bitterness, and an hand full of blood. Thus speak they friendly to their
neighbors, when mischief is in their hearts, Psalm 28. 3. Art thou in health
my brother? It is the voice of Ioab, when he meant to be his butcher. But Amasa
might have answered this dissembler, as the sick Hen in the fable replied to
the Cat, asking how she did: Been si tu discedas, better (I thank you) if ye
would go farther from me. Such a visiting Cat was he, who came to see David,
Psalm 41. 6. If he come to see me, he speaks lies, he heapeth up iniquity
in his heart, and when he comes forth he tells it, When shall he die, and
his name perish? now that he lies let him rise up no more. Thus one thing
floteth in their mouth (says a Ierom coment. in Math. ^.
Father) and another thing is diued deep in their heart. Et venenum animi
linguae mella tegunt, like cunning Physicians that should poison, they cover
the poison of their heart with sugared words, that more easily we may receive
their bitter potion, and drink their cup of deadly wine. With Judas they
kiss their brethren, but osculo oris non charitatis (says Austine) with the
kiss of Judas, not of Jesus; of their mouth, not their mind: Oris attactu non
mentis affectu, coniunctione labiorum, non commixtione spirituum: they draw
near their brethren with their lips, but their heart, that heart is far from
them. Hom. 15. in Ephes^. in iliud cum omni m^litia.
Chrysostom compares them to the worst kind of dogs, which bark not at
passengers, nor make show of any rancor, as other common curres do, (...) but
fawn upon them, and show an outward face of gentleness, (...), but coming
behind them in private, and taking them at advantage when they see not nor
perceive, privily they snatch them by the heels. And he there gives his
censure of such fawning spaniels, (...), these fawning dogs (says he) are
worse then common barking curres, that very honestly give us warning of their
teeth before they bite: and that father fitly applies his comparison, (...):
and even some men are dogs (says he) which neither bawle with their mouth,
nor snarle in their anger, nor show any rancor in outward behavior toward
others, (as those barking curres which I sneaped in the verbal reconcilement:)
(...) etc. but secretly they concinnate and fainedly forge deceites, or (as
David may expound Chrysostom) they courage themselves in mischief, and
commune among themselves how they may lay snares, and say, that no man shall
see them. They imagine mischief and practice it, that they may keep secret
among themselves every man in the deep of his heart, Psalm. 64. 5. 6. Thus false
brethren (among whom 2. Cor. 11. 26
Paul himself was in peril) speak with the voice of Iaakob, when indeed they
have the hands of Esau. Exteriora serenitas tenet, and interiora tempestas, (as
one Eusebius. Emis. homil 9. ad Monach.
speaks of some Monks, such evil beasts and slow bellies, which being
fruges consumere nati, like the frogs and grasshoppers of Egypt, eat up the
green herbs and fat of the land.) They speak friendly to their neighbors,
but imagine in their hearts. And it were less unnatural, if even thy brethren
only, and domus patris tui, and the house of thy father, (as they used Ier.
12. 6.
Jeremy) were perfidious, and thy kinsmen and friends did betray thee, as
prophesied our Savior they would: but when pater domus tuae, the father of thy
house fulfilleth Christ's Mat. 24. 10.
prophecy, and betrayeth his own bowels into the hands of sinful men, this
is most unnatural, Improbus ille pater crudelis tu quoque matter, thy father is
an Amorite and thy mother an Hittite, as the Ezec. 16. 3.
Prophet spoke of Isreal's parents. Scelus est Jason and magis scelus Medea
matter. More cruel then the Lam. 4. 3.
dragons in the wilderness to their young, yea then the Job. 39.
Ostrich, who shows himself cruel to his young ones as if they were not
his, are those which like Exodus 2.
Moses his parents expose their own son to the waves of the river: yet cry
these peace, peace, and would be called peacemakers, that so steal they might
that blessing from their heavenly Father in the apparel of Christ the elder
brother. But indeed they are pacidici non pacifici, says Iab. 1 de conuers. ad
Cleric. cap. 31.
Bernard, they speak unto us of peace, but in truth prepare themselves to
battle: for they say and do not: Vtinam tamen nostri etsi non facerent saltem
dicerent, says that Father, Would God ours though they do not, yet would say
well, and know the things that belong to their peace. But as a (...) R^d^^ph.
T^ssou^ Scrap^. re^g. lib. 2.
General of the Franciscane Friars reprehending that societies life and
learning, truly spoke of them: My dear brethren (says he) from the first
beginning of our Order and religion conscientia, conscience did flourish: but
honesty decaying by little and little, the first syllable is lost, and
scientia, science or knowledge alone remained: but now by our faults the first
syllable being taken away again, we remain pure entia, blocks, stocks and
images: so (I fear me) some Prefect of English Franciscans, or Benedictines
rather (as they count themselves, and would be called) viewing their mores and
scientiam, how they are lived and learned, may as justly complain, not with
Beza Epist.
him that they have multum scientiae, parum conscientiae: much science, and
little conscience: but of loss of both syllables, with the Prophet Esa. 1. 5.
The whole heart is heavy, and the whole head is sick, and the disease of the
head is falen upon the heart, that the child in understanding may cry with the
2. King. 4. 19.
Shunamites boy, Mine head, mine head, and his mother cannot mend him: and the
man of ripe age in malitiousnesse may complain with Ier. 4. 19.
Jeremy in another meaning: My belly, my belly, I am pained at the very heart,
mine heart is troubled within me: for from the sole of the foot to the top of
the head there is nothing whole therein, but wounds in the head, swellings in
the heart, and in the other parts sores full of all corruption. And if they
either had like those Romans 10. ^
Jews conscientiam sine scientia, zeal and love without knowledge, we might
hope they would be simple as Doves without gall, and look to their heart: or if
they had lost only the first syllable of their conscience, and had scientiam
sine conscientia, like the 1. Cor. ^. r. ^.
Corinths, knowledge without love, we might expect they would be wise as
serpents to defend and look to their head: but seeing like those Franciscanes
they have lost both syllables of their conscience, (strange, that in Paradise a
place of purity, should neither grow the tree of life nor the tree of
knowledge) that only they remain pura entia, pure and meare things (as that
governor spoke of them) statues and images Psalm. 115.
which have heads and understand not, nor know the way of peace, hands and
handle not the works of charity and deeds of reconcilement. I will not add
with the Prophet: They that made them, and set them up, are like unto them, but
so are all they that put any trust in them. I wish, as these golden images are
set up in the temple (by them who commit the greatest idolatry in setting up
such images in the Church of God) and adored by their simple Saints, (though it
be but as the people honored the Ass that carried Isis, with a non tibi, sed
religioni, not because they are pure silver, but like Caesar's Mat. 22.
brass penny, Caesaris effigiem qui libet, assis habet, Asses may have Caesar's
image and superscription:) so they would not like Nebuchadnezzars Dan. 3.
golden image procure the death of them, who in wisdom like Daniel fall not
down and worship them. I wish, that as the Plu. comment. de sort. Roman.
Romans, though they erected not a temple to Wisdom, nor Temperance, nor
Patience, nor Magnanimity, nor Continence, yet builded a temple to Concord: so
though they build not themselves as a 1. Pet. 2. 5. 1. Cor. 6. 19.
spiritual temple to those virtues and goddesses of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. to
Faith, nor Temperance, nor Long-suffering, nor Gentleness, nor Peace, nor
Meekness, nor Goodness, yet Charitati templum facerent, they would edify
themselves in love, and build themselves a temple to Concord and Charity. And
though they build her a temple, yet is it not founded in faith, nor her walls
reared and raised up with Hope, nor her roof perfected by Charity, as Saint
Austine speaks. They brag of Concord, and cry to all men, peace, peace, when
there is no peace: for in their titular temple of Concord they sacrifice their
brethren like sheep on the altar of their heart, and yet cry they Templum
pacis, templum pacis, peace, peace, where there is no peace. Like Plut in vit.
Tyber. and Grac.
L. Opimius the Consul, who slew 3000. of the faction of the Gracchi, and yet
forsooth built a temple to the goddess Concord. But what was this else quam
irrisio Deorum, to mock the God of peace, says Lib. 3. de ^ru. Dei cap. 25.
Austine, to build a temple to that goddess, who if she had bin in the city,
it had not been rent with so many dissentions. Cur enim si rebus gestis
congruere voluerunt, non ibi potius aedem Discordiae fabricarunt? For if they
would have done suitable to their deeds, why rather erected they not a chapel
to Discord?

Thus face-taking friendship often comes in sheep clothing, when within she is
a ravening Wolf, for by her fruits ye shall know her. Thus masked malice under
the vizard, under the habit of amity, faineth her self to be another, when
indeed she is the 1 King. 14.
wife of Jeroboam, of fighting against and chiding. And he that like old Genesis
(...). 1.
Isaac is dimme-sighted, may be easily deceived with the voice of Iaakob, and
fair tongue of supplanters, till he feel the rough hands of Esau. Yea Ahijah
the Prophet himself, for the dimnesse of his eyes may be cousened with her
disguise, till the Lord reveal it unto him, saying, Behold the wife of
Jeroboam coming in unto thee, and faining her self to be another, and then
can he unmask this mistress, and tell her who she is as soon as she enters
the door of his ear, or his eye: Come in thou wife of Jeroboam, why fainest
thou thus thy self to be another? I am come unto thee with heavy news. Yea
charity that is neither simple nor subtle, (as Bias spoke wisely of her) or
rather not only simple as a dove to think no evil, but also wise as a
serpent to discern all things, and see what is evil, could subscribe on the
night this Epigram to the inscription of the Consuls Plut. vit. iv.
temple, Actus vecors templum facit Concordiae, bloody and warrish hands build
a temple to Concord. And we in this wise charity may judge, that though
themselves they inscribe with the Temple of Concord, though in their forehead
and front like the Exodus 28.
High Priest they carry the inscription of Holiness to the Lord, and amity
to their brother: yet vocabulum opere destruxerunt, says Comment. in Mich. 7.
Jerome, though in words they profess it, with their works they deny it;
though they make a show of love, yet have they so denied the power thereof,
that in their stony heart like that Act. 17.
Athenian altar, we may judge is written: Unto the unknown God of Mars, and
malice, of enmity and envy. S^^ll 1 enarr. in Luke 12.
One compares them to Apothecarie boxes, which are without titled with names of
medicine and sweet herbs, when within there is nothing but Wormwood and Gall,
Aloes or poison. And though like Ioab, they have titles of health: Art thou in
health my brother? or like Judas, God save thee master, yet do they flatter
with their tongue, says David, for their inward parts are very wickedness,
Pal. 5. 9. And when we open these b^xes we shall find them no less, then full
of those roots of bitterness, (...), (...). Romans 1. with the Paranomisia of
which words, Paul (as one Pis^ at schol. in R(...). ^. 29
notes) was not more delighted, then they are with the things themselves which
they signify, I wish these men, whose heart is so deceitful and wicked above
all things that none can know it, had in their pretense of love that
fenestratum pectus, glass windows in their breast, (which Momus in Plutarch
looked for and found lack of in the fabric of man's body) Tunc si mentes
recluderentur, possent aspici laniatus and ictus, as one Tacit. Ann. 6.
speaks, then should we see their malicious rancor in the heart, like a Lion
lurking in his den: then should we see their mischief in the deep of their
hearts, as it were a Lions whelpe lurking in secret places that he may ravish
the poor: then should we see their (...), heart, and a heart how they speak
every one deceitfully to his neighbor, and flattering with their lips speak
with a double heart, Psalm. 12. 2. one heart in their mouth, and another in
their breast, outwardly speaking one thing, and inwardly thinking another,
says Musculus on these words. Then should we see how they Thom. in hunc locum.
rejoice at our misery, when they seem to bewail our misfortune, how they
hate when they seem to love, how they laugh when they seem to lament our
affliction. But seeing nature has not set that glass window in their breast,
yet holds grace the Iam. 1.
glass of the word before their eyes, which being a Heb. 4 12.
discerner of the intents and secrets of the heart, casts such a reflexe of
their inward meanings, that in it as in a glass we may behold, not darkly, but
face to face, what manner ones they are. For every one of them speaks
peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart lays wait for
him, Ierem. 9. 8. Wherefore let every one take heed of his neighbor, and trust
you not in any brother, says the Prophet, for every brother will use deceit,
and every such friend will deal deceitfully: and every one will deceive his
friend, and not speak the truth; for they have taught their tongues to speak
lies, and take great pains to do wickedly. Whose mirie pits and filthy
puddles, though now they lie covered with sweetness of apparent sanctity and
love, like dirtie bogges covered with snow in winter, yet when the Sun of
righteousness shall rise, and break forth in no less heat then flaming
fire, then shall these ungodly melt at the presence of God, says the Psalmist,
as water at fire, and snow at the Sun, and then shall he lighten things hid
in darkness, and make the counsels of their heart manifest: and when their
snow is melted by that consuming fire and brightness of his coming, then
shall appear their myrie places, their pits and plots, their Serpents
subtlety that lay hid under the Doves simplicity. And he, before whom the
grave it self is naked, Job 26. 6. shall open these whited tombs, which
appear outward so beautiful and amiable to their brethren, that men going
over them perceive not, but are within full of dead men's bones, of iniquity
and all filthiness. But to leave this snow-coloured earth and earthly
whiteness, to that final melting by the Sun of righteousness; to leave
these Apothecary boxes, (whose ointment of love those dead flies, injuries,
suspicions, enmities, truce, war, and yet again seeming peace (as the
servant told Phaedria in the Terent. (...). act. 1 scena 3.
Comedy) causes it to putrify and stink in the nostrils of the Almighty)
to Eccles. 13.
that last opening of all hearts and secret things. To leave these ambidexters,
Quiamant tanquam osuri (as L^b. de amici^. cap. 8.
Austine out of Tully speaks) who love so, and are friends to day, that to
morrow they may be foes; so friendly to all that faithful to none: now praising
and straight dispraising; now fawning and presently biting; to day ready to
kiss, and to morrow more ready to kill: to leave these ambidexters to him that
will reward them according to the work of their hands: to leave these fast and
loose men to him that Job 5. 22. 23.
catches the wise in their own craftiness, and makes the counsel of the
wicked foolish, yea scatters the devises of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot accomplish their intended enterprise: and to leave lastly these masked
hypocrites (who in the theater of this world are now the devils stage players)
to that last catastrophe (when they have acted their parts of dissimulation)
Exite maledicti in ignem aeternum, Go out ye cursed into everlasting fire: let
all true reconciled friends, as they pretend the show and shadow, so extend the
body and substance of friendship, and be reconciled indeed.

Which doctrine, as it vnmasketh the face of hypocritical 3. Use.
Ioabs, so binds it the hands of blood-thirstie Esawes, under whatsoever
their pretense of revenge. Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn
to him the other also, commands Christ our Lord and lawgiver: And if any will
sue thee at the law for thy coat, let him have thy cloak also: and whosoever
will compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain, Math. 5. 39. Under which
triple injury, of our person, If any smite thee; and of our good, If any sue
thee; and of our body, If any will compel thee to travel, compriseth he all
wrongs offered by our enemies, as the Iansen. in hu^c locu^.
learned observe; which so we must bear in the greatest measure, as forbear
to requite in the least degree. If any shall smite thee on the cheek with the
fist of wickedness, turn to him the other also* says Christ: to which yet
thou art not bound according to the letter of the law: for neither John 18. 23.
Christ himself, nor Acts 23. 3.
Paul his Apostle turned the other cheek to their smiters, (as Julian that
messenger of Satan, being sent to buffet the Christians, when he smote them on
the cheek, replied to their complaint, that their master bids them turn the
other also; and beat them with this text, as the fowler smote the Eagle with
that shaft which was feathered with her own quill) for praeparationem cordis
non ostensionem operis intelligit (says L^b. 1. de ser, Dom in mont. c. 26.
Austine) He understands greatest patience and moderation of mind, says hom.
18. ^p. imp^rs. in Math 5.
Chrysostom with some Theoph. Ambr. and F^rus in hoc.
other expounders, that after one wrong, thou be more ready to receive a second
then requite the former: as Paul was ready, not only to be bound, but to die
also at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21. 13. or as the
Corinths suffered this threefold wrong of their false Apostles, If they
brought their persons into bondage, or took their goods, or smote them on the
face, 2. Cor. 11. 20. Thus must we turn the other cheek to our smiter, that
is, Fer^s li. 1. comment. in Math. 5.
Duplicat am iniuriam perpeti quam refer talionem, be more ready to receive
another wrong then retaliate the former. Said I, another? I may add a greater.
If he smite thee on the right cheek, says Christ; which blow coming but from
the left and weaker hand by nature (says Augu. epist. 5 ad Mar^ellinu^, Magis
smistra percutitur, quia in eius petius partem, qu^ ad ^exti a^ ferientu
fac^lior ^ctus est.
Austine) is less sore and grievous, thou must turn the other, the left
cheek to receive a greater blow from his right hand, which is Arist. lib. de
com. animal. gre (...) lib. 7. c. 17.
stronger then the left, and falls not so light where it lights. Thus must we
offer the acceptance of a greater injury, then repay the less which was
offered: as Christ our head to the smiter of his cheek, Math. 26. 67. offered
his whole body to be crucified, rather then requite it, and gave his back to
the smiters, his cheeks to the nippers, and hid not his face from shame and
spitting, Esa. 50. yea offered his head to the thorns, his mouth to the
vinegar, his hands and feet to the nails, and his precious sides to the
spear.

And if for thy goods, the litigious wrangler will sue thee at the law for thy
coat, rather then revenge, let him have they cloak also which is of greater
value, or (as Luke 6. ^9.
Saint Luke changes these garments) if he take first thy cloak, let him also
have thy coat which is nearer unto thy self: that is (...) rather suffer
wrong, rather sustain harm, then to go to law one with another, as not only
1. Co^int 6 ^
grace commands, but even (...) 5 (...) c. 11. and (...). (...).
nature it self can teach thee. Yea for thine own person, if any (...) shall
not only take up thy horse, but post thy self, and compel thee to run a
mile at his stirrup, yea and load thee with his carriage (as the Mat. 27. 32.
Jews (...) took up post, and loaded Simon of Cyrene with Christ's cross)
thou must rather go with him two miles, not casting off that which presses
down, but run with patience the race that is set before thee, though he ride
thee like an ass, rather then like Issan couch down under thy burden, and in
revenge kick against the pricks. And this is the victory which overcomes
the world, to kiss thus the hand of him that smites thee on the cheek, to
cloak thine enemy that sueth for thy coat, and to run with him two that
compels thee one mile. This is the goodness that ouercometh evil, not to
resist evil, but putting up thy sword of revenge into his sheath of patience
and long-suffering, to commit it with David to him that judges righteously,
Domine tu retribues, thou shall repay for me O Lord: Ego non retribuam, Domine
tu retribues pro me, not I, but thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God.

It was ferina exceptio, a brutish exception (says one) of Lib. 1. (...).
Tullie, That none hurt or harm another, nisi lacessitus, unless provoked. O
quam simplicem veramque sententiam duorum verborum adiectione corrupit! O what
a good sentence (says Lib 6 (...). cap. 18.
Lactantius) he mard with two words! yea with one syllable, which like a little
leaven sowred the whole lump, and with that small herb put death in the pot.
Unless provoked? Vox pecudis non homims, the voice of a beast and not of a
man; for what else could the roaring Lion have excepted? He came indeed nie the
truth, and if this ni had not been, he had spoken like the Apostle of Christ
Jesus, Si lacessitus, si quis in seruitutem adigit, si exedit, si deuoret, si
in faciem cedat: suffer if thou be provoked, if brought into bondage, if
spoiled, if devoured, or if thou be smitte^ on the face. Proud Arist. l. 4.
ethi. cap. 5. T^leraresi lac^ssaris seruit^^ est.
nature indeed thinks it bondage and slavery to suffer when she is provoked;
but humble and meeke-making grace it teaches that Christ's servant is herein a
freeman; and in this free servitude of long-suffering must we serve our God,
as Paul himself served the Lord with all meekness, with many tears and
tentations which came unto him by the laying a wait of the Jews, Acts 20. 19.
Thus to overcome not only thy foes evil with goodness, but thy self, and in thy
self those James 4. 1.
soldiers of Satan, thy lusts which fight in thy members 1. Peter 2. 11.
against thy soul, thou resistest the devil, that he give over the siege, and
fly from thee, James 4. 7. thou conquerest no less the^ the powers of
darkness, and put to flight the armies of these aliens. For as the mouth of
fleshly wisdom tells thee, Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima vincit
moenia, Valiant and more victorious is he which conquers his own anger, then
if he won a defenced city. So least thou should think this wisdom of the
flesh enmity against God, Solomon tells thee from the mouth of true wisdom,
that it is subject to the law of God, Prou. 16. 32. Stronger is he that is slow
to anger, then a mighty man: and he that rules his own mind, then he that
wins a strong city. For whereas the spur of anger makes our feet (which
should be slow to wrath) swift to shed blood; and like that messenger of Satan,
is a prick in our flesh to buffet us with its wicked fist, and others with the
fist of wickedness, we had need thrice with Saint Paul to beseek the Lord, it
might depart from us. Wherein yet it is no less doleful then daily to behold,
how with toiles and trifles (as Lib. 2. de Ira. ca. 25.
Seneca notes) our bile is moved to anger, and our choler inflamed with heat
and desire of revenge. As, our servant is not quick enough, or our potion and
drink made too hot, or the bed is ruffled and out of order, or the table is
negligently spread and served, yea the coughing of one or sneezing of another,
or the ouerturning of a cup, or our servants letting fall of a key, drives
some into rage and fury. Yea as the a Bull is angry at a red color, ^
the Aspe at a shadow, the Bear and Lion provoked with a tablecloth: so often
testie and writhen natures are with the very color of injury, and shadow of
wrong incensed so far, that eftsoons iniurias vocent modica beneficia, Small
gifts and little good turns they count injuries. Nay, sometime (as (...). cap.
^.
he notes) are we angry that we are not angry, and provoked to avenge
without cause of revenge: like little children, who, if they fall will have the
ground beaten, and often know not at whom to be angry, but only they are angry
without cause and without injury, yet not without some show of wrong and
desire of punishment: and therefore are often deluded imitatione plagarum, and
simulatis deprecantium lachrymis, with semblance and counterfeit strokes, and
with fained tears of those that ask them forgiveness: Et falsa vltione falsus
dolor tollitur, and their false grief is satisfied with fained revenge.

Some again go by the ears for a woman, and idem velle (says L^b. ^. cap ^^
Seneca) their unity of affection (which should be the knot of love and bond
of peace, Phil. 2. 2.) becomes the cause of their hatred and stirrer of
contention. Iter angustum ripas transeuntium excitat: Others on horseback
strive for the way, and these are out of the way, I mean Christ's, which is the
kings high way of humility, and may learn it of Saint Paul, To. 12. To give
place and way to wrath, and be not high minded, but make themselves equal to
them of the lower sort. For because an high mind goes before the fall, Prou.
16. 18. therefore Saul being mounted on his steed was thrown down to the
ground, Act. 9. and being thus humbled from his horse was exalted on high, and
that humility was the stirrupe whereby he got up into the seat of heavenly
honor. I wish these obuious quarrellers and goats (which in their high mind
arrogate the right hand, when their place is the left) would learn of those
two goats in Lib. (...) cap. 50.
Pliny, which (as Mutianus from his eye there reports) meeting on a straight
and narrow bridge, that the one could not pass by the other, nor turn aside
to return back again, non vim sed viam sibi fecerunt, neither made his way
by ouerturning the other, but the one lay down that the other might go over
him: as it fared with those wayfaring pilgrims, Thou have brought us into so
strait a place, that men ride over our heads, Psalm. 66. Some again on foot in
their pride contend for the wall (these are as wise as a wall) and their too
much turning to the right hand before men, will make them be set on the left by
God himself. These might learn of Abraham to yield their own right to their
inferiors for peace: Let there be, I pray thee, no strife between thee and
me, neither between thy men and mine, for we are brethren. Is not the whole
land, is not the whole street before thee? depart, I pray thee, in quiet from
me. If thou will take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou will needs go to the right hand, then I will take the left. For in thus giving
and not receiving honor, we are commanded to go one before another, Romans 12.
10. We must not then like Jonah be angry for a shadow, and for these toils
and trifles be moved to vengeance, but stay the first motions of wrath: one and
not the least whereof is opinio iniuriae, opinion of wrong, and conceit of
offered injury (says Lib. 2 de ira cap. 22.
Seneca) in these triuiall occurrences.

It was that Philosophers position to Serenus which he made the title of his
book: That injury cannot befall a wise man, and thereof Cap. 3.
gives his reason; because that is inuulnerable, not that is smitten with a
blow, but which feels no hurt nor harm by the stroke, (as he in the
paraemiast spoke of a worse blow) They have stricken me but I was not hurt,
they have beaten me but I felt it not, Prou. 23. And yet is it a world to see
how men in an house, like those Genesis 25.
brethren in the womb of Rebecca, strive and struggle for pre-eminence,
whether should come out first, and to receive this honor of precedencie go one
before another, starting before others after a shadow, which flies us the
faster we follow it, and is caught indeed and catched by humility, and falling
down upon it, Mat. 23. 12. It is a wonder to see how our right hand walkers,
and cutting swaggerers stand on a wall unto blood, and often for the right hand
thereof make it a partition wall of strife between them and their brethren, and
so rear up a partition wall of their sins to separate between them and
their God, Esa. 59. 2. Like those two cocks in Lib. 2. var. hist. cap. 28.
Aelian, whose eager but causlesse fight when Themistocles beheld, he cried
thus out in admiration: These fight neither for their country, nor for their
household gods, nor for their ancestors renown, nor for their liberty, nor for
their children, nor yet for their own true glory, but only ^e alter ab
altero superetur, aut alter alteri cedat, lest either should yield to the
other, and seem to be overcome. And indeed as the master of the pit often sets
two cocks together, to fight unto the death of them both, and then after
mutual conquest, suppeth perchance with the fighters bodies. Even so (says
Pastoral part* 3. (...). 10.
Gregory) the master of these two hot-spurres, like a crafty adversary of
both their souls, sets them by the ears for toys, that after mutual
conflict he may conquer them both, and so suppe with their souls at his home,
when in this world and cockpit of contention they have made him pastime and
sport. Thus like the Frog and the Mouse in the fable, they fight eagerly for a
toy, and then comes the Kite, the prince and chief foul that rules in the
air, and rapit vtrosque bellatores, and snatcheth away both these great
warriers. Thus like two Emmets in the molehill of this earth, we fight for
superiority, and then comes a Robin-red-breast and pickes us both up. Thus
when they should be Iam. 1. 19.
slow to wrath, as God himself did not run, but only walked to take
vengeance on his enemy, and deferred it too till even and cool of the day,
Genesis 3. 8. they run and prepare themselves to battle, as Psalm. 59. 6.
David speaks of his enemies, their feet run to evil and they make have to
shed blood, Esa. 59. 7. as if not heaven but hell were the prize of their race:
they so run that they may obtain it. And this they defer not till even and
cool of the day, but in the heat of their blood, hate of their brother, and
cool of their charity they rise betimes, and execute this judgment in the
morning. Yea whereas the God of mercy came with Eheu to be avenged of his
enemies, Esa. 1. 24. these men of murder come with aha, aha, There, there, so
would we have it, Psalm. and with that 1. Sam. 17.
challenger of Gath, not provoke alone but proclaim a combat, I defy thee
this day, give me a man that we may fight hand to hand, that I may conquer or
be quelled. And whereas the provoked resistant and defendant, antagonist is often
(as L^cocitat.
Gregory notes) withheld by good motions from answering his challenge and
defiance, the subtle adversary of his soul brings to his mind the offered
indignities and wrongs received, and with exaggeration of each circumstance
shows them so intolerable, that for most part being ashamed of his former
patience, and blushing at his first forbearance, he lamenteth the time bypast
of revenge, and with the dog returning to his vomit, licketh up his malice
into his stomach which he had cast away: like Hector in the Homer. Iliad. lib ^.
Iliad, who told Achilles that he had often refused his challenge indeed, but now
I will not fly thee (says he) as I did before, Now my courage pricks me
forward to resist thee to thy face, and stand to it manfully (...), whether I
kill or be killed. Now will I stay a man in my wound, and a young man in my
hurt, as cruel Lamech courageously or rather outragiously vaunted, Genesis 4. 23.

Of which fire of contention and fury of revenge, as Satan is himself the
kindling coal and principal prouoker, so is the worlds reputation no less
then the bellows thereof, and accessory a bettor: for the pacate and peaceable
man which is unwilling to revenge, contemptus est omnibus, he is contemned (as
truly ob. observed Lib. 6. diu. inst. c. 18.
Lactantius) and despised of all. And because he is thought not able or not
manly to defend himself, habetur pro segni and inerti, he is reputed a faint
hearted lubber, a coward without courage, and a body without spirit and life in
him. But he that will revenge his injury, Hic fortis, hic strenuus iudicatur,
hunc colunt, hunc venerantur omnes: he is counted a stout man of stomach, all
honor and reverence his courage, and fear him for a swash buckler and kilcow.
Which pointing of the finger, Et dicier hic est, this is the man of valor,
whetting his courage, puts resolution in the sist, revenge in the hilts, and
bloodshed in the blade: and this, this is it which makes them resolve with
those cutters in Lib. 2 de Jea. c. 32.
Seneca, Minus contemnem^r, inquiunt, s^vindscauerimus inturiam, It is for our
credit and renown to put up no wrong that is offered. A Beaux am. (...).
Euang^^ (...). 5. 44.
late writer so complains of the Noblemen of France, who count it their
greatest disgrace if they pocket up the least injury without some revenge, and
think their honor is impeached, yea touched as the apple of their eye; if
straightway they seek not his death who has wronged them. Thus their
Nobility refuses the honor that comes of God alone, and seek honor one
of another. I wish English hearts were not so infected with this French
disease, whose hearts take no ease but while they meditate revenge, the temples
of whose heads cannot take any rest till they find out a place for revenge,
whose eyelids cannot sleep till they see revenge, and whose fingers itch till
Satan have taught their hands to war and their fingers to fight his own
battles. But the foolishness of the flesh cannot give her an objection which
the wisdom of the spirit cannot answer, who both by her law does infatuate
this wisdom, Thou shall not avenge nor be mindful of wrong, Leuit. 19. 18.
and by her Gospel of peace counts it foolishness with God, See that none
recompense evil for evil unto any man, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15. Vengeance is mine,
says the Lord, Romans 12. He alone in the Magistrate (who is his hand and
sword bearer before him) carries not this sword in vain, Romans 13. And me
thinks the Almighty cries here like the true mother for her own, Mine, it is
mine, let it not be divided, I will recompense, says the Lord. And therefore
whosoever usurping Gods right, takes this sword, and wresteth it so out of
Gods hand, shall perish with the sword; says Christ our Savior, Math. 26. 52.
For who so thus sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, says God
himself, Genesis 9. 6. And if any kill with the sword, he must be killed with the
sword, says Christ his so^, Apoc. 1^. 10.

Not that Christian religion is unfit for war because it enioyneth peace, as
Machiuell once did object, and makes cowards, because it perswardeth patience.
For as it bad Peter put up his sword of private offense into his sheath of
patience and long* suffering, Luke 22. 51. so willed it him before, to sell his
coat and buy a sword in public defense, verse. 36. It makes weaklings so
valiant in Gods battle for religion, that they put to slight the armies of the
alients, Heb. 11. 34. and yet stronglings such cowards in man's combat of
revenge, as to give place to wrath, and not resist injury, Mat. 5. 39. But it
gives Psal^e 9^ 13
patience in time of adversity and wrong, until the pit be dug up for the
ungodly. It teaches us with Verse 1. 2.
David to commit all vengeance to God with a double attribute and Epitheton, O
God the auenger, O God the auenger, show thy self clearly: stand up thou
Judge of the world, and reward the proud after their deserving. How shall the
wicked, how shall the wicked triumph and make such proud boasting? They smite
down thy people, and trouble thine heritage. It teaches the oppressed to rely
on his justice, that he will Verse 23.
recompense the ungodly their wickedness, and destroy them in their own
malice. It tells us God is jealous, and the Lord reuengeth, the Lord
reuengeth, even the Lord of anger. The Lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and he reserueth wrath for his enemies, Naum 1. 2. And therefore
he that takes and usurps the sword, shall perish with the sword, and Gods
vengeance still auengeth man's revenge. Because Edome ( Ezekiel. 25. 12. 13, 14, 15.
says the Lord God) has done evil by taking his vengeance upon the house of
Judah, and has committed great offense and renenged himself upon them,
therefore thus says the Lord God, I will also execute my vengeance upon Edome,
they shall know my vengeance, says the Lord God. And because the Philistimes
have executed vengeance, and revenged themselves with a despitefull heart to
destroy it for the old hatred, therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold I will
stretch out mine hand upon the Philistimes, and I will cut off the Cherethims,
and destroy the remnant of the sea coast, and I will execute great vengeance
upon them, with rebukes of mine indignation, and they shall know that I am the
Lord, when I shall lay my vengeance upon them. And thus God revenged them
according to their handy-worke, in weight and measure, his eternal for their
temporal vengeance, and measured to them again as they measured to Judah, yea
a measure pressed down, shaken together, and running over gave he back again
into their bosom. Et libet hominem vindicare? and has any man now lust and
courage to be revenged? says Tom. 10. ser. 42 ^ Orat. D^^.
Austine* why stay the Lords leisure. The holy Martyrs, whose blood was powered
forth unto death, are not yet avenged, Apo. 6. but they, that is, their blood
alone (like the blood of Abel) cries with a loud voice, How long Lord, holy
and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? and it was answered unto them, That they should rest for a little
season, until their fellow servants and brethren that should be killed even as
they were, were fulfilled. Yea Christ himself is not yet all this while
revenged on his enemies, but henceforth from his passion he tarieth till his
enemies be made his footstool, Heb. 10. 13. At his bitter passion when he was
reviled, he reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but
committed it to him that judges righteously, righteously indeed, for he smote
his sons enemies, in laying his wished blood upon them, and he smote them on
the hinder parts, for it is to this day upon their children, and has put them
to a perpetual shame. Thus tarieth the head with his members the Lords
leisure, who is that auenger of Israel, and will recompense every man at
length according to his works. Who are we then (asks Ibid.
Austin) that we should seek revenge? If God should seek it of us, vbi
remaneremus, what should become of us, and where should we remain? He whom
Prou.
seven times in a day, yea daily and hourly we offend, will not be avenged on
us, and shall we seek vengeance on man who has wronged us Luke 17. 4.
seven times in a day, yea though Math. 18. 2^.
seventy times seven times iniuried us fellow servants?

Bear then and forbear (advises a grave Se^^. l. 3. de Ira c. vl^.
Philosopher) behold even now is death coming which will make you equal. What
do thou fighting and stabbing him? do thou wish any thing but his death
whom thou would revenge? Etiam morietur, why he shall surely die; thou
loosest but thy labor, Facere vis quod futurum est. Like those blood-thirstie
Acts 23. 14.
Jews, thou vowest with an oath that thou will neither eat nor drink till
thou have killed him. And whereas like a 2. Timot. 2. 3. ^
soldier of Jesus Christ (as every Christian is called in this warfare, 2.
Cor. 10. 4) he is here placed by his captain in his stand and vocation; in
which 1. Co^in. 7. 10
calling he must stand and abide till he be called away, as the Math. 2.
Angel told Joseph, Be there till I bring thee word: as if thou had the
Math. ^. 9.
Centurions command, thou say to this soldier, Go, and he goes, and
sendest him from his station, Iniussu Imperatoris, without his Captains leave
and Generals command. Yea, whereas his soul is cooped up in his earthly
tabernacle, like a bird that is kept up in a cage, with Caine thou dissoluest
his tabernacle, and violently breakest the cage, that his soul before she be
called, may fly as a bird unto the hill. Wherefore have rather patience in the
time of adversity, until the pit be dug up for the ungodly. O tarry thou
the Lords leisure, yet a while, and he that shall come will come, and will not
tarry long to fet him away. Mean while let his soul like Act. 12.
Peter lie in the prison of his body wherein it is imprisoned, till thy God
send his Angel to smite him on the side with sickness, that her chains fall
off, and then shall she come out of prison wherein she was fettered, and death
the iron gate that leads to the holy city, shall then open to her of it own
accord.

The consideration of which motives if it enter not thy mind, yet nosce
teipsum, consider but thy self, how nature has framed thee a peaceable
creature, and thou will hardly seek revenge. For whereas (as the Pli^. not.
hist. lib. 7. pro^m.
naturalist well observes) she has given her younger sons, I mean, other
creatures which are but her base-borne, couerings, as bucklers to defend, and
as weapons to offend their foe: as shells to the fishes of the sea, knottie
barks to trees of the forest, hard hides to the beasts of the field, stings
to the Bees, bristles to Hogs, and to Hedgehogs their pricks, rough hair to
Bears, feathers to birds, scales to fishes, and fleeces to the sheep: yea (as
the Arist. lib. 3. depart. animal. cap. 1.
oracle of nature further adds) stings to the Serpents, spurs to Cocks,
horns to many beasts, teeth and tusks to Elephants and Bores, arma vel ad
inuadendum vel defendendum, their weapons of offense, or armor of defense, as
he speaks: this mother has brought forth man (though not her eldest son,
yet the beginning of her strength, the excellency of her dignity, and the
excellency of power) unweaponed, unarmed, unfenced, and naked says Pliny, as
the God Genesis 2. 25.
of nature first created him, and since Job. 1. 21. Eccles. 5. 14.
returns naked into the womb of his mother the earth, as naked as he came
from the belly of his mother: yea, nudissimum omnium animalium, most naked of
all living creatures: as one Arist. lib. 3. de generat animal cap. 4.
notes, to show, that this his mother bare not him, Ier. 15. 10.
like Jeremy, a contentious creature, and a man that strives with the whole
earth: but (...), that son of peace, Luke 10. 6. to have peace, and if
possible, that peace with all men. At whose birth she seems to say to her
son of peace, as spoke Christ to the raging sea, Peace and be still, Pax huic
proli, peace be to this son of peace. In my frame of thy body I have taught
thee to be Galen. (...).
(...), a peaceable living creature peace I leave with thee, my peace I give
unto thee. And since indeed bodies she has given creatures suitable to their
souls, (as (...) de ^s^ part hans. ^^^p. cap. 2.
Galen teaches) the frame whereof and position is correspondent to the feature
of their minds and disposition: as, the Horse because he is noble spirited and
courageous, strong hooses as hard as flint: the Lion because he is magnanimious
and stout, fenced him with teeth and paws: the Bull with horns, which he sets
up on high and looks with a stiff neck: and the Bore with tuskes, which are
(...), their natural weapons: but to the heartlesse Heart, the Dove which is
peaceable, and Hare which is a timorous creature, has she given an unfenced
body, (for thus (...),) neither has nature armed the fearful and quiet, nor
unarmed the cruel creatures: Os homini sublime datum, as he Ovid. lib. ^
Me^a^s.
speaks, Man's countenance being framed upward and erect, shows his
affections should be on things not on earth but Col. 3. ^.
above, on his mother Jerusalem above, where is such a vision of peace, that
the citizens of that ^ Gal. ^
commonweal are of one heart, and soul and like brethren dwell together in
unity. His countenance so comely, and his aspect so amiable, (as Pope (...)
lib. de mor. g^^ cap. 2^.
Gregory seeing once the face of an Englishman, said, he was Anglus quasi
Angelus, English as it were Angels-like, because his face like Act. 6. 1^.
Stephens shone like the face of an Angel,) like a glass represents the
image of his soul, how amiable and lovely it must be: which but looking through
this glass window of the visage, leaves there such a luster and reflexe of her
beauty. The smoothness of his body betokens nothing less then the
roughness of his mind, as the vnarmednesse of that, neither the bearing arms
of this: for though nature has given him an hand, which (as these two Fathers
of Arist. lib. ^. de part. animal. Ep. 10.
Philosophy and Gal^^ (...).
Physic note) is both horn and hoof, sword and spear, yea all weapons unto
him, because it can take and handle all weapons of nature, and make any armor
by art: yet seeing as the Galen. ibid.
one auerreth, he is (...), a peaceable and civil creature, he is but (as the
Arist. lib 1. politic. cap. 2.
other teaches him) to take these weapons into his hand through wisdom and
prudence for his better regiment of civil affairs, and that as a magistrate
and Gods minister of justice he take the sword into his hand, to divide
judgment aright, and give every one their portion of right in due season, lest
if he take the sword as a magistrate of his own mischief, and minister of his
own malice, he perish with the sword, and like Saul at the least fall upon his
own sword: and though authority has armed him as a public person for
justice, yet nature has unarmed him as a private man for revenge, that as man
he have peace with all men, Heb. 12. Wherefore as the Apostle held some the
glass of nature to behold their long hair, and sent them to her shop to cut
it for shame of men, 1. Cor. 11. 14. so may I bid man behold his own natural
face in a glass, and send him no further then to his own shape, to cut off
all brutish asperitie and roughness, lest he become a shame-kin of mankind.
And does not nature it self teach ye, that if a man have a cruel mind as well
as long hair, it is a shame unto him? Howbeit, if nature as man cannot
dissuade him from taking the sword, since she has given him no armor of
defense, yet might religion as a Christian persuade him to put up his sword
into his sheath, seeing it prescribes him no weapons of offense. For howsoever
as a private man, it bids him take arms, Ephesians. 6. 13. yet is it but the
armor of defense, not any weapon of offense save the sword of the spirit: it
is but the complet armor of God, and weapons of his warfare, not carnal but
spiritual, 2. Cor. 10. to cast down not withholders but holds, not imagined
wrongs, but his own imaginations; and things exalted not against him, but the
knowledge of his God; to fight not so much against flesh as spirits;
principalities, not Princes; not the powerful, but powers; nor governors in
the world, but worldly governors, which are princes of the air: that if he
put an helmet on his head, it be of salvation to keep it from offense, not of
destruction to plot his revenge. If he gird about his loins it be with the
girdle of verity, not severity, with his sword upon his thigh to execute his
vengeance. If he shoe his feet, it be with peace as with wool, and with
patience as with lead, to be slow to wrath, not with the wings of report to be
swift to shed blood. If he take the shield, it be of faith and patience, to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, not of resistance to withstand
injury. And if he take the sword into his hand, it be the sword of the spirit,
to cut away the sin and the wrong, not of revenge to cut off the sinner.

Nevertheless, if thy bodily nakedness by nature, cannot as man unarm thine
affections of revenge, nor thine armor of religion as a Christian defend thee
from offense, yet if in thy swelling fury thou behold but thy natural, or
unnatural face rather in a glass, in shame of thy disfigure thou would go
thy way from wrath, and never forget what manner of one thou art. For Licet ora
ipsa cernere iratorum, quorum ora, facies, vultusque mutantur, as Li^. ^. (...)
Tully speaks: If the angry and wrathful man would but behold his own face
how deformed it makes his visage, nulla alterius indigeret admonitione, he
needed none other (says Homil 2^ ^^ Ioh.
Chrysostom) but himself to reprove him. For indeed no affection has (as
^ab. 3. de ^^. cap. 4.
Seneca notes) a more ugly and il-fauoured face, when the hairs stand like
bristles and stare most horridely, the eyes flash like lightning, and sparkle
fire, the temples frown with wrinkles, and gloome with cloudie brows, the
nostrils snuffing with disdain, the teeth gnashing like a dog, and inter se
acietati, and whetting one another like the grunning of a Bore, or grinning of
a Dog, the cheeks swelling like a bladder puffed with the wind, the
countenance truculent and fierce, now pale as death the blood retiring,
presently red as a Turkey, it returning: the veins swelling with heat of the
blood, the breathing thick panting with sighs, the lips trembling with
threats, the tongue faltring with abrupt and imperfect speech. From which
palsy of anger they fall into the Epilepsia and falling sickness of revenge,
vt cadant ipsi vel potius in alios incidant, that they fall down themselves
dead, or rather fall deadly upon others. Which deformed face of anger when Dial
de ira cohib.
Plutarch observed in other men, lest he should seem terrible and uncouth to
his friends, wife, children and family, he bids his boy hold him a glass in
his anger, that beholding his deformity as women do their spots, he might
correct his countenance thereby.

We read it fabled in that Ibid.
author, of the Goddess Minerua, that playing on a pipe which blew up her
cheeks, and being checked by a Satyr, saying, That visage beseemes thee not,
lay away thy pipe, obeyed him not then, but beholding her m^sshapen face in the
river as in a glass, threw it away in greater anger, I procul hinc dixit, non
est mihi tibia tanti,
Vt vidit vul^us Pallas in amne suos,
says the Ovid. l. 3. de art.
Poet. And many angry men which have not believed it by report, by beholding
their face in a glass have been pacified and appeased: Q^ibusdam iratis
profuit aspexisse speculum, It has mended some angry men to look themselves in
a glass, as Seen. l. 2. de ira ca. 38.
Sextius observed, whose strange and sudden alteration of countenance has so
affrighted them, that they knew not them selves, as said the said Ouidabid.
Poet, Vos quoque si media speculum spectetis in ira,
Cognoscet faciem vix satis vlla suam.


And how little of their inward deformity in mind (says Seneca) did that
image reflect and the glass represent? Qualemintra putas esse animum, cuius
extra imago tam foeda est? what a one within do thou think is the mind,
whose outward face is so deformed? How much more within the breast lies there a
more terrible countenance, a more cruel aspect, a more ugly spirit, and a more
deformed face? For if the whited tomb and painted sepulcher be so ill-favored
without, how filthy may we think is the iniquity and dead bones of rancor and
rottennes within? If the mind it self could be showed, and shine thorough any
matter transparent, Intuentes nos consunderet, it would confound us with shame
when we beheld it, and as she seeing her mis-shape and monstrous metamorphosis
in a well, started with affright, Sese exteritafugit, it would for fear run
away from her self. Whose foulness and disfigure if through bones and flesh
with other impediments it seem so great and monstrous, Quid si nudus
ostenderetur? what if she were bare of these figleaues that her nakedness
might appear? Surely she would be ashamed with Eve, and like the deformed
woman loath while she looks on her self in a glass. Thus wrathful anger
leaves man quite dead in sin while he lives a sinner: thus makes it the
lively image of God that anatomy of sin, Romans 3. taking the fear of God
from before his eyes, filling his mouth full of cursing and bitterness, using
his tongue to deceive, putting Aspes poison under his lips, making his feet
swift to shed blood: and when he is thus dead in trespasses and sins, she puts
his filthiness and dead bones in a whited toombe and painted sepulcher. Thus
all his members (as the Psalmist speaks) are out of joint, and from head to
the foot, nothing but wounds and swelling and sores full of corruption, thus
are all his members weapons of unrighteousness, to serve sin and revenge in
the lust thereof: as if man with his members were nothing but corpus peccati,
that dead body of sin, Romans 6. 6. sit for the grave and pit of destruction.
For as the corporal sickness is most dangerous, and declining to the first
death of the body, which makes the sickmans face most unlike it self, as
Dial. de ^racch. b.
Plutarch out of Hippocrates has observed: so the spiteful angry man, since he
changes his linely color of countenance into the palenesse of death, does
argue to others, and might to himself, that his soul is very heavy and sick
unto the second death, of whom I cannot say, The maid is not dead but
sleeps; but like the volup^uous widow (1. Tim. 5. 6.) divorced from her God
by the death of grace, she is dead in the spirit while she lives in the body,
and her (...) is but (...), her body but a sepulcher, wherein (as our Savior
speaks) the dead does bury her dead, Mat. 23. 27.

Wherefore if this swelling one against another condemned by Saint 1. Corint.
^. ^.
Paul, be so deformed in the conception of malice and travel of mischief, how
ugly (may we think) is revenge the monster it self at the birth, when they
bring forth ungodliness in the field? Nevertheless if beholding thus thy
natural face in a glass, thou blushest not at thy self, but going thy way
forgettest immediately what manner of one thou art: yet if thou would view
thy souls face in the glass of Gods word, and look into the perfect law of
liberty, James 1. 25. thou should find therein like that in the law, Exodus
38. as a glass to show thee her spots, so a lauer of living water to wash away
her filth. And certainly, if as Orat. 1. de reconcil. Monach.
Gregory Nazianzen often read Ieremies Lamentations to cool his heat of
pride in the sunshine of prosperity, thou would in thy heat of anger and
fire of wrath but read the lamentable end of those reuengers, Ammon, Moab,
Seir, Idumea and the Philistims, Ezekiel. 25. it would allay thy heat, if not set
on fire of hell, and abate, yea turn thy sharpest edge of revenge, if not
desperate to run headlong on the pikes of Gods displeasure.

We read of Saint Li. 8. cons. c. 12
Austine, that being prone in his youth (as he Lib. 2. cap. 2.
confesses) and ready to cool his lust with the act of uncleanness,
prevented by grace he was warned by a voice from heaven, saying, Take up and
read, take up the Bible and read: when being directed by the finger of God to
that sentence of Saint Paul, Not in chambering and wantonness, Romans 13. 13. he
so beheld in this glass the foul face of his soul, that it was a lauer also
of pure water to wash it of this uncleanness. And if when thou art ready to
satisfy thy lust in the heat of revenge, thou would but look her face in
the next sentence of S. Paul, Neither in strife and envying, if thou were not
past grace, it would make strife against thy strife; envy thy envious mind,
hate thine own hatred, and malign thine own malice. Or if thou requirest a
comment on that text, that Tract. 5. in epi. Ioann.
Father does advise thee to read the first Epistle of Saint John, wherein
charity and love is most commanded, and in no Epistle (as he speaks) more
commended. For though the whole Scripture be an Greg l. 4. ep 84
Epistle from God to man, to love the one above all, and the other as himself,
Tract. 8. in ca^d.
Math. 22. yet nulla hac Epistola ardentior est ad commendandam charitatem, no
Epistle is there more earnest and hotter for love (as he speaks) then this of
the beloved Disciple, who leaned so on the breast of Christ Jesus, that he
seemed to suck the ^eates of his love. In which perfect law of liberty, yet
must thou not look, as that fool in Saint James beheld his natural face in
the glass, to forget when thou art gone what manner of one thou wast: but as
the framers of the Jewish Cabala add this Selah to their reader at the end of
every sentence, Reputa apud te, consider what thou read; so must thou
therein at every period and precept of love remember that Selah of our Savior,
Let him that reads consider it, Matthew 24. 15.

But if thou be of that graceless spirit, that with Sozow^^ ^. c. 17
Julian the Apostate thou answerest (...), I have read, understood, and
disallow it: I must answer thee as Appollinarius did him, (...), thou have read
it indeed, but not understood it, for if thou had, thou would not have
disallowed to obey it; yet if thou dashest this glass against the wall for
showing thee thy spots and blemishes of the mind: if through pride of the flesh
and worldly reputation thou refuse this humility of the spirit, and as Numb.
2^. 27
Balaam the blind Seer beat the Ass, for seeing the Angel staying him from
going to curse, which himself did not see: so thy worldly wisdom checketh this
1. Corin^. 1. 1^
foolishnes of preaching, for showing thee this Angel which might stay thee
from revenge; yet must thou thus be 1. Corin^. 3. 1^
a fool that thou may be wise, seeing this foolishness of God condemns
those wages of unrighteousness in worldly wisdom, as the Ass speaking with
man's voice forbad the foolishness of the Prophet, 2. Pet. 2. 16. Vincamur quo
vincamus, let us here be conquered (says a Nazian. ora^. 3. de pa^e.
Father) that we may overcome; seeing hic vinci quam vincere est praestantius,
in this cause to loose, is to win the victory, as Homil. ^5. i^ Math. 1^,
Chrysostom auerreth. Go not forth to fight, and thou have won the field:
strive not, and thou art crowned: make thine adversary admire thine invincible
patience, that he may report himself without fight to be overcome of thy
long-sufferance and longanimitie. And this is indeed the life of love, and
soul of Christan charity, To love of whom it is hated to honor of whom it is
contemned, to bless of who^ it is cursed, and to do good unto him of whom it
is persecuted and wronged, says Lib. de (...). 1. ca. 16.
Austin, if he be not the putatine father of that book. For these are the true
proprieties of love, says Saint Paul, it is patient, it is courteous, it
seeks not her own, it enuieth not, and it is not provoked to anger, 1. Cor.
13. And if it be patient says ^^b. 5. super Luc. 6.
Ambrose, debet patientiam verberanti, it must turn the other cheek to him
that smites, Mat. 5. If it be courteous, it must not render rebuke for rebuke,
1. Pet. 3. 9. If it seek not her own, it must not forbid to take the coat
also, Luke 6. If it envy not, it must not hate her enemy, Leuit. 19. If it be
not provoked to anger, it must not be angry without a cause, Mat. 5. 22. and
if it endure all things, it should not resist injury, Verse. 39. Which saying
if it seem so hard to flesh and blood, that she cannot hear it, the Apostle
sweeteneth her bitter potion with five comforts and counterpoisons, 1. Pe. 2.
For first this is thank-worthy and acceptable to God, if a man endure grief,
and wrong suffering wrongfully. And if this hope of reward cannot induce us let
us secondly consider, that it is exacted as a duty, for hereunto are ye called
to be Romans 8. 29.
like the image of his Son, and comformable to your head. For what
disproportion should this be, that in the heads passion, the members should have
no compassion? What analogy that the head should be crowned with thorns, Mat.
27. and the members be crowned with rose-buds? Wisdom. 2. 8. What reason, the
head Ioh 11. 33. 35.
should have that doleful sympathy, to Romans 12. 15.
weep with them that weep, and the members that Stoicall apathie, to feel no
grief and sorrow: or rather that antipathie mentioned of some by Homil. 53. ad
pop. An^^och.
Chrysostom: To rejoice with him that wept, and wept not with his eyes alone,
but with all his members tears of blood, and drops of sweat? as Sermon. 61. in
Cant.
Bernard speaks. And if his most pathetical crosses cannot crucify us with
Christ which are Christians, yet seeing thirdly, he suffered for us, what
reason but like Paul we suffer for Christ, who has left us an ensample to
follow his steps to mount Caluarie? And this so much more willingly should we
^. Pet. 3. 13.
suffer with Christ, because when he did no sin, neither was there found any
guile in his mouth, with the good Luk 23 41.
thief we may truly confess, that we are indeed righteously here on the
cross of wrong-suffering, and receive things worthy of that we have done, but
this man has done nothing amiss. And if thou do hope for revenge, thou
must commit with David thy cause unto God the Judge of right, as Christ
committed it to him that judges righteously: who seeing he is the auenger, the
auenger of Israel, Psalm. 94. 1. he will in due time show himself clearly,
though the wicked, the wicked do long triumph, though they speak
disdainefully, and make such proud boasting, though they smite down his people
and trouble his heritage, though they murder the widow and put the fatherless
to death, and say, Tush, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of
Iaakob regard it: though they gather them together against the soul of the
righteous, and condemn the innocent blood, yet at the last judgment shall
return to justice, to render tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
which are troubled, rest, 2. These. 1. And when the Judge of the world shall
exalt himself to render the proud after their deserving, then will he
recompense these men their wickedness, and destroy them in their own malice:
yea the Lord our God shall destroy them. Till which time of judgment, we must
put up our sword of revenge into his sheath (as I said) of patience, and of
long-suffering, and commit our revenge to whom we committed our reward, our
hope, and our haven of rest: whereto till then like his disciples on the lake,
must we sail with a contrary weather of doing good for evil, Mat. 5. 44. So
sailed the master and Pilot of his ship against the raging and tossing waves
of Iudaea: for when they went about his death and temporal destruction, he
went about their life and eternal salvation: when they crowned him with
thorns, he strove to crown them with glory: when they gave him vinegar to
drink on a stalk of Hyssope, he gave them his blood to drink, to purge them
with Hyssope as David speaks, and make them whiter then snow, Psalm. 51. Thus
sailed the Apostles and mariners themselves: we are persecuted and buffeted,
and we suffer it, 1. Cor. 4. and thus all passengers bound for heaven the haven
of their hope, and harbor of their rest, like Paul's mariners, Act. 27. must
keep a straight course, though wind and weather be contrary, do good to them
that hurt you, Luke 6. 27. Wrest not then this sword of reuengeance out of his
hand to whom vengeance belongs, lest thou grieve and make sad the spirit of
God, Ephesians. 4. 30. Even bloudthirstie Esau would not be avenged on Iaakob so
long as his father was alive, lest it should grieve old Isaac, and bring his
gray head with sorrow to the grave, Genesis 27. 41. And must less must thou
avenge thee to grieve the holy spirit of God who has begotten thee, lest thou
bring not the Dan. 7. 22.
ancient of days to his grave, who is the Ios. 3. 10.
living God, and Deuteronomy. 32. 40.
lives for ever, but thy self to Sheol, the grave of hell, and pit of
destruction.

Thou say, thou would beat and kill such a foe, if it were not for his
master whose cloth he wears; and whose cognizance he bears. And how dare
thou murder or beat his servant whether blessed or cursed, whether of the
Mat. 25. 34. 41
right hand or left, whether like the Mat. 8. 9.
Centurions servants of going or coming, go ye cursed, or come ye blessed,
(for these Ier. 25. 9.
also are his attendants to serve him) which bear his badge, yea the very
image of himself? How dare thou clippe the Lords coin, and deface that image
and superscription, which his own finger has stamped on them, whether pure or
reprobate silver, whether current gold or counterfeit slippes, seeing he has
such compassion on them, that he will avenge the blood of all his servants,
Deuteronomy. 32. 36. and 34. Neither must thou think it more lawful to beat or
misuse minimum sanctorum, as the Ephesians. 3. 18.
Apostle speaks, the least in his kingdom, Mat. 11. 11. though he were
black as the spouse speaks, even the scull in his kitchen, and of-scouring
of all things: for whatsoever is done to the least of his, he counts it done to
himself, Mat. 25. yea the but touching of them, is the touching of him, yea of
his dearest part, his eye, and of that the most precious piece, the very apple
of his eye, Zac. 2. 8. Nay, if thou knew him to be a vessel of earth and
dross to dishonor, and not of gold and silver to the honor of his maker, yet
how dare thou dash him in pieces like a potters vessel, seeing he bears
the image of him that created him: I say, the image of God that created him?
For though when first he coined man of the earth, and stamped upon him his own
image, of I^^ in G^^. 1. 26.
essence to be a nature eternal and spiritual in soul: and of the qualities
of Ephesians. 4. 24.
holiness and righteousness, whereby he is partaker of the divine nature, 2.
Pet. 1. and of his attributes of power to be his Viceroy in this inferior
world, Genesis 2. 26. Psalm. 8. 6. Though I say, when he first stamped this
threefold image on man, Genesis 5. 1. man by his fall Ephesians 4. 2^, Col. 3. ^0.
defaced that of holiness and righteousness, and imprinted his own image of
another stamp, which was unrighteousness and impuritie in his posterity,
Verse. 3. yet in respect of the two other parts of this print, spiritual
eternity of soul, and powerful sovereignty in body over creatures, every
man without exception carries the image of God, 1. Cor. 11. 7. and though he be
but brass and (as I said) reprobate silver: Quilibet effigiem Caesaris assis
habet, Every ass and idiot has the image and superscription of this heavenly
Caesar and Emperor of the world. Which seeing by manslaughter and murder, by
wrath and revenge, thou wholly do deface, as his essence to thy power of
eternal being, in killing his body, though thou can^t not kill his soul: as
it is of those divine qualities, by blasting his fruit in the blade, and
cutting off his growth and ripening in holiness and righteousness to the
image of him that created him, Col. 3. 10. And thirdly his sovereignty and
Lordship that his kingdom over creatures by thy means is now departed from
him. This should so bridle thine hand from breaking down this image, as it kept
1. Sam. 24. 7.
David from laying hands on Saul, because he was the Lords anointed. We
reverence and dare not deface the kings picture in which his resemblings, and
disposition, and majesty is but partly deciphered, and how then may we
adventure to destroyman, who as Iam. 3 ^.
James speaks is made after the similitude of God in essence, and qualtie, and
power of his creator? And this if thou do, what may we think, but that as
Satan showed his hatred to God, when he destroyed Christ the Col. 1. 15.
image of the invisible God, and Heb. 1. 3.
the engraven form of his person: so thou hate him that did beget, when thus
thou defacest him that is begotten, 1. Ioh. 5. What can be imagined, if
charity were thy Judge, but as the Pardale shows her malice to man, when in
* Basil sermon. de ira and (...).
wrath she teareth that paper wherein she sees his picture: so thou bewrayest
thy hatred to God, when thou destroyest man wherein thou beholdest his image,
1. Ioh. 4. Wherefore as he said of the body of wicked Iezabell, Let us use her
honorably, for she is a kings daughter by procreation, 2. King. 9. so must
thou not dishonorably misuse man how wicked soever, since he is the King of
kings his son by creation, Esa. 64. but as the Apostle spoke of the Jews
though apostates, he is to be beloved for the fathers sake, Romans 11. 28.

Howbeit, if neither the view of thy face in a glass can make thy wrath blush
as a man, nor thy look in the perfect law of liberty, as in a 2. Cor. 3. 28.
myrror can change thee into the same image, from malice to mildness, from
enmity to amity, from fury to friendship, from glory of nature to glory of
grace, as by the spirit of the Lord: but with bloody Genesis 4. 23.
Lamech still in thy rage thou do outrage, I would slay a man in my wound,
and a young man in mine hurt. If Cain be avenged seven fold, surely Lamech
seventy times seuen-fold: yet when thus thou hear thy selfout of tune, out
of concord and harmony of love, I wish before thou go forth to revenge, with
Clinias the AElian. lib. 14 var hist. cap. 23.
Pythagorean, or with Achilles in the Iliad, thou woldst pulsare citharam, like
Psalm. 81. 2.
the Psalmist call for the merry harp with the lute, that the concord of it
may drown that discord with thy brother, and the harmony of its strings tune
the affections of thy mind and heart strings which now jar with thy neighbor.
For as 1. Sam. 16. 23.
David by playing upon his harp drove the evil spirit of frenzy from Saul
that was upon him: so an instrument of music, or if thou can not play,
singing of a Psalm of David, will expel the evil spirit of fury that rages
in thy mind: (...), or a Psalm of David says S. Homil. in Psa. 2. in Prefat.
Basil is mirth of the mind, tranquillity of the soul, a white wand or the
ambassador of peace a ruler of the affections, a procurer of charity, and
reconciler of love, a composer of strifes, and bridler of rage: neither is
there any so troubled in mind, and disturbed in thought, which if he take the
Psalms, may not straight be appeased. For hereby all perturbations and
impetuous affections of the mind, which overrule men many ways in this life,
are quite rooted out. And herein (...), as in a common Apothecaries shop may
the furious man find ointment of love more sweet and precious then the ointment
of Aaron; which the dead flies of malice, hatred, and envy cannot cause to
stink, nor putrify the ointment of this Apothecarie: so plentiful is this
shop of love, and box of Spikenard, that as it is the storehouse of the
law, so it is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. And
when thou art wrathful and raging toward thy enemy, Opuscu. in Ps^^.
Athanasius advises to read often the seventy first Psalm as a medicine for
thy disease.

Now if nothing I have said can mitigate thy rage, but to the field thou will
go, and like that brauing chalenger of Gath thou desire a combat and defiest
thy foe, why boastest thou in thy wickedness, O man of power? What will thou
do, O mighty man (says Comen. in ps. 51
Austine) what will thou do? thou keep a great bragging; thou will, yea that
thou will, kill a man: Hoc and Scorpius, hoc and vna febris, hoc and fung us
malus potest: Alas poor brags, a Scorpion can do this, this one fever, or the
snuff of a candle could effect. One Plin not. hist. lt. 7. a. 7. Va^ Ma. lib
9. cap. 12.
kernel of a grape could choke Anacreon: the Fulg l 9. c. 12.
yolke of an egg could stifle Saufeius: a G^^do.
fish-bone Tarquinius Priscus, a Fulg ibid.
pear Drusus Pompeius, an Punabid.
hair in his milk Fabius the Senator, a Plin. lib. 17. and Florus lib 3 c. 23.
smoke Catulus the Orator, the Palla. and Su^^.
hot sun Chrysostom, and a Polid (...). hist. Angl.
crumme of bread Goodwin Earl of Kent. Huccine redacta est omnis potentia tua
vt vno malo fungo coequetur? Is all thy bragging power come to this (says
Austin) that its but equal with the smell of a snuff, with the sting of a
Scorpion, with the fit of a fever, with the stone of a grape, with the yolk of
an egg, with the bone of a fish, with a piece of a pear, with an hair of the
head, with the smoke of a fire, with the heat of the Sun, and with a crumme
of bread?

Hear therefore thou man of blood, who like those bloodthirstie votaries in
the Acts, swearest thou will neither eat nor drink till thou have killed,
till thou have eaten up thy brother as it were bread, and quenched thy thirst
with his blood. Harken O man of revenge, who proclaimest with that voice of
vengeance, I will do to him as he has done to me, I will recompense every man
according to his works: and wresting that legem talionis, Exodus 21. 24.
threatnest before heaven and earth that thou will have life for life, eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning,
wound for wound, and stripe for stripe, though it was but given by a fool:
like Plut. dial. deir^ cohib.
Ctesipho the wrastler, who would not put up a blow at the heels of an ass,
but like an ass kicked her again with his heels. Know thou assuredly, that as
Lamech slew a man in his wound, or as the Hebrew reads it, (...) to the
wounding of himself, that is, the wounding of his own conscience (says
Ferus) and hurt of his soul, Genesis 4. 23: so thou art a manslayer both of him
and thy self, seeing after it thou abidest in death, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. Thus
reuengefull wrath dat poenas dum exigit, with her own staff is she beaten
(says Li 3 de Ira. c. 5
Seneca) while she beats. Cap. 3.
Ea deprimens quae mergi nisi cum mergente non possunt, striving like a
millstone about his neck to drown him which cannot be drowned without the
drowner also. For as we read in Aristophanes of the earthen pot, which by
dashing against another pot, burst it self in pieces: so we Idem cap. 42.
forgetful of our weakness, ad frangendum fragiles consurgimus, while we dash
our brittle bodies one against another, both these Jeremy. 18. 6.
earthen pots are shiuered to scraps: and therefore woe to the pot sheard that
strives with the pot sheards of the earth, Esai 45. 9. Thus as strongest
poison first breaks the vessel which holds it before it hurt another: so
anger (says Eliphas) doubtless anger kills the foolish, and envy slays
the idiot, Job 5. 2.

And therefore David (says a I^. Hu^ in hunc locum.
writer) compares his enemies to bees, Psalm. 118. which as Lib. 9 de hist.
animal cap 40.
Aristotle and ^^ 11. not. hist. ca. 18.
Pliny both observe) by stinging others exentorate, and therewith shed forth
their own bowels, Animasque in vulnere ponunt, and loose their lives by there
stinging. And it is as true in revenge, she sails with her own wings, and
dasheth on that rock, whereon she makes shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience. The revenger like the be, he has a reaction or repassio^ rather,
and receineth the wrong that he has done, Col. 3. 25. and while he seeks
vengeance on man, finds vengeance of God, Eccles. 28. 1. While he shoots his
sting of revenge, he does euiscerate himself of those bowels of mercy,
kindness, humility, meekness, longsuffering and forbearance, Colos. 3. 12.
Animamque in vulnere ponit, and loses his soul in the wound of his foe.
Alium laedit extrinsecus and se vastat intrinsecus, says Ser. 16 de ver. D^^.
Austine, like the bees outward stinging he only kills the body of his foe,
but like her inward bowelling kills the soul of himself, and casts both body
and soul into hell fire. And therefore would Homil (...) pop^ Antiocis.
Chrysostom have us be warned by the Be, and by her example be weaned from
revenge: Do thou not see the Be (says that Father) how she dies by her
stinging? By that living creature does God teach us that we wound not our
brethren, for we do it through our own sides, and perchance like the Be we
hurt them but little, but we our selves shall be no more, no more then that
creature.

Hear this also thou bloody stabber, who beyond the law of retaliation
exactest not only a tooth for a tooth, and an eye for an eye, Deuteronomy. 19. but
like Ioab repayest a stabbe for a lie, a wound for a word: with Lamech for a
small hurt wilt slay a man, and not only mete to them as they measured to
thee, but an Epha of wrongs for an Hin of injuries, and (as Orat 9. de ira and
mimie.
Basil out of the Luke 6 38.
Gospel speaks) from thy seperfluitie of maliciousness give mensuram
superfluentem, a measure running over into their bosom. I wish thou would
learn of Christ our Savior, who as a lamb before his both shearer and
slayer, was so dumb that he opened not his mouth to revile when he was
reviled, nor so much as threatened when he felt the stab of their spear, 1.
Pet. 2. But if thou will not learn clemency of the Lamb of God, yet learn
it for shame of cruelty it self, of the Lion of the field, who (as Aelian
noteth') is so just in his cruelty, that he keeps an equal mean and measure
of revenging his enemy: for though he see a man shoot at him and deadly
pursue him, yet (as Li. 9. de hist. animal. cap. 44.
Aristotle and Lib. 8. not. hist. ca. 16.
Pliny both observe) if the archer do not wound him, he neither wounds him if
he catch him in his paws, but shakes him only without hurt, and throwing him
down when he has thus affrayed him, lets him go free. And if thou will not be
more cruel then cruelty it self, and from thy British clemency degenerate
into more then brutish cruelty, at least be as gentle as the roaring Lion, who
seems here to exhort thee with that voice of the lamb, Math. 11. 29. Take my
yoke on thee, and learn of me that am lowly and meek to my foe. For there is
none (says Lib. 5. din. Inst. cal^^.
Lactantius) who had not rather die then be transformed into any shape and
feature of a beast, though he might retain the mind of a man: and how much
more is it wretched to have the mind of a beast in the form of a man, since the
soul so much excels the body? But alas, Aspernantur corpora beluarum quibus
sunt ipsi saeuiores, they disdainfully abhor the bodily shape of wild
beasts, who are themselves more savage and cruel then they: and so much
please themselves in that they are men, of whom they carry nothing but the
outware lineamennts and figure.

Wherefore to conclude this point, which thou regardest not a point, if nothing
that is said can end thy contention and revenge, yet as the wise man advises
thee, Remember thine end and thou will let enmity pass, Eccles. 28. 6. For
like as when the bees fall out and fight among themselves, Dimicatio iniectu
pulueris tota discutitur, the throwing of a little dust upon them (says Li. 11.
not. hist. ca. 17.
Pliny) ends all their deadly strife: so cogitatio mortalitatis, the thought
of death (says Lib. 3. de Ira ^ap. 42.
Seneca) the remembrance of this general mortality by plague and pestilence,
say I, which thus long has toled for her last gasp, and might now (me thinks)
ring out at last the death of all malice, might bury all wrongs in the grave of
oblivion never to rise again. And indeed, Se de hoc mundo quotidie migraturum
credere (as Abbas. Joseph. de amicit. collas. 13. cap. 6.
one speaks) to think this day of his strife may be the last of his life, is
a common peremptory and killer of all iarres, and omnium comprimet motus, and
will still the most turbulent sticklers. And howsoever the remembrance of dust
and death cannot bridle the mighty bulls of Basan, who set up their horn on
high, and speak with a st^ffe-necke; but like those bulls in De solart Animal.
Plutarch, Ad pugnam sepuluere conspergunt vt magis irritati ferociant,
sprinkle this dust of mortality on their faces to whet their courage to the
combat. And as the Lion beats himself with his tail to set an edge on his
wrath; so they remember their end to hasten their swift revenge, like that
Judge. 16. 30.
Lion of might, who conquered the roaring Lion. Let me loose my life with the
Philistines, yet iam par acerrimum media mors dirimet (says Seneca) even now
will death step between these two hot spurs and part the fray. And though
no remembrance of death could extinguish the memory of injuries between them,
yet iniectu pulueris, cast but a little dust of the grave upon their heads, and
then are they as quisht as a Be, and now their hatred and their envy is
perished, says Solomon, Eccles. 9. 6. But let us (beloved Christian) who have
better learned Christ, let us leave off wrath and let go displeasure, before
they leave and let go us at our death. Let us die to our malice, least it die
to us, and leave as our bodies with the metewand in the grave, so our souls
with the rod of Gods wrath in the lowest p^t. Let us bury it in our life, that
at our death we may go to our grave in peace, and in peace with all men. Let
our love awake that sleeps, and stand up from the dead, that is interred. And
seeing a friend must (...), as the Arist. lib. 2. Rh^roric.
natural man tells Gentiles, and friendship work through, as the Galat. 5.
spiritual man teaches Christians. Let our friendship show it self, Arist.
li. 8. E^h. c. 2.
(...), a benevolence not latent and lurking, but patent and working in the
deeds of reconcilement, and be reconciled not in word and tongue only, but in
work and in deed.

Yet here (beloved) must we not stay in these Sancta and holy 3. reconcilemet
intentiona^,
places of unity, where is but the candlestick of concord, and shewbread of
friendship: for there is a Judas that can not only kiss with his mouth, but
embrace too with his arms and works of love when his heart is far from us.
And therefore thirdly this agreement must enter into the heart the holiest of
all, where is the hidden Manna and hidden man too, the arc of this testimony,
and the mercie-seate of reconcilement. For as she said to Sampson, How can
thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? Judge. 16. so how can
thou truly affect and be friends with thy brother, who staying him in the
atrium and sanctuary of thy love, shuttest up thy heart from him, and scant
once a year admittest him into this holiest of all? The Lord by his Apostle
commands thee this last, but not least degree of agreement, 1. John 3. 18. Let
us love not in word, and like treacherous Ioab by works deny it; neither in
tongue only with traitorous Judas to give good words with our mouth, and curse
with our hearts: but as in deed against the former, so in truth, that is,
sincerely from the heart against the latter, says Lyra on these words: which
is love indeed out of a pure heart, 1. Tim. 1. 5. Christian without
dissimulation, says Romans 12. 9.
Paul: brotherly without faining, from a pure heart fervently, says 1. Peter
1. 22.
Peter. For though men, not only speak with the tongue of men and Angels to
their brethren, but even give all their goods to their enemies, yet (as Tract.
6. ^n ^pi. Joan
Austine out of Saint 1. Corinthians. 13.
Paul collecteth truly) if they have not this fervent love out of a pure heart,
it profits them nothing, because though it be in deed, yet not (...), in
truth: not before God, who sees their hearts, and knows their root to be
rottenness; but before men, who judging the tree by her fruit, are eft soones
deceived with August. lib 21 de (...) De^, ca. 5
apples of Sodom, that seem ripe to be taken, but being rotten within, turn
to ashes and smote when they are touched. Whereas then many exhibit their
beneficence when their benevolence is inhibited; some like the Matthew 6. 1.
Pharisees to be seen of men, and some like those Luke 14. 12.
feasters to receive the like again: both these have opus non veritatem, says
a Ferus in 1. Ioa^. 3. 18.
writer, they love indeed before men, who look on the outside, but not before
God, who beholds the inside of the platter, whereas their left hand of
worldly respect should not have a finger in their gives of love, nor so much as
know (says S. Austine) what their right hand of pure conscience and
sincerity; does but as fervently to love in God their friend, so heartily for
God their foe, whose image and superscription he bears. Which love of God
above all, seeing it begets the love of our neighbor as our self, Mat. 22.
like Ruth 1. 16
Naomi and Ruth they will not be parted, but the daughter professes to her
mother as Ruth did to Naomi, Whither thou go I will go, and where thou
dwell I will dwell, thy people shall be my people, and where thou die I
will die. And therefore as those pair of Turtle-doues or two young Pigeons, were
jointly a legal oblation for Christ, Luke 2. so must these two both together
be an Euangelical sacrifice of Christians, 1. John 4. 21. And if the one Dove
come alone without her mate, she shall not be received into the ark of Gods
rest, nether will he put forth his hand to receive her, unless she bring an
Olive branch of peace in her mouth, and of peace with all men, Heb. 12. 14.
Which two wings of charity (to use the words of Saint (...) 10. hom 27
Austine) seeing as ^^ Psalm 10 4.
elsewhere he notes, they are the two wings of the soul, which were given to
that Eagle the Church of God, that she might fly from the Serpent into her
place, Apoc. 12. we should wish them the more, and pray with David, that we had
the wings of a Dove, that we might fly away to the hill from whence comes
our help, and be at rest: because though these two be commanded loves, and so
a burden, yet are they not 1. John 5.
grievous, but as wings they are light, Mat. 11. says the Dove that was
covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. Onus est sed love, a
burden they are, but a light one, says S^r. 24. de (...) Apost.
Austine, and though commandments of God, yet not grievous to the godly: Non
pondus ouerati, sed alae volaturi, not burdens such as beasts do carry, but
such as wings are to birds: Portant illa^ in terra, and portantur ab illis in
c^lum, if these wings we carry here on earth, they will carry us up into
heaven.

One terms them Pedes animae, the two feet of the soul, whereby she runs
the race that is set before her, and walks in love; on either whereof if she
halt like lame 2. Sam. 4.
Mephibosheth, she shall fall in the way, or rather for her halting be turned
out of the way. And therefore confessed Paul himself, that though he had the
right foot of his soul, to love God so dearly as to give his body to be
burned, and wanted yet the left foot of love to his neighbor, it would profit
him nothing, 1. Corinthians. 13. Teaching us thereby to make straight st^ppes, not
with one foot alone, but with both our feet, in following, as holiness
toward God, so peace with all men, least that which is halting be turned out of
the way, Hebr. 12, 13. 14. Like the two blessed John 20. 4.
Apostles Peter and John, they must run to Christ both together, though the
love of God like the beloved Disciple must run before. For as the Apostle
has Ephesians. 6. 15.
shod both our feet with the preparation of peace to run the way of his
commandments: so this is the way through which thou must run unto life, That
he which loves God should love his brother also, 1. Ioh. 4. 21. and that by
good propottion, seeing we must not halt in the way, but make strait steps
with our feet, nor hoppe, but walk in love, Ephesians. 5. 2. and so walk, that
not only with David we run viam, the common and Kings high way of his m Psalm
10. 11 ^^.
commandments and James 2.
royal law, to bless, benefit, and be beneuolent to our enemies, Math. 5.
44. but walk also like him in Psalm 119. 35*
semitis, in the paths thereof, which are the nearest and against way to heaven
(not as more wittily then wisely S^ell^ ^narra^. in L^c. 3. 4.
some distinguish his Evangelical precepts and counsels, for even these Ferus
in Math 3. 3
semita are mandata, Psalm 119. 35.) that not only we love from our heart,
but so fervently without faining, that as Exodus ^2. 32.
Moses willed it for the Hebrews, Romans 9. 3.
Paul wished it for the Israelites, Ios. 2 2.
Rahab ventured it for the spies, Judges 10.
Judith endangered it for Israel, 1. Kings 18. 4.
Obadiah hazarded it for the Prophets, Esther 4. 16
Ester for the Jews, 1. Sam. 19. and cap. 20. 33
Jonathan for David, 1 Samuel 17.
David for his country, John 13. 37
Peter promised it for Christ, and Christ performed it, to lay down his life
for his enemies, Romans 5. 6. so we also should walk in this path of love; that
as hereby we perceived his love, in that he laid down his life for us,
therefore ought we to lay down our life for the brethren, 1. John 3. 16. then
which as no man has greater love of heart then when he is willing to bestow
his life for his friend, John 15. 13. so if like Christ, who laid it down
voluntarily of himself without any taking it from him, John 10. 18. for he
died Bern. ser. 3 de pacificat. Mar^a
Non quia meruit, nec quia Iudeus praualuit, sed quia ipse voluit, not because
he deserved, for he laid it down for his sheep, verse 15. nor because the
Jew prevailed, for none could take it from him, verse 18. but because he was
willing, for he laid it down of himself: Nec modo voluit and oblatus est,
quia voluit oblatus est, neither was he willing because to be offered, but was
offered because he was willing, as Ser in Feria ^eb^ p^^os. de p^ss. D^m.
Bernard elsewhere speaks. If we could (I say) like Christ thus walk in love
of our hearts, we should be perfect as he is perfect, since as Paul epitomizeth
religion into faith and repentance, Hebr. 6. 1. and Solomon repentance into
fear God and keep his commandments, Eccles. 12. 13. so our Savior his ten
commandments into two of love, Mark 12. 31. and the Apostle Aui^. and Pet.
Mart. in Romans 1^
those two of love into this one of loving our neighbor, Romans 13. 9. to show
that this hearty love of our foe is the castle-gate of religion, the stairs
of repentance, the tower and turret of faith, the watch of the fear of God,
and the keep of his commandments: all which are wholly kept and fulfilled in
one word, which is this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5. 14.

Wherefore if offending in many things thou can not fulfill the royal law it
is so large, vis compendium seruandarum omnium legum? will thou have (says a
Ar^t in Romans 13 8.
Writer) a short cut to keep all? Monstrabo tibi Epitomen, I will show thee a
compendious way: Love thy neighbor, and thou shall fulfill the royal law,
Iam. 2. 8. and praise God (says Austine) with an instrument of ten strings:
for as James said of him who fails in one point that he is guilty of all, so
contrariwise may I say, that he who fulfils this one point, in some sort is
guiltless of all. And thus are we known to love God when we love our brother,
and cannot before him assure our hearts, till our hearts be sure to the other.
For as D^roth de^^. 6. ne iudicemus proximum.
lines in a circle drawn to the circumference from the center, the nearer they
come the center whence they first proceeded, the nearer needs must they come
one to another, and the further off they go from it, the more are they distant
one from another: so our lives in this great round, as they have their first
being from that indivisible center of whom and to whom are all things, Romans 11.
36 so the nearer they come him in love, the nearer must they needs in
affection come one another. And as every one that loves his brother, loves
God also, and is borne of him: so he that hates his brother, hates God, and
if he say he loves him he is but a liar, 1. Ioh. 4.

Howbeit if through natural deprauation and humane infirmity, surripit ira
Christiano, anger (as Aug. Pr^fat, in Psalm. 25.
one speaks) steals on thy heart, and like that foul of the heaven
catches away the seed of love out of thy heart, (for Idem hom. 40.
humanum est irasci, and vtinam ne hoc possemus) yet must it not be kept so
long in thy breast, vt fiat pridiana, that it live past a day, lest the mote of
anger being fed in the night with the dew of suspicion, become a beam in the
morning, to put out the eye of reason. For seeing ( H^rat. Epist.
as an heathen well resembles it) Anger is like an headstrong horse, which
must not have the reins, lest he throw headlo^g his rider: we had need curb
this heart-strong passion and perturbation of the mind, lest it carry us
headlong into mischief: and as we put bits in horses mouths, that they should
obey us, whereby we rule them in the right way, so hunc fraenis hunc tu
compesce ca^ena, its mouth also like horse and mule without understanding must
be holden with bit and bridle lest it fall upon thee. Which natural edge and
sharp affection, seeing it is whetted and sharpened by Satan on the stony
heart of man, to wound the name or the person of his foe: therefore our Arist.
lib 4. Ethic. cap. 5.
master of morality shows: Why, against whom, how, when, and how far it
may be drawn and unsheathed. Why: in the offense of God, and defense of
goodness: as Exodus 32. 19
Moses waxed hot against Israel for their idolatry, against Number. 16 15.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram for their conspiracy. 1. Sam. 19. 14
Elias against Israel for their Apostasy, Ier. 6. 11.
Jeremy against the Jews for their impiety, and Christ looked angerly on
their children for their obstinacy, Mark. 3. 5. Secondly, if thou would know
against whom, though thou carry this sword of anger in the sheath of thine
heart, yet like the minister of justice ( Romans 13.) must thou draw it against
not the good and them that do well, but the bad and them that do evil. And
thus did holy David: Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee, and am not I
grieved with those that rise up against thee? yea I hate them right sore, as
though they were mine enemies, Psalm. 139. 21. I saw the transgressors, and was
grieved because they kept not thy law, Psalm. 119. 158. I will set no wicked
thing before mine eyes, I hate the works of unfaithfulness, there shall no
such dwell with me, Psalm. 101. And thus may we be angry against sinners, no
not so much the man as his manners, as hereafter shall be showed. Thirdly, how
it must be spent, not in fume, like the foaming sea, that cannot rest till it
cast up mire and dirt: for this anger is furor breuis, a short madness, as he
H^rat.
speaks, and only they differ (said wise Plut. Ap^th.
Cato) in continuance of time. For whereas there be two kinds of madness, one
of the head which makes men run out of their wit, and another of the heart,
which puts them out of their right mind: these angry men having neither the wit
to govern, nor the mind to be governed in this passion, are the maddest of all
other: seeing (as Lib. 1. de ira cap. 1.
Seneca notes in them) they have the same signs and tokens that mad men have,
and this mist of anger so darkeneth their eye of reason, that it cannot
discern things that differ, but as objects though little in themselves,
thorough a thick cloud seem bigger then they are indeed: so whatsoever moate
the eye of anger through cloudie brows beholds in a brother, seems no less
then a beam. For as Lib. 11. not ^^. cap. 37.
Pliny notes, Oculos in comitiali morbo apertos nihil cernere animo caligante,
that the eyes in the falling sickness though open see nothing, when the mind is
darkened and dimsighted: so in comitiali morbo irae, as one Plut* deir^ cohib.
terms it, in the falling sickness of anger wherein they fall on others, men
have like those Jews eyes and see not the right, as ears and hear not the
truth, but their minds being blinded that they see not Satan ever boweth down
their back for a load of sin, and anger the daughter of injury, as
Sabellicus speaks, becomes in them the mother of revenge. And as anger in her
madness is blind to augment all faults, and make a moate a beam, and a
molehill a mountain: so is she (...) as 2. Pet. 2. 9.
the Apostle speaks, and cannot see far off, but diminishing the person of
men, makes a Cedar of Lebanon but a bramble of the bush: and like the purblind
man in the Ma^^. 8.
Gospel, sees men but like trees, which with the Io^. 1^. ^.
good husbandman, when she should but loppe with the pruning-knife of
correction, she heweth down with the axe of her own judgment and revenge.
And therefore (because he will never observe the mean, nor keep a right
measure in punishing, who in his anger comes for to punish, (as Lib. 1. O^^^^.
Tully said most truly) the Romans wisely tied a bundell of rods to those axes
that were carried before the Consuls, vt ijs soluendis inijceretur aliqua mora
irae antequam ad puniendum accederent, that in loosing of them some delay of
time may allay their anger before they came to punish: as neither Socrates, nor
Plato, nor Architas (whom I mentioned in the beginning) durst punish even their
servants in their anger, lest under correcting their manners, they should
revenge them on the men, and turn judgment into wormwood, as Cap. 5 7.
Amos speaks, and Apo. 6 12.
justice into gall. Wherefore seeing optimum est temperare iram non tollere, as
Seneca Lib. 1. de ira, cap. 7.
notes, to temper anger and not take it away, be angry but sin not, says
Paul, Ephesians. 4. 26. Be angry at his manners, but sin not by anger against the
man. Or if ye chance to exceed this golden mean, Irascimini? are ye angry?
(as some Bez annot. mat^r. in hun^ lxum.
interogatiuely understand it) sin not, that is, so moderate your affection,
that it be appeased before it burst forth, as our English note on that place
expounds it. If turbulent motions arise in the mind through the corruption of
nature, yet let not reason consent and obey them in the lusts thereof, that
although in our flesh we serve the law of sin, yet in our spirit we serve
the law of regenerate part, as In Psalm. 4. 4.
Austine most excellently expounds it. His meaning is, this serpent like Goliath
must be smote dead in the forefront and crushed in the head, lest if he get in
the head as he did into Eve, he bring in the whole body, and when sin is
finished, from this tail of the serpent leave 1. Cor. 15. 55
that sting of death in our souls. We must crush this Cockatrice in his egg,
we must take this little fox before he do hurt, lest growing up to be great,
like Sampsons fox he set all on fire, and like Herod the fox fall to be
bloudthirstie and ravenous. We must purge out this little leaven, lest it sour
the whole lump: we must give this water of bitterness no passage, no not a
little, lest like that in Ezechiel, it grow from the ankles to the knees, and
from the knees to the thighs, and prove a river that cannot be passed without
drowning: we must dash this youngling of Babell against the stones, lest after
growth it cry, down with him, down with him even to the ground: for this
little fire will kindle a great matter: this least grain and mustard seed of
anger will grow up to a great tree of hatred, under whose branches of envy and
malice the fowls of the heaven, and princes of the air will build their
nests. And therefore this root of bitterness must not be let grow up, lest many
therewith be defiled: this little cloud of anger if it be not dissolved by his
heat, will cover all the sky, hide the sun of righteousness, and cause
much rain and no little storm: this cord of vanity will pull on a cart-rope
of iniquity: and therefore for the manner how ye may be angry, be angry but
sin not in your anger.

For whose season and opportunity of time, when it must be drawn, as there is
a time to hate, as a time to love, and a time of peace, as a time of war,
Eccles. 3. 8. so must anger not rashly out of time, nor unadvisedly out of
season be misspent, Mat. 5. 22 Saul's flatterers mistook their time: They are
mine enemies unjustly, says David, and hate me without a cause, Psalm. 39. 19.
They gather themselves not for mine offense, not for my sin, but without my
fault O Lord, Psalm. 59. 3. They hate me without a cause, and would destroy me
guiltless, Psalm. 69. 4. Thus Gen ^
Caine was wroth with Abel because his sacrifice was more regarded: thus Esau
Genesis ^^
was wroth with Iaakob, because in the blessing he was preferred: thus his Genesis
3^
children were wroth with Joseph, because of his father he was more favored:
thus ^
H^man was wroth with Mordecai, because he was more honored: thus 1. Sam. 1^
Saul was wroth with David, because he was more commended: thus 1. Sam. 17.
Eliab was wroth with this younger, because he was more exalted. Which sin of
envy, as many show it by causlesse anger, so is it most dangerous to the soul
of man, because it is the eldest sin, and the devils eldest son: therefore
calls Austine it the devils sin, Plutarch the wound and plague, Socrates the
axe and sword, Basil the rottenness and rust, and Chrysostom the moth and
canker of the soul. For Ma^^^^ (...) 2. de part.
this fire consumes the wood wherewith it was kindled, and cum suo alit
nutrimento, and this worm gnaweth the wood wherein it was bred, this viper
eats through those bowels wherein it was fed: this moth fretteth that garment
wherein it was cherished: this canker consumes that iron wherein it was
nourished, and iustissime possessorem suum torquet, says Nazianzen. And justly
is irefull envy the consuming of the flesh, and rotting of the bones (Prou.)
in the envious, and makes him cry with that father, (2. Sam. 16.) Behold, my
son which came out of mine own bowels seeks my life. This was it that made
Sabell. lib 9. Exemp. cap. 2.
Cimon so infest to Pericles, Anitus to Alcibiades, Epaminondas to Pelopidas,
Hanno to Hannibal, Fabius to Scipio, and Marcellus to Caesar: which tortureth
the mind of its own possessor so much the more, because as Plut. Apoth.
Anacharsis truly observed, it is grieved not only with its own adversity,
but with other men's prosperity: as Bion seeing an envious man sad, said, That
either some great skill is happened to him, or some great good to some other.
And therefore by Homil. 41. i^ Math.
Chrysostom rightly termed bellua multorum capitum, because as they who serve
that beast with many heads, Apocalyp. 4. and receive his mark in their
forehead, shall be ever tormented, and have no rest neither day nor night: so
they also that serve this beastly passion of envy, and receive its Tau and
cross in their countenance, are so tormented in mind, that it will not suffer
their eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of their head to take any rest.
Which sin as it takes no quando nor opportunity of anger, but is that Romans 7.
13.
sin exceeding sinful: because whereas all other sins are vnius fere horae
peccata, but sinful acts of an hours continuance, says Damascene, this is
like that inhabiting Cananite and dwelling sin, Romans 7. 17. whereby inuidus
singulis horis peccat, the envious man continues sinning every hour and
minute of time: so is it a sin exceeding painful, because whereas all those
other sins of drunkenness, gluttony, chambering, and wantonness, To. 13.
13. in actu voluptatem aucupantur aliquam, taste and relish some sweetness
and pleasure in the act of their commission, as Sabellicus in the cited place
observes: sola inuidia perpetuo est moerori, Strife and envying are in
continual sorrow and sadness of heart. Only envy of all the company, with
Caine has still her countenance cast down, and inwardly goes mourning all the
day long. Only envy like the fly ^ingeth her wings and torments her self in
the light of others, which she labors to extinguish and put out. I pray thee
what pleasure (says Ad D^meir.
Jerome) does envy yield to its owner? what delight, hatred to the possessor?
or what sweetness malice to the maligner? so run through all these
perturbations, and inuenies tot animi tormenta quot vitia, and thou shall find
so many torments, as there be passions of the mind, which therefore by so much
might more easily be overcome, by how much they bring no pleasure nor
sweetness unto us in the act of committing them.

Howbeit, if neither we observe the cause wherefore, nor the persons with whom,
nor the season when, nor the manner how, yet fifthly has both the heathen and
heavenly man too praefixed her a teatme quousque, and set her bonds of a day,
which she shall not pass. Here must this raging sea stay her proud waves: and
if thus far she will go, she shall go no further. For as three degrees and
ages of anger are censured by our moral-maister Lib. 4. E^his. cap. 5.
Aristotle: one, (...), cholericknesse, which is the infancy of anger, soon
come and gone: another, (...), amarulencie or bitterness, which is the youth
of anger, and stays boiling in hot blood for opportunity of revenge: and the
third (...), irreconcilable wrath, which is her man-age and full stature, when
she will not be appeased, but remains implacable without wished revenge. (For
as there is a triple growth of piety in children, young men and fathers, 1.
Ioh. 2. 14. so from this root of bitterness, like that ^.
apple tree in Aslyria, some fruit is but budding, other ripening, and some
grown to maturitie.) So condemns S. Paul these three degrees of sinful
anger, and this threefold state of angry sin, Ephesians. 4. 31. Let anger, and
bitterness, and wrath, be put from among you. For remedying of the first, he
forbids us to walk in the way of ungodly anger, be angry but sin not. If
that passion be too familiar, to stay us from the second, he inhibits us like
sinners to stand in the way of bitterness, Let all bitterness be put away: if
our standing upon it make us stand in that path, to keep us from the third, he
charge us not sit down in the chair of wrath, and lie down in the bed of
implacabilitie, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath: for this is to give
place to the devil, ver. 27. who like the Psalm. 114. 20. 21. 22.
Lion that is greedy of his prey, when the Sun is down creeps forth in
the night to seek whom he may devour: and quietis tempore ad animum iracundi
accedit, and on the night season comes to the angry mind in his bed, says
Pastoral. part. 3. admo^^. 10.
Gregory, and bringing to his memory the greatness of the injuries,
exaggereth every circumstance, and shows them intolerable to incense his
revenge: and therefore noctem metuens beatus Paulus, blessed Paul fearing the
nights occasion for a work of darkness (says Homil. 14 in Ephesians. 4. ^6.
Chrysostom) dare not let one go angry to bed, lest the Prince of darkness
aduantaged by his solitariness, finding his house swept from charity, and
garnished with hatred, bring in seven other spirits of malice worse then the
former of anger: but would have him though he be angry yet sin not unto
wrath, but examine himself upon his bed in his chamber, and be still, Psalm. 4.
4. lest on the day having conceived sorrow, he travel with mischief in his
bed, and in the morning bring forth ungodliness: lest the cloud of anger (to
allude with that Father) which was gathered on the day by his heat, being not
dissipated and dissolved with the Sun, be augmented with the nights vapors of
chafe and fretting, and make in the morning a tempest of wrath and storm of
revenge. And therefore as to king Attalus, Pompey and Antipater, natalis fuit
fataiis, the day of their death was on the day of their birth: so would the
Apostle, vt ira die orta cum die decidat, says Ambrose on these words: that as
Jonah his gourd came up in a night, and withered in a night, so this root of
bitterness which sprung up on the day, should be smote at the root with the
worm of remorse on that day, and wither away. For as the beast Arist. lib. 1.
de bist. animal. cap. 5.
Ephemeron, or (...), (as Lib. 11 not. ^^st. cap. 36.
Pliny calls it rather) whose name is from his nature; for as his name is so is
he; being bred in the morning, flies at noone, and dies at night with the
setting of the Sun. So would the Apostle have this beastly affection to be but
Ephemeron also, a day old at his death; that although in the morning anger be
bred, and grow to strong hatred at noone in the height of his heat, yet it
live not wrath till the Sun be gone down, seeing Non amplius vna nobis die
ad iram indulsit Apostolus. The Apostle has allowed (says H^mil. 3. in Joan.
cap. 3.
Chrysostom) but the space of one day for the age of any anger. Wherefore as
we say of the Toad-stoole, oritur, moritur, it grows up in a night and dies in
a night, so must this Toad-swelling fool die on the day wherein it was borne,
its womb be its tomb; yea be like the untimely fruit of a woman, which
perishes ere ever it see the Sun, lest sleeping with the mote of anger (to use
S. S^r. 237. de Temp.
Austines often allusion) thou water and feed it on the night with the dew of
suspicions, and rise up in the morning with the beam of hatred and malice in
thy mind. This good lesson Epiphanius (as he confessed to the Abbot Hilarion)
well observed, Ex quo tempore assumpsi hunc habitum, non dimisi aliquem dormire
qui aduersum me haberet aliquid, neque dormiui habens aliquid aduersus aliquem:
Since I took this calling and habit upon me, I never let any man go to bed
who I thought had any thing against me; nor ever went to bed my self when I
knew I had any thing against any man. And thus indeed should the Sun not go
down upon s Mat. 6. 34.
wrath. And time too to let our wrath set before the Sun, seeing satis ad
iram vna aut altera hora, an hour or two (says Chrysostom) is too long to be
angry, and sufficit diei malitta sua, as the vulgar reads it, the day has
enough with his own malice and wrath, to heap wrath against the day of wrath.

What shall they do then in this day of judgment, upon ^. Use, a repr^^^ of
implacability
whose wrath non vnius diei sed tantorum annorum sol testis occubuit, the sun
not of one day but of many years (as Tom. 1. ep^^^ ad Cast.
Jerome speaks) has gone down: but that this eye of the world be as of
their wrath a faithful witness in heaven, so a swift witness to their
judgment in hell? Which implacable and cruel men, as they were foretold to
come in these last and perilous times, 2. Tim. 3. 3. even so now are there
many implacable men, who this day have fulfilled this scripture in our ears
and eyes too, to whom our Savior may in vain cry (...), be reconciled, being
indeed as Phil. ^.
Demosthenes called Philip, (...), irreconcilable enemies; or as Patroclus in
^^ad. lib. v.
Homer told Achilles, -- (...), Thou art unappeasable Achilles: Peleus sure he
never was thy father, nor Thetis thy mother. -- (...),
(...).
God sure is not thy father, nor his spouse thy mother, but the raging sea it
bare thee, because thou can not rest, and the hard rocks begat thee, since
thy heart is as hard as a stone. Whom if with Id^m. l. 9. (...)
Phoenix the Ambassador of peace, I should advise to be reconciled and
appeased toward Agamemnon with that greatest example of persuasion, -- (...),
even God himself will not always be childing, neither keeps he his anger for
ever, Psalm. 103. 9. yet this stony heart would admit no instruction, but
like the wall send back the last words and echo of this exhortation, that is,
anger for ever. I will communicate with him, (...), neither word nor work,
(...), before he has feeled my fingers, and paid for his bitter contumely.
Thus would Achilles answer peacemaking Idem lib. ^
Hector, (...), It is no more possible for me and thee to love and agree, then
the Wolf and the Lamb, nor shall any thing agree us till I be revenged. And
indeed when men (as one notes) Puluere si laedant scribunt sed marmore l^si,
write their own scandals in the dust, and other men's offenses in the stony
tables of their heart with the point of a Diamond: Vt plumbeas gerant iras (as
Plautus speaks of such) engraue them in lead with a pen of lead, for ever,
how can there be reconcilement, when they ask their brother as the serpent did
the husbandman in the fable; How can there be ever love between us two
hereafter, (...), so long as I see this stone which in stead of me thou
smotest, and thou this toombe of thy son whom I slew? Thus when all their
other sins end with their act (says De Z^l^ and li^are.
Cyprian) and are bounded with that present time of commission, as their lust
cease when cooled with stolen waters, their gluttony satisfied when their
stomach is gorged, their lying silent when the report is believed, their
idleness refreshed when the bones are wearied, their drunkenness fulfilled when
their appetite is quenched, their slaundering surceasseth when their brother is
disgraced, and their oppression remitteth when he is dejected; only their
implacable wrath and unappeasable malice never ends nor ever rests, but in
the grave the house of its age, Eccles. 9. 6. and says, she does well to be
angry unto the death. That as it was doubted of Val. Max. lib. ^. cap. 3.
Sylla, whose last gasp breathed out threatenings, whether himself or his
anger died sooner: so may it be doubted of them, whether their life or their
strife will first give over. For as Thespesius in Coment. descr. number. vandict.
Plutarch fableth of his infernal vision, that some souls there like vipers
hanging on together did bite and gnaw one on another, ob memoriam iniuriarum in
vita ac^^rum aut tol^ratarum, remembering old grudges and wrongs done and
suffered in their life time here on earth: so may it be feared that these
asseruatores iniuriarum, as the spirit calls them, Leuit. 19. 18. whose hatred
is that inimicitia seculi, Ezekiel. 25. 15. or rather seculs seculorum, for ever
and ever, as with hell they are at agreement, so have made that covenant with
death, -- (...) ^^.
Nec mors mihi finiet iras:
Though we be dead, our malice shall not die,
But then my ghost with thine shall battle try.
It is to be feared that in hell they will not agree, but that though themselves
be mortal on earth, and shall die like men, yet their hatred will be immortal
in hell, and like those spirits bite and devour one another. And then as (...)
Tomar^s the Scythian Queen replied to blood-thirstie Cyrus, when his head was
thrown into a tub of blood, Sati^te sanguine quem sitissti, Now glut thy self
with blood Cyrus, which still vnquenchably thou thirsted after: so when these
Salamanders, that through their cold charity could willingly live still in the
fire of contention and hatred, when these Rom 1. 31.
(...), implacable me^, whose (...), as (...) lib ^
Homer calls it, whose hard heart like the stone Pa^^. 1. 37. ^^c. ^ast. cap. 10
Asbeston being once incensed with wrath, is for ever unquenchable, shall be
cast (without repentance) (...), into that fire that never shall be quenched,
Mark 9. 43. then Salamander, Satia teigne quem sitijsti, let thine
unquenchable heat and heart take it fill of unquenchable fire which it still
desired. But I hope better things of thee (beloved Christian) and such as
accompany salvation, though I thus speak of some men's implacable malice: for
even the best men (as Tull. lib. 1 Ep^ ad (...).
one notes) may in their choler be irritabiles, quickly provoked, sed tamen
ettam placabiles, but yet will they not always be chiding, neither keep they
their anger for ever. But I speak of the man of wrath, who though like him in
Lib. 1. Iliad.
Homer he seem to have digested all wrongs, (...),
(...)
yet still keeps anger in his mind, and lets not go displeasure from his
boiling heart. And woe is me (says David) that I dwell with Mesech, and have
my habitation among the tents of Kedar: my soul has long dwelt among them
that be enemies unto peace. I labor for peace, but when I speak unto them
thereof, they make them ready to battle, Psalm 120. And though men labor for
their peace with that embassage of peace, Peace be to this house: Is it peace
my brother? They ask him, What peace? What have we to do with peace, turn
behind me. Though with Iaakob they should bring them great gifts to win, and
good words to woo their reconcilement; they more implacable then Esau, who
relented herewith, and unappeasable like Achilles, whom these could not
pacify, would return like David's foes, hatred for good will: and though they
give good words with their mouth, and salute with a pax vobis, yet curse they
with their hearts, and bless us with a pox vobis. When Tit. Liu. lib. 3.
Quintius the Consul made an oration of peace to pacify the tumultuous
Romans, this raging sea (as one well resembles them) could not rest til the
Decemvirs and the most honorable worthies of Rome were exiled, and yet when he
had yielded them the expulsion of those noble sages, this implacable people
(more troublous then that working sea which ceased from her rage when Jonah was
cast out) still cast up mire and dirt: but when he saw, that (like that town
clarke in the Acts) by no means and satisfaction he could still the raging of
this sea, and the noise of her waves, and the madness of his people, Pro Deum
fidem (says he) quid vobis vultis? Good Lord sits what mean ye, or what would
ye have? Tribunos plebis concupistis, concordiae causa concessimus. Decemviros
desiderastis, creari passi sumus. December virorum vos pertaesum est, coegimus
abire Magistratu. Manente in eosdem priuatos ira vestra, mori atque exulare
Nobilissimos, viros Honoratissimos passi sumus. Tribunos plebis creare iterum
voluistis, creastis. Consules facere vestrarum partium, nostra iura oppressa
tulimus and ferimus. Ye desired Tribunes and Proctors for the Commons against
the Nobles, for peace sake we granted it. Ye then required Decemvirs or ten
joint governors, we suffered them to be created. Ye were weary of the
Decemvirs, we forced them to give over their office and leave their place: Your
wrath remaining the same toward them when they were but private men, we
suffered those most noble and honorable men to be banished. Ye would needs have
Tribunes again created, ye created them. To have Consuls of your own side and
faction, and our laws and statutes to be broken we have suffered. Quis erit
finis discordiarum? Good Lord what will please you, and when will ye be quiet?
Ecquando vnam vrbem habere, ecquando communem hanc esse patriam licebit? We
have many outrageous waves, like that raging sea of Rome, which like the
Northern sea never rest, but working and storming with some tempest or other
still cast up mire and dirt: for indeed (as L^^. 2. de ira, c. 16.
Seneca notes truly) In frigora septentrionemque vergentibus immansueta sunt
ingenia, suoque simillima caelo, as the Poet speaks, Some are borne so far
North in the Friseland or Iseland rather, of charity, where the floods of
iniquity have made a great frost of love, that if one with Abraham would yield
their own right to buy peace at their own rate: if with Agamemnon (in the
Hom. l. 9. Ill^.
Poet) they would offer them all they possess, like cruel Achilles they would
not be pacified with reason, because they seek not theirs but them; and like
the roaring Lion, not what, but whom they may devour. When their brethren would
make with these men a covenant of peace, they answer with Naash the Ammonite,
1. Sam. 11. 2. On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may
thrust out all your right eyes, and bring that shame upon all Israel. And thus
like the Sa^^lli^ lib. 9. Exempl. cap. 3.
Swissers, having made their enemies lives tributary to their swords, Hostium
cadauera pro puluillis sibi subijcientes discumberent and odio inexplebili
hostium cruorem haurirent, would sit on them like cushions, yea would tread them
like clay in the streets, and eat up Gods people like bread, and then sit
down in quiet and rest upon them. Whose malice yet even in conquest would be so
implacable to those whom it has subjected, that as Lib. de mu^tit. a^^ic.
Plutarch advises, Salis modium prius comedere, first to eat a bushel of salt
with a man before thou trust him and make him thy friend: so multi salis modij
cum illis prius comedendi, as Lib. de a^. ^cit.
Tully speaks, many bushels of salt should we eat with them before we could
win them to amity and make them our true friends. What shall I say to these
mortal men of immortal malice? shall I labor to cure their malady? No, no,
I should labor in vain, I should but spend by strength in vain and for
naught. Eius vulnera remedium medentis non admittuut (says Di Zelo and liuor.
Cyprian) her wounds, her swelling and sores full of corruption, she will not
have searched with wine, but be wrapped and bound up, and mollified with oil.
Malitia est regius animae morbus, Malice (says I^^ Ephesians 4.
Chrysostom) is the kings evil of the soul, and cannot be cured with the
balm of Gilead, nor by any Physician there. Her bruising is incurable, and her
wound dolorous, there are no medicines for her. We must leave her to the cure
of the King of kings, who only gives medicine to heal her sickness, and
heals all her infirmities. Only I wish, that if the Viper will still be a
Viper to retain his poison, be he charmed never so wisely, that then the wise
Apothecary would in justice make Triacle of him to expel poison out of others,
Qui non corriget seipsum, alij corrigant se per ipsum: I mean he would set up
this brazen Serpent on a pole, for a terror to them that will be bit with the
fiery serpents of hatred and envy. I mean that if their malice, like I
biremansit vnde respexit. ipsa in loco mansura, and transcu^tes ali^s conditura
Aug in Psa. 83. Facta est flatua s^lu, vt illius co^templatione condiantur
homines, non retro respiciant, ne malum exemplum dantes ipsi remaneant and
alios condia^t. Aug in Psa. 75.
Lots wife, will still be looking back to the fire of Sodom, and not forget
that which is behind, that then justice would turn her into an exemplary
pillar of salt, set to season others that pass by that way.

But let us beloved, seeing we are the Math 5. 13.
salt of the earth, to season others, not with this example of Lots wife, but
with that 2. use, an exhortation to forget and forgive all injuries.
2 Conn. 5. 19.
word of reconcilement, Coloss 4 6.
powdered with salt to keep them from this rottenness of the mind, and
putrefaction of the bones. Seeing we (I say) like Judge 9 45.
Abimelech sow salt in others with 2 Kings 2. 21.
Elisha, to heal the infections and deadly waters of strife and contention,
let us for shame have Mark 9 50.
that salt of grace and wisdom in our selves, to have peace one with another,
to keep our souls from this putrefaction of malice, which the often shining
on and going down of the sun upon wrath, causes to stink in the nostrils
of God.

Utterly forgive and forget (says Tom. 10 homil. 42. mor at. Dom.
Austine, speaking of this same argument at this very time) utterly forgive
those wrongs which even to these days ye have kept in remembrance, at least in
these days of Christ's Nativity forget and forgive them. The sun of one day
should not have gone down upon your wrath, Et multi soles occiderunt, and alas
many suns have set upon your hatred.

Let once, once (I say) let go displeasure. Let all bitterness, and anger, and
wrath be put from among you, with all maliciousness, Ephesians. 4. 31. We must not
only crop like the Ox the blade of anger in the eyes, hands and tongue where
it sprouteth, but pluck up the root of bitterness in the ground of the
heart, least it spring up again. We must not only loppe and break off the
branches of anger, and shake off her sheaues of evil speaking, or scatter her
evil fruit of wrath, and yet with that tree ( Dan. 4.) leave malice the
stumpe of his roots in our earthly minds (for that is to purge and prune it
that it may bring forth more fruit:) but with Christ also lay the axe to the
root of the tree, and take away all maliciousnes, the plant which his heavenly
Father has not planted. Neither must we so yet lay the axe to the root, to
hew it in pieces, and so leave it in the ground of our hearts and earthly
minds: but seeing there is hope of a tree if it be but cut down, that the
root will yet sprout, and the branches bud again when the root is left in
the earth, Job. 14. therefore must we tollere, take away al malice and
maliciousnes. And because the fire of hatred and heart-burne can hardly so be
quenched, but that some spark of displeasure or tepiditie of grudging will
remain hid under the ashes of reconcilement, or at least give some smoke of
disaffecting, though malice be put out and hatred be extinguished: therefore
must ye not so much put out, as put out from among you, and not so much quench,
as take away all maliciousness, the root with the branch, the burning coal
with the flame, the dead coal with the smoke, let both be put out, and that
from among you, out of your hearts.

Which root of bitterness we should so much rather weed out of our minds,
because the root thereof is so bitter in our souls, as to arraigne us at the
Kings bench, and bears an action of murder in the court of heaven, 1. John 3.
15. Who so hates his brother, is a manslayer, (for thus the Judge of the
world gives his charge) and ye know it is law, that no manslayer has eternal
life abiding in him. For although humane laws bind the body more then the
mind, and the hands rather then the heart, and often even in that like the
Spiders web catches but little offenders, as flies, and lets the mightier
like birds sly away, and with the net takes great offenses and lets the small
escape through it: yet this heavenly Lawgiver catches the mighty in their
crafty murder, as well as the dead flies of hatred and malice in the text and
web of his law, Leuit. 19. 18. and Irr^t. (...) Job 5. 13.
takes in his net of malice the thoughts as the actions of murder, it were
flies, as birds in that net of his Gospel, Math. 5. 22. Thou have not sheathed
thy sword in his body (says Loco citat.
Austine) nor made any wound in his flesh, nor smote his body with a blow, the
thought only of murder is in thine heart, and thou art counted a murderer
before him who asks especially the heart. Ille viuit and tu occidisti, he is
alive and yet thou have killed him: quantum ad te attinet occidisti quem
odisti, to thy power have thou slain him whom thou hate. And therefore are
these two hatred and murder coupled together as yoke-fellowes in that long
teame of beastly works of the flesh, which draw men to perdition, Romans 1. 29.
Gal. 5. 21. And as the father and the son, devil and evil, differ but a
letter; so the mother and the daughter, (...) and (...), are no more nor so
much distinct in deed, when she like concupiscence has conceived, and brings
forth sin in the act, but both are counted murder before God, and according
to the Ezekiel. 16. 44.
proverb, As is the mother so is the daughter. For as Lib. ^. not. hist. cap. 23
Pliny notes of the Adders, that coniuga vagantur nec nisi cum compare vita
est, they go by twoes, and live together by couples in such mutual
companionship, that when the one is killed, the other burning with revenge
pursues her fellows foe, and by a certain knowledge infesteth him alone in
any prease of people. Even so (says Austine) the concupiscible and irascible
faculties (and it is more true of hatred and murder) like two Adders they go
coupled together in such a link of love, that when envy is wounded with grief
of the mind, murder steps up in anger from the heart, and reuengeth her
quarrel, and so makes envy guilty and accessory to murder when she is the
principal. Wherefore let us not breed that viper in our breasts which will
eat through our tender bowels of mercy, kindness, long-sufferance and
forgiveness. Let us not carry that fire in our bosom, which will set us on
fire of hell. Let us rub off that rust which consumes as a canker. Let us pull
out that stone out of our hearts which rotteth the fruit of the spirit. Let us
not suffer that worm to lie at the root of our hearts, which gnaweth and
withers the righteous plant: but rather cherish the worm of remorse in our
conscience, whose gnawing makes the red tree white, and our scarlet sin white
as wool. And that rather considering the season let us do it, the season I
say, that it is now time we should arise from sleeping in malice, and letting
so often the Sun set on our wrath. For now is our salvation nearer then when we
believed it: Magni solit dies celebramus August (...) supracitat.
(says Austine) preaching this day of this duty of forgiving. Now we keep the
festival of the great Sun and Son of God, the birth day of our Savior,
and great Sunday of the Son of righteousness. Let us now then in this
Sunneshine of grace, cast off and hang forth that our cloak of
maliciousness, 1. Pet. 2. 16. that the moth of malice may perish when it
feels the Sun. And let not the Sun which rises on the good and evil go
down upon thy wrath, lest the Sun of righteousness (says Austine) who rises
to the just alone, set to thy soul, and going down upon thy wrath, leave thee
in tenebris interioribus, eijciendum in tenebras exteriores, in the internal
darkness of the mind, to be cast into that external and eternal darkness of
both body and soul at the day of wrath.

And if that terror cannot shake love from thy heart toward thy foes, yet should
the good that comes from these evil ones, the light that shines out of this
darkness, and the heat that comes from this burning fire, in self-love and
pity of thy self induce thee to love them. For whether indeed they have power
corporally to afflict, they exercise thy patience: or only by strange opinions
oppugn thee, they exercise thy wisdom, as Lib. 8. de (...) Dei cap. 51.
Austine speaks of the enemies of the Church in general. And in that thou
love them they exercise thy beneficence, in giving and in forgiving, thy
benevolence. For as he Quid. lib. 2. de Trist.
said of him whom he had offended: Si non peccassem, quid tu concedere posses?
Materiam veniae sors tibi nostra dedit.
So art thou to love them, because in doing wrong, they have given thee matter
of remitting: yea as Lib. 8. Ethie. cap. 1.
Aristotle truly said, that as friends were needful to our earthly blessedness:
as namely both (...), for custody of our goods to aid us against thieves or
robbers: and (...), for the use of our bountifulness and liberality: so are
foes as truly necessary to our heavenly happiness, both (...), to keep us
(as the Psalmist speaks) from the great offense, and deter us like those
thorns, ( Hos. 2.) from the paths of impiety, and (...), for the use also and
traffic of our love, of whose bellies (as one speaks) we may make bags as
we are commanded, Luke 12. 33. to lay up treasure in heaven, where neither
thieves break through nor steal. For touching this custody, as Lib. 5. Hexa.
cap. 8.
Ambrose reports of the Oister, that while she is tossed by the Crabbe in the
waves of the sea, she so claspeth her shell from her foe, that then she is
least in danger of devouring: but when without fear of her foe she lays
open her self to the Sun on the shore, then comes the Crab, and putting a
stone between the lips of her shell, thrusts in safely the cleyes and pickes
out her fish. Even so while we are tossed to and fro like those faithful ones,
Heb. 10. 33. by crabbed men and regredient back-sliders, they make us in their
storm pull our cloak and roabe of righteousness near unto us, and walk
warily to them that are without, lest like Cham seeing our nakedness, they
sport at our privy faults. And if we be not in perils of these waters, or
with 2. Cor. 11 26.
Paul in perils among false brethren, if without fear of a foe and suspision
of the Crab; we the^ lay open our nakedness in the Sunshine of friendship and
prosperity, and give occasion to the adversaries to speak evil and feed on
our inward corruption, who keep themselves close and mark our steps, when
they lay wait for our soul. And such Crabs that tossed David, made him claspe
his shell, and shut up the door of his lips, lest he should offend in his
tongue, while the ungodly his foes were in his sight, Psalm. 39. 1. When some
about Scipio with no small joy avouched, that the commonwealth of Rome was now
in safest state, since they had vanquished the Carthaginians, and conquered the
inhabitants of Pontus: No, Plut. lib. de cap. ex i^imic. v^lit.
said wise Scipio, we are now in greater danger then we were before, because we
have left us no enemies to stand in awe of and fear. So true was that saying
of Ibid.
Antisthenes, That a man rather needs deadly foes to deter him from
notorious faults, then honest friends to admonish him to virtue. So truly
replied Plut. libel. de mult^. amic.
Chilo, one of the seven Wise men of Greece, to one boasting, that he had not a
foe: Then (says he) thou have not a friend. And therefore as Plutarch wrote a
book titled, De capienda ex inimi^is vtilitate; Of the good that comes by our
enemies, and proved the title good: so made T(...)
Chrysostom a whole sermon entitled, Diligamus etiam nos persequentes, Let us
love even our greatest enemies. Seeing as his brethrens great enmity and
dishonor brought Joseph greatest amity and honor, or as Telephus received
cure from the rust of that spear wherewith Achilles wounded him, or as he that
meant to smite Jason to death, opened but his dangerous impostume to his
health: so an enemies tongue, which is as sharp as a spear or a sword, does
but cure while it cutteth, and heal while it lanceth, and lets us blood in
the swelling vein of some vanity: that we may confess like him: vna eademque
manus vulnus opcmque tulit: The same hand that kills, makes alive; that
brings down, raises up, that makes poor makes rich, that brings low
exalts, and profess with Zachary in another sense, Luke 1. 71. that we
receive (as the original reads it) (...), health from our enemies, and good
from the hands of all them that hate us.

Which hearty love of our foes, and dismission of displeasure, seeing it
consists in the remission of their faults; and the giving over of anger in
the forgiving of their wrongs: our Savior from the parable of the merciless
debtor, straightly charge each one to forgive from our hearts their trespasses
seventy times seven times unto our brethren, and that under this condition: If
mine heavenly Father shall forgive you your sins. Mat. 18. 35. Wherein,
Hearty love and reconcil^ment consists in forgiving.
whether we respect the condonation, not forbear but forgive: or the remitters
not some, but each one: or the manner, not from the teeth, but our hearts: or
the matter, not thoughts or words alone, but all their trespasses: or the times
when, not unto seven times alone, but unto seventy times seven times: or
lastly, the party to be pardoned, who is our brother: this key of knowledge
should so unlock our sealed-vp affection, and set open our hearts, that, as
the Corinths had in 2. Cor. ^. (...)
Paul's, our brethren should have a large room in our hearts. And first
touching this act of 1. Condonatio^* Forgive.
hearty love in remitting, we must if our brother offend us forgive him,
commands Christ our Savior, Luke 17. 3. 4. If he offend us I say: for if
man trespass against man, it may be pardoned or judged, says old Ely: but if
a man trespass against the Lord, who will plead for him? 1. Sam. 2. 25. Ioh.
who can forgive sins but God alone? Nevertheless if he offend thee,
dimittend^ habes potestatem imo necessitatem, Thou may yea must (as Lib. 3.
in Mat. 18. 15.
Jerome speaks) forgive. For mark who said, forgive, and to whom he said it,
(says Saint Sermon. 3 1. d^ verb. Apost.
Austine) truth to his scholars, the chief pastor to his sheep, the king to
his soldiers, the Lord to his servants, Christ to his Apostles, God to man,
Height to worms creeping below on the earth, who has voluntarily bound
himself with an obligation to forgive us, if we keep the condition to forgive
our brethren, Mat. 6. 14. Neither is it negligently to be passed over, Lib 2.
cap. 18. d^ sermon. Dom. in (...)
(says that Father) that of all those petitions which he taught us to pray
withal, this only of forgiving he chiefly commends unto us; which because it
is of greatest weight and importance, as Pharao his dream was doubled, it is
ingeminated twice together unto us, Mat. 6. 15. For in no other petition we so
pray, as to bargain and indent with God, but in this alone, Forgive us as we
forgive others. In which covenant, if we lie and forgive not our brother,
totius orationis nullus erit fructus, all the other petitions are made in
vain, and fruitless is the rest of the Lords prayer, seeing our sins are not
forgiven unless we forgive. In this August. hom. 40. de frat. charit.
alone we make an indenture with God, and subscribe the condition with this
prouiso, As we give for them that trespass against us. Which Idem Euchir. ad
L(...) cap. 73.
if we perform, without all doubt verba sponsionis huius implentur, we keep
the condition of this obligation which is such, If ye forgive men their
trespasses. As if he had said: Ibid. sermon. 31. d^ verb. Apost.
Thou man have a debtor, even thy brother who has offended thee, and I have
another debtor, even thy self, who have grievously offended me: that which
thou do to thine, will I do to mine, for so thou in thy prayer desire me.
If thou forgiuest, I do forgive; if thou retainest, I retain against thee, or
rather thou against thy self. Idem sermon. ^^2. de Temp.
Forgive therefore, ne dum fratri nega^ misericordiam, tibi claudas patris
indulgentiam: lest whilst thou denyest mercy, and shuttest up thy heart from
thy brother, thou shut the gate of mercy with thy father. For there shall be
judgment, and that merciless too to him that shows no mercy, Iam. 2. 13.
And indeed (dear Christian) ^
with what face can thou say the Lords prayer? with what conscience can
thou ask the maker of heaven and earth forgiveness of then thousand talents,
when thou do, and have not, nor wilt forgive thy fellow servant an hundred
pence? thou I say, a worm crawling twixt heaven and earth? ^
Take heed lest thou hear of that just Judge, Physician heal thy self: thou
perswadest me to mercy, which thou thy self wilt not impart to thy brother:
thou intreatest me to have patience, when thou will not hear thy brother
entreating for his debt: thou intreatest me to blot out all my hand writing
against thee, and yet thou suest thy brothers bill of offense: (...) debtor
est in carcere, and tu in Oratorio: thy debtor is in prison, and thou in the
Church to ask forgiveness, thy prayer shall there be heard, I will forgive
thee as thou forgiuest him that trespasseth against thee. O foolish man, tibi
contradicis in oratione, thou prayest against thy self, says Sermon 2 de (...)
^r^m.
Austine, Lord forgive me my trespasses, as I, even as I forgive them that
trespass against me: but Lord thou know I forgive not them that trespass
against me, therefore O Lord forgive not me. Non pro te orationem facis, sed
super te maledictionem inducis, says Anastasius, thou prayest not for thy
self, but bring a curse upon thy self. And therefore wills our Savior
when ye shall stand and pray, forgive, Mark. 11. 25. least your prayer be
turned into sin, and pull down a curse instead of a blessing. Forgive thy
neighbor (says the Wiseman) the hurt that he has done thee, so shall thy
sins be forgiven thee also when thou prayest. Should a man bear hatred
against man, and desire forgiveness of the Lord? He will show no mercy to a
man which is like himself, and will he ask forgiveness of his own sins?
If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, and ask pardon of God: who will
entreat for his sins? Remember the commandments: O remember the
commandments thou have broken, so shall thou not be rigorous against thy
neighbor, consider diligently the covenant of the most high, and forgive his
ignorance, Eccles. 28. 2. to the 8. O remember the merciless debtor, with what
indignation his Lord did vpbraid him, Mat. 18. 32. O evil servant, I forgave
thee all the debt, because thou prayedst me: ought not thou also to have had
pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity and commiseration on thee? So his
master was wroth (yea more wroth with this not forgiving of an hundred pence
to his fellow, then for all his own debt of ten thousand talents that he ought
him) and delivered him to the Ia^lors till he should pay all that was due. So
likewise shall mine heavenly Father do unto you, except ye forgive each one to
his brother their trespasses. Agree then with thine adversary quickly, while
thou art in the way with him, lest remaining thine adversary, he deliver thee
to the Judge, and the Judge to the Sergeant, and the Sergeant cast thee into
prison: verily I say unto thee (says Truth it self) thou shall not come out
thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing of thy sins, Mat. 5. 25.
But if thou forgive, says De v^rb. D^. cap 5.
Austine, instead of a Judge thou shall sind a Father, for a Sergeant to arrest
thee, an Angel to transport thee, and Paradise instead of the prison. Forgive
them that trespass against thee, against thee a worm of the earth, though
thou can not forgive them that trespass against God. But alas says Comment
in Mat. 1^.
Jerome, we are contrariwise bountiful and free to forgive injuries and wrongs
done against God, when in our own wrongs we keep hatred to the death. If our
brother blaspheme God, and open his mouth against heaven, we quickly forgive
him: but if he curse or revile, offend or harm us, we say not like Saint 2.
Cor. 2. 10.
Paul, I forgive him: we pray not with Stephen, Lord lay not this sin to his
charge: so far short come we of the Saints, nay of the heathens in this most
Christian duty that ever was commanded. We read the Graecians had a
sanctuary and altar, whither they usually went all to forgive their mutual
wrongs, says Fulgosus and Sabellicus. For at Athens (as (...) gerend. prae^ept.
Plutarch reports) it was enacted a decree, obliuionis iniuriarum, of
forgetting Injuries: for when Thrasibulus had freed the city of those thirty
tyrants, and restored it to peace, he made a law, that none should remember any
injuries past, which the Athenians called the Law of Oblivion. And we Tr(...)
in (...) lib ^ ^ap 5. ex S(...).
read no less of the Emperor Aug. who though of a most tenacious and
retentiue memory* iniurias tamen cum primi^ obliuisceretur, would yet forget
wrongs as soon as they were offered. O remember these, implacable Christian,
and be ashamed* yea for ever confounded for thy everlasting malice. These were
but Ephesians. ^. ^.
Gentiles in the flesh, and at this time without Christ to instruct them, Love
your enemies Mat. 5. 44. These were alients from the common wealth of Israel*
without that law to enforce them. Thou shall not revenge nor be mindful of
wrong, Leuit. 19. 18. These were but strangers from that covenant of promise:
^^ye forgive men, your heavenly Father will forgive you, Mat. 6. 14. These had
no hope of that reward in long-suffering. Blessed are you when men rebuke you,
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for great is
your reward in heaven, Mat. 5. 1^. ^hese were without God in the world, without
his spirit to direct, and without his grace to restrain them. And these having
not the law, and doing by nature the things of the law, yet shall judge thee
which by the letter of the law* and spirit of the Gospel, art a transgressor
of both law and Gospel, Romans 2. 27. Shall not these judge us? shall they not
judge us Ch^istians, who have the law to threaten our hatred with judgment,
and a Gospel to till on our love with sweet promises of mercy? If none of
these could, yet should we for his sake forgive our brother: who (as ^lut.
(...).
Ag^silaus wrote to one for Nicias: si insons est, dimitte: sin vero, mei causa
dimitte, omnino autem dimitte) has himself written to us many letters for our
brother, desiring us, R^mit one another if any have a quarrel: but if not, yet
even as I ^^ Christ remitted you: in any wise, even so do ye. Col. 3. 13. 2.
R^m (...)


Each one. For his Apost. here sets up a Siquis for love that is lost, and
scarce to be found on the earth: Si quis, if any, Gentleman, or other, high or
low, rich or poor, has sound his brother offending, God the owner requests
him to restore him to him again with the spirit of meekness that forgiueth
all offenses. Thou must take on thee this his yoke of unity which is so easy
to be carried by two, and his burden of love which is so light for every one to
bear, Mat. 11. 30. We read in the law, that for the building of the
tabernacle, God by Moses imposed a tribute on the people of Israel, which
should not exceed half a Shekel, e Vide (...) Mat. 17. 24. and ali^s.
Exodus, 30. 13. which was but 10. pence, as our English Translators esteem and
value it, Mat. 17. 27. which task was of Gods purpose exacted so little, that
the poor might be able to contribute as well as the rich, verse. 15. And there
is come a commandment from Augustus the Emperor of heaven and earth, that
each one should forgive if any be wronged, and all the world be taxed with a
subsidy of love, which if it consisted like that ten penny-tribute in donando,
in giving only, many rich men of their superfluity might cast in much: but
seeing it is condonando given in forgiving, the poor widow with the love of
God and neighbor, as with two mites may cast in more then they all, and say
like Act. 3. 6.
Peter, Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have I give and forgive
thee. In all other good works some one sometime may pretend some colorable
excuse, says Sermon. 61. de Temp.
Austine, but for love none can excuse himself. Some body may say unto me, I
cannot fast, but can he say truly, I cannot love? he may say, for my stomachs
sake and own infirmity, I cannot abstain from wine or flesh-meate, but can
he justly say, I cannot love? Some man may say, I cannot keep my virginity,
he may say he cannot sell all his goods and give them to the poor, but can he
say truly, I cannot love and forgive them that trespass against me? Let no man
deceive himself (beloved brethren) for God is not mocked, nor deceives any:
for though there be many good works, which through humane infirmity we cannot
corporally perform, it is too abominable and a filthy excuse, that in this
work of the mind, either the lame, or the deaf, or maimed should for its
wearisomnesse make excuse. For in this work of love, neither the feet labor
in running, nor the eyes with seeing, nor the ears with hearing, nor the hands
in working. It is not said unto us, go ye to the East and seek charity, sail
to the West and ye shall find love, it is engraven in our heart by that law of
nature, Do as ye would be done to, Luke 6. 13. Whosoever thou art, this
commandment of love which he commands thee this day, is not hid from thee,
neither is it far off (as Deuteronomy. 30. 11. 12.
Moses speaks.) It is not in heaven that thou should say, who shall go for
us to heaven, and bring it to us, that we may do it? Neither is it beyond the
sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it
us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it? But love is very near unto
thee, even in thy mouth and in thine heart, to give it in forgiving each one
his brother. Some man may say (says Ser de Ma^^yr.
Leo) I cannot watch, I cannot fast, I cannot give all to the poor, I cannot
live single: but can he say, I cannot love? It may be (says H(...)l. 6. (...)d
Man. 5. 44 V^de tom 6. ^b (...)a A^hmant ^^ 17. and ser. 59. d^ ^^p.
Austine) that sometime thou have not gold and silver, apparel or corn, wine
or oil in thine house to give to the poor; but what shadow of excuse can
thou pretend, that thou have not a penniworth of charity, a wedding garment of
love, a grain of mustard seed of amity, a drop of dilection, and ointment of
love in thy coffer, and wardrobe, and garner, and chalice, and box of thy
heart? No, no, this is the tribute of love, wherewith all the world is taxed,
and all may go to be taxed, every man to his own city. It is an easy
offering always at hand or at heart, that with Isaac thou needst not ask but
where is the Lamb for the oblation? It is within, which thou may easily
offer, as of that which cost thee nothing, In forgiving each one

From the heart. For because man often forgiues with his mouth ^. manne^ (...)
from (...).
propter homines, as H^^d (...)rat: Dom.
Austine notes, and keeps hatred in his heart propter daemones, and Ierom lib.
3 an Math 18. 35.
can say of his brother, He knows I bear him no evil will, I will leave him
to God his Judge, I have for my part forgiven him (for Bu^^r enarra. in Math.
18. 35.
thus we would often seem to pardon our brother, when we scarce from our heart
forgive him, that we love him as before, yea Tom. 1. ad ep^ Castor.
say in the Lords prayer Forgive as we forgive, animo discrepante cum verbis,
oratione dissidente cum factis as Jerome notes) therefore Christ (says that
Father) taking away all hypocrisy and color of fained peace, commands to
forgive from our hearts. And that, if not from his precept, yet after Gods
example, Qui remittit ex cord (as Musculus on these words observes) Who so
forgiueth men from his heart, that he Ier. 31. 24.
remembers their trespasses no more, but Micha 7. 19
casts them into the bottom of the sea, and imputes them not unto them, but
covers al their offenses, Psalm 32. 1. Which most motive example of his
Father, his Apostle urges as the strongest inducement, Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye
tender hearted, forgiving one another. But how? (...), even as God forgiues
you. And if this love of God shed abroad in our hearts, and Matthew 3. 11
fire of the spirit, like that purifying flame in the Numb. 31. 23.
law, cannot burn out all our dross of malice till it be pure, and take away
all our tin of hatred from the heart, certainly it argues we remain full
(like those wicked. Gentiles Romans 1. 29.) of all unrighteousness, wickedness,
maliciousness, full of envy, murder and debate, and poisonous affections of
the heart. For as we read of Germanicus Caligula his father, that when
according to the Suet. ^n Tyber. cap. 75. vide comens Beroald.
custom of the Romans (who burned their Emperors bodies and other, least
being interred in forrame wars the enemy should dig them up) though his body
was consumed in the fire, yet his heart could not ^e prierced by the flame, but
lay unburned among his bones, because being opened it was found full of poison,
whose nature is such, that dipped in poison it resists all fire, as Suet. in
Calig. cap 1.
Tranquillus and Li. 11. not. hist. cap. 37.
Pliny both observe: even so, and more then so, if this fire of Gods spirit,
That he forgiueth us from his heart, kindle only our tongues and hands, to love
our enemies in word and work alone, and inflame not our hearts also to love
them in truth, 1. John 3. 18. it tells the searcher of the heart, that yet for
all this our heart is wicked and deceitfully malicious above all things, and
(as James 3. 8.
James speaks of as little a member) full of deadly poison. And though this
stony heart cannot be burned with this fire, but lies buried in the whited
tomb of the body; though this whited tombs rottenness and ranc or appear
not to flesh and blood, and men that go over it perceive not (for it is wicked
and deceitful above all things, who can know it? Ier. 17. 9.) yet he who only
knows the hearts of all the children of men, 1. Kings 8. 39. Job 10. 4.
having not carnal eyes, nor seeing as man sees, 1 Samuel 16. 7.
looks not like man on the outward appearance, but beholds the heart, yea
so searches the heart and tries the reins; he I say, who (as Jerome
speaks) is all eye, when he sees the hearts hypocrisy, and all hand when he
punishes that double iniquity, beholding the painted sepulcher within full of
all rottenness and filthiness, will give it according to its ways and most
secret paths, Ier. 17. 10. It was a precept of amity (but in deed the bane of
hearty and true love) given by an ^urip. in Hyppolit.
heathen, that love should be mediocris, indifferent and mean, dwelling in
teeth, Intendere vt possis facile aut remittere, that being but lukewarm
between hot and cold, thou may spue it out upon occasion. And it was a
prescript for friendship fathered on Cuer. lib de an^^t.
Bias, Ama tanquam osurus, love but a little, that thou may loath when thou
list, and have thine affection at command, as the Chamaelion her color. The
former even ^
Plutarch could correct, Let us practice this precept, my friend Euripides
(says he) in enmity not in amity, and command our broils and contentions
that they be mediocres, in mean and moderacion, neither go further then the
teeth to diue into the heart, Intendere vt possis facile remittere, that
leaving out this aut thou may easily intend to remit them. And Scipio
checking the latter, could never be persuaded that Bias one of the seven
wisemen of Greece should speak so wickedly, but rather some ambitious statist,
or false hearted politician, who like the weatherco^k would turn with the wind
for advantage, and swim with the tide of prosperity till it begin to ebb.
For certainly, as woman's affection is commonly so plain without hypocrisy,
that Vel te ardenter amat, vel te capitaliter odit, as the Ma^t. (...)
Poet speaks. Her love is either passing admirable, 2. Sam. 1. 26. or her
hatred and malice greatest, Eccles. 25. 14. 15. 17. so he that commands love
without faining and from a pure heart without malice, and fervently without
mediocritie, 1. Pet. 1. 22. will ^^ue this lukewarm love out of his mouth, and
wishes it were either hot or cold, Apoc. 3. 15. 16. He has prescribed you a
better lukewarm love, Love your enemies from the heart, Luke 6. 35. and so
love them, that ye forgive each one from your hearts

Their trespasses. Forgive (says Christ) si quid, if ye have any 4. matter
what: All their trespasses.
thing against any man, Guaah. homil. 95. in Math 6.
Mark 11. 25. any thing that offends, word or deed, small or great, heavy or
light, says an Homelist. Any thing about the goods of the body, If a man smite
you on the face, if a man bring you into bondage, yea if a man devour you. Any
thing about the goods of the mind, If a man exalt himself above you: or of the
goods of prosperity, If he take your goods, 2. Cor. 11. that as certain beasts
of good concoction and sound health, digest Serpents and Scorpions, yea stones
themselves, calore spiritus, through the heat of their spirits and stomach,
as I^th de cap ex (...)c. vtd^t.
Plutarch notes: so our stomachs through zeal of the spirit, broke with
Math. 23. 33.
Christ a generation of vipers, and with his Mark 16.
Disciples meeting with Serpents and Scorpions, feel no harm, yea with Act.
7. 60.
Stephen, Acts 14. 19. 2. Corinthians. 11.
Paul and 2. Sam 16. 6
David digest even stones, through fervent love which endures all things, 1.
Cor. 13. that our love to our brethren like our mothers love to her spouse,
Cantic. 8. be strong as death, which conquereth all things, cruel as the
grave, which deuoureth al things, whose fiery coals and flame of God much water
cannot quench, nor the floods drown it: that triumphing over all offenses, we
may challenge all kind of injuries with Saint Romans 8. 35.
Paul: What shall separate us from love? shall tribulation of them that trouble
us, or anguish of them that grieve us, or persecution of them that hate us, or
famine of them that starve us, or nakedness of them that strippe us, or sword
of them that smite us? No, in all these things we are more then conquerors, and
are persuaded that death of our friends, nor life of our foes, nor Angels of
men, nor principalities of devils, nor powers of darkness, nor things present
that we suffer, nor things to come that we endure, nor height of envy, nor
depth of malice, nor any other creature of offense shall be able to separate us
from the love of God and our neighbor, commanded by Christ Jesus our Lord. But
alas it is most lamentable (complains Ser. 168. d^ Temp.
Austine upon these words) that whereas these Saints could not with torments be
separated from love, nos otiosis fabulis, we often with idle words of a foe are
divided from charity, and eftsoons with the least detraction and revile of
every silly wretch, we so relinguish love, that not only many days, but even
months and years too perhaps we will not speak to him, nor come to his house
to eat of his bread. Perchance thou reply, Mine enemy has made me
sustain so great losses, and done so much wrong, that I cannot in reason
forgive him. O wretch, do thou mark how greatly man has trespassed against
thee, and do thou not consider how grievously thou have sinned against God?
If thou search and sift thy conscience truly, thou have without satisfaction
committed greater sins against God then man has done against thee: and with
what face ask thou the forgiveness of much, who wilt not forgive a little?
O remember what no comparison there is between pence and talents, an hundred
and ten thousand, sin how great against God, and offense how little against
man: this is not worthy to name on the same day with that; and therefore though
David had offended Bath-sheba and Vriah, 2. Sam. 11. yet only for offending
against God, cried he out at his repentance: Against thee, against thee only
have I sinned and done this evil in thy sight, Psa. 51. Remember how far thou
servant art inferior to thy Lord, who yet bids thee forgive as he forgiueth
thee, Ephesians. 4. 32. as he forgiueth all thy sin, and heals all thine
infirmities, Psalm. 103. Romans 5. 12. 14.
actual as original, Romans 6. 12.
reigning as servile, 1. Corint. 6 18
external as internal, of the 2. Cor. 7 1.
body as of the spirit, 1. Tim. 5. 20.
public as private, Verse 24. 25.
open as secret, of James 2. 9. 10
commission as omission, of y infirmity as Gal. 6. 1.
ignorance, wicked deeds Acts 3 17.
as idle words; the breach of the Mat. 22.
great as less commandment, Esai 1. 18.
cartropes as cords, of iniquity as vanity, Math. 5 21 22
killing as anger, Verse 28 27
adultery as lust, Verse 33. 34.
forswearing as swearing, Verse 38. 39.
revenge as resistance, Verse 43. ^4.
hating as not loving, talents as pence, ten thousand as an hundred, the beam
as the mote, and the work of thy body as the thought of thy mind. Every sin
he forgiueth unto men, Math. 12. 31. save only that sin of sins against
the holy Ghost, verse 32. which is impossible to be forgiven, because these
cannot possibly repent, Hebr. 6. 6. And if God thus forgive thee all the debt,
ought not thou to have like pity on thy fellow servant, even as the Lord
has on thee? O remember the merciless debtor, Math. 18. whom when his Lord
had forgiven ten thousand talents of sins, he would not forgive his fellow an
hundred pence of offenses. See how his master weighs him in the balance to
aggrauate Io Ferus. come. in Mat. 18 lib. 3 and (...)etan idem
every circumstance of his vnthanfulnesse; first unthankful, when his Lords
remission was yet in his ear, and that servant departed k Chrysostom. n^m. 62 in
Mat. 18.
to his debtor. 2. he uses so hardly not a stranger, but found out one of his
fellows. 3. not for any great sum, for he ought him but an hundred pence. 4.
he exacteth the debt not with words alone, but laid hands on him and took him
by the throat. 5. though his Lord forbear him in patience, yet he would not
spare his fellow an hour, Pay me that thou owe. 6. though his Lord heard his
entreaty, he would not be entreated of his fellow, who fell down at his feet
and besought him, and he would not. 7. he would not be moved with that very
prayer of his fellow, wherewith he wrung pity from his master, Appease thine
anger toward me and I will pay thee all; 8. so soon as his fellow craved
respite, he cast him into prison till he should pay the debt. But what? does he
escape thus the hand of his Lord? No, no, then his master called him, and
vpbraideth his monstrous ingratitude: O evil servant, I forgave thee all the
debt because thou prayedst me, Ought not thou also to have had pity on thy
fellow, even as I had of thee? And see his eternal punishment. So his master
was wroth, (we read not he was so for his own debt, says Chrysostom, nor
gave him this term of evil servant) and delivered him to the ^ayler till he
should pay all that was due to him. Not that he exacted the debt of those
talents which before he had forgiven him (as our adversaries hence collecting,
after justification and forgiveness their final fall, pervert this scripture to
their own destruction. No parables (as notes Sap^as dixi non ad verbum
exponen^^esse parabolas, ne mulia sequatur absurda, homil. 48. in Mat. 13. and
non oportet cu^^tacuriose in parabolis scrutars, nec nimi ^ in singulis verbu
cura perangi, s^d quum quid per parabolam intendie, didicerimus ande v^^litate
collee^da nihil est vlterius anxio conatu i^^^stiga^du^ Chrysostom. hom. 65. in Mat.
20.
Chrysostom) must not be racked beyond their intent and meaning. And the
Papists by pressing them too hard, strain out of these teates blood in stead
of sincere milk; as when they get this parable by the end, they ring it so
deep, that they turn the clapper (as one Greenb. ^a 48 tra^t. minister.
speaks) but the Lord casts this evil servant into hell, for the debt of Hug
and la^s. in h^rc locum
ingratitude and unmercifulness to his fellow, which was as great by equal
proportion as the benefit of forgiveness which he had before received, seeing
to whom much is forgiven, he should love as much, Luke 7. and to whom much is
given, of him shall be no less required. And our Savior in the end of all
gives us the kernel of this nut and the spirit of his letter: So likewise
(says he) shall mine heavenly Father do unto you, except ye forgive from your
hearts each one to his brother their trespasses whatsoever. This parable is the
glass, wherein al may behold their face, what manner of ones they are. But as
Stella spoke of that of the unjust Judge, Luke 18. so may I wish of this
parable of the merciless servant, Math. 18. Serui parabolam vtinam nos non
faceremus historiam, would God this parable of the servant we made not an
history: Vtinaem nunc esset parabola, and non pro historia posset recenseri,
would God it were now but a parable, and might not be related for a story. But
I fear from the proposition I may assume with Saint 1. Cor 6. 11.
Paul, Such are some of you: and particularize with 2. Sam. 12.
Nathan to many one in particular: Thou art the man, who hope rem^ssion of
talents from their Lord, and will not forgive pence to their brethren. Or if
when their Sun is going down, they forgive all before men at the hour of
their death, yet remittunt culpam non poenam as one speaks, they say, I
forgive all, and in this will and testament, Lauat. in Ezec. 35. 5.
Odia and inimicitias quasi per manus liberis suis tradunt: They bequeath their
hatred and malice by tradition to the hands of their sons, and make them
haeredes paterni odij, as notes Lib. de irae cap. 34.
Seneca, heirs of their fathers hatred: parallel with the children of Esau,
Obadiah 1. which remembering the old quarrel of their Grandfire Esau with Jacob
for the blessing, as heirs of his malice, carried a perpetual hatred against
the children of Israel, Ezechiel 35. verse. 5. Amos 1. verse. 11. and cried in
the day of Jerusalem, down with it, down with it, even to the ground, Psalm.
137. Thus were they mindful of their fore-father his enmity, quasi
haereditate quadam retinuissent odium aduersus Israelem, says Lauater, as if
with his substance he had bequeathed his perpetual malice in his will, and left
the rest of his hatred for his babes.

These men may be ashamed (says Lib 15 Epist. 95.
Seneca) not only warring and iarring in their life, but even committing it to
their children, quasi haereditaria successi^ne, as it were by haereditarie
succession, since we see not the most savage beasts deal so cruelly one with
another. I wish these Esaus at their death, which have learned that popish
remission of the guilt, and not the punishment of great offenses, would learn
if not of brute beasts whom they scorn, yet of the Almighty himself, who
remitteth not only the guilt in him whom he made sin for us, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
but also the punishment through him, on whom he laid the chastisement of our
peace, and the iniquity of us all, Esa. 53. at least for shame let them learn
of Plut. Apoth. and AElian. var. hist.
Phocion the Athenian, who being asked at his unjust execution by a friend,
whether he would any thing to his son at home, Nothing (quoth he) but that he
never stomach the Athenians after my death for these wrongs. Neither let them
draw curtains over their bedridden enmity, because David forgave Shimei his
cursing, 2. Sam. 19. and yet at his death left it Solomon in his will to kill
him for his curses, 1. King. 2. For though David at his coming to the crown
(as our gracious king at his ingresse of this kingdom) in his princely mercy,
not willing to begin his reign with blood, pardoned railing Shimei, as In 2.
Sam. 19.
Martyr observes: yet only promised he him, he should not die then, nor for
that only fault, nor at all by his hands, as the learned Lyra, Hugo and lun.
in 2. Sam. 19.
interpret. And whereas the injury to David was double (as one Hugo Card. ibid.
notes:) private to him as a man, and public to him as a king: the former
(according to the law, Thou shall not avenge nor be mindful of wrong against
the children of thy people, Leuit. 19.) he then wholly and freely forgave:
whereas the other in the love of justice, he willed Solomon to requite, says
Quast 18 and 19 in 1. R^g. 2
Abulensis: yet so, that albeit he seem to mention Shimei reuiling, as a cause
motive of revenge, yet charge he not Solomon to kill him for that alone, but
when he takes him tripping in another offense, he shall then pay him home for
both. For thou art a wise man (says he to his son) and know what thou
ought to do unto him, 1. Ki. 2. Wherefore let none by this example,
forgiving the fault to his foe, think by his son he may prosecute the
offense. A parable (says Solomon) in the mouth of a fool, is like a thorn in
the hand of a drunkard, wherewith he pricketh himself, Prou. 26. 9. And this
is to wrest the Scripture, or (to use Saint 2. Pet. 3. 18.
Peter's word) to make it (...).
look a squint to their own destruction. And indeed it is lamentable to
behold, how wilful children execute the last will of their malicious parents
to revenge: and like those hostile beasts in Lib. de mirab. mun. ls.
Albertus, which being at deadly enmity in time of their life; parts eorum and
pili, their parts and hair are enemies after their death. Or as ' Plutarch
reports of Eagles and Dragons, Crows and Owls, the Libbard and Linnet, whose
c Lib. d^ inuid. and ol^^.
enmity while they lived, makes their blood after death at such strife, that
it can never agree or be joined together in one vessel. But let us learn
(beloved) of the living God, at our death to leave peace to our children, the
best legacy of our will, and remit all though greatest offenses, and thereof
both the guilt and punishment before we die, to forgive each one from our
hearts all trespasses

Unto seventy times seven times. For it may be thou replyest, 5. Time when,
Always.
(says L^b. ^e constit. vi^. and v^^t. c. 9.
Austine) he has offered me so many wrongs, and offended so often, that I am
weary with bearing and forbearing revenge. And indeed we which are debtors of
love to many, say like him, who is debtor to no man, in the first of Amos: For
three offenses of Edom, and for four I will not turn to it, because he did
pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger
spoiled him evermore, and his wrath watched him always, and remembered not the
brotherly covenant: for three offenses and for four, I will not turn to it.
This is the manner of mankind, and therefore even Peter himself asked his Lord
to set down some definite number of forgiving, Mat. 18. 21. Master, how often
shall my brother trespass against me, and I shall forgive him? Unto seven
times? The worlds custom is to forgive but once or twice, or three times at
the most, and therefore Peter thought himself very liberal, says Homil. 6^.
in Mat. 18.
Chrysostom, if he went so far beyond worldlings, as seven times to forgive.
What, unto seven times Lord? Indeed the number of seven is wont in Scripture to
import an universality of all, says venerable Ser. and Post. 1 Do quadrag.
tom. 7.
Bid, as all time is limited by seven days, and all vice by seven evil
spirits, Mat. 12. 45. as with Chrysostom Ansclmus does observe. Nevertheless
because the number of six seems to be a number of work and labor, and seven
a number of rest: therefore Peter understanding this, says Tract. ^. in Mat.
18.
Origin, thought in sixth times, as in six days he might finish his work of
forgiveness, and rest the seventh time from all his labor. Wherefore Christ
his Lord and master scoreth up a greater number of remission: I say not to
thee, unto seven times, but unto seventy times seven times: alluding (says
Hilarie) to that number of Caine and Lamechs punishment, Genesis 4. 24. If Caine
shall be avenged seven times, truly Lamech seventy times seven times: that as
their auengement and requitalll was by this imported infinite: so his
forgiveness hereby should not be less finite. For this is a number finite put
for an infinite, says Chrysostom, as if he had said: Will thou know how
often, Peter? do thou tell me of seven times, man? I tell thee unto seventy
times seven times: in Chrysostom. ibid.
which number yet is no bound nor limitation, but seven times, i that is,
semper, always, or seven days in a week, yea seven times in a day says our
Savior, Luke 17. 4. or toties quoties, as with Dionys. Carthus. in hunc l^cum.
others Ser. 15. de verb D^m. in Mat.
Austine does expound it: and by this is meant a toties quoties of
forgiveness, as that number seven is used, Prou. 24. 16. This infinite number
our Savior there sets down to condemn the merciless debtor, Mat. 18. who
(it seems) standing upon the number, would not forgive his fellow, because he
had run so long on his score, that the debt was now grown to an hundred
pence, Howbeit, let us be followers of God as dear children, who forgiueth not
only talents and great sins, but even ten thousand, that is, all sins
committed (says Ibid.
Austine) against the ten commandments. Let us (I say) be merciful as our
heavenly Father is merciful, who when he had often delivered the Jews from
the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, and from the Ammonites, and from the
Philistines, and from the Zidonians, and from the Amalekites, and from the
Moabites, and pardoned them often upon the promise of amendment, Judge. 10. 11.
though when after breach of their covenant, they cried again for further
pardon, he answered: I have done it so often, and still ye offend, wherefore I
will deliver you no more, verse. 13. yet for all this when they cried, We pray
thee only deliver us this day, and save us this once: he heard their
complaint, and pitying them according to the multitude of his mercies,
delivered them again. Wherefore as when 2. Reg. 5. 13.
Naaman the Syrian thought much to wash so often as seven times in Jordan, that
his leprosy might be cleansed: Father (said his servants) if the Prophet had
commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? how much rather
then, since he says, Wash seven times and be cleansed. So seeing not a Prophet,
but that Prophet Christ Jesus, has commanded us no great thing, but only
seven or seventy times seven times to forgive, that our sins may be forgiven
and cleansed, Mat. 6. verse. 14. who is he that will not take the pains to
forgive each one from his heart all trespasses, seventy times seven times ^
Person who^, Our Brother.


To his brother? who is not a stranger from God, or an alient from the
commonwealth of Israel, but of the household of faith, and of that family so
near as our brother. He might have said, Forgive thy fellow servant: but
because the (...) 95. ^ Mat ^
title moved not the merciless debtor, he calls him our brother, to put us
in mind, that as we are Gods servants by condition of life, so brethren among
our selves by unity of affection. For as that Bern ^^r 2. ^^ res^^^. (...).
Father before mentioned, considering himself that he might be tempted,
compassionately said of the fall of his brother, Ille hodie, and ego ^ras, he
has offended me to day, and I shall offend him it may be to morrow. He that
shall thus, when like the hypocrite ( Math. 7.) he has seen extra mittendo,
the mote in his brothers eye, shall thus (I say) reflecting his eyes into
himself, and behold intramittendo, the beam in his own: Ne is non magno
vitiorum in alys odio indulserit, seipsum venia plurima indigere sentiens,
says (...)
Plutarch, he will surely restore his slipping brother with the spirit of
meekness, considering himself that he may so be tempted, Galat. 6. 1. and
will profess like Hora^. de art Po^t.
him, mutual need of forgiveness, -- hanc veniam petimusque damusque
vicissim. I must forgive my brother his trespasses, even as he must do me when
I trespass against him. For peccabis and tu illi cras qui tibi hodie peccauit,
says Chrysostom. s^r. 13^
one, perchance thou shall offend him to morrow, who has offended thee to day,
Et erit tibi iudex qui erat ante tibi reus, and he shall be then thy judge, who
before was guilty unto thee, and shall restore thee pardon if to him thou
gave it, or if thou did not, either deny it thee, or by giving it, make
thee more guilty before God. And this is indeed the debt which still we must
pay, Romans 13. and yet still owe it our brother; because though to day we
discharge it, to morrow comes a fresh charge of love (says Lyra) whose
commandment is therefore called new, John 13. because though to day it be kept,
yet to morrow is it so new as if before it had not been heard. I always (says
Epi 63. ad C^l.
Austine) owe this debt to my brother, which only being paid, always still
keeps us in debt. Neither by paying is it lost, but multiplied thereby; and
like the widows oil, by bestowing, more increased. Yea Aug. ser. 205. de Temp*
as the poor widow having nothing to satisfy her creditors but a cruse of
oil, was hid by Elisaeus to borrow vessels of her neighbors, which she filled
with oil and paid all the debt, 2. Kings 4. so the Church or Christian soul
(says that Father) having nothing to pay her debt of offenses, not shillings,
but a little oil of love, is commanded by our Savior to borrow vessels of
her neighbors, which filling up with oil she may satisfy her creditors.
While her oil decreased, her debt it increased, and while the oil was
augmented, the debt it diminished. While she kept it in her cruse, it suffi^ed
not her self, nor was able to pay the debt till she borrowed vessels of her
neighbors. Wherefore seeing every brother may like that servant Math. 18. say
to his fellow, Pay me that thou owe: let us owe nothing to any man, but to
love one another. Yea if we want vessels for increasing of this oil, let us
borrow them of our neighbors, and pour it into them out of the cruse of our
heart. And if thou art willing and not able to give it, if thy soul like the
poor widow cry, The creditor is come and thine handmaid has nothing to
pay: he that made thee willing (says E^arr. in Psalm 33. and Psalm. 36.
Austine) to promise, will also make thee able to pay that debt, which is love,
not in word and tongue only, but in deed and in truth, and the act of Christ's
commission here spoken of so much, Be reconciled in word, in work and in will.

Which triple reconcilement of two, seeing it must be by a The 2. part of the
commission:
third (as the (...) est per 3. a^que^ mediatorem ad amicitiam and v(...) duci.
Bud^n coment. b^^g. Gr^^. Step. Thesau. and Pha.
word imports) which must make them both (...).
one: behold here is a brother which is a mediator between them, to be their
peace, to make of both one, to break the stop of the partition wall, to preach
peace to him that is far off from agreement, and to him that is near, that
reconciling both to God in one body, he might make of twain one new man, so
making peace and slaying hatred thereby. Which days man seeing it was the
peacemaker between Abraham and Lot, Genesis 13. and should have set those two
Jews at one, Acts 7. Guill in Math 5. 24.
therefore uses Christ in this exhortation the name Brother, because it is
most effectual to persuade concord or unity, and that it is thy shame if
either thou will not retain, or can not obtain amity with thy brother.
Wherefore as the interlinearie gloss on that of the Apostle, Let brotherly
love continue, Heb. 13. 1. does fitly make this word the motive of continuance
in love, because ye are brethren: so does our Savior here make it the reason
of reconcilement, and by the word brother admonishes of keeping concord, and
restoring it as ^
one observes. For indeed latet in hoc vno verbo argumentum, as another ^
speaks in like case: the very name (...), brother (says an ^
heathen) seems by good reason to put us in mind of love and goodwill. And
Sa^el lib 3. ex^tap. cap. ^
what affection men should carry one toward another, the very name brother,
whereby they are called, plainly declares. Wherefore as Lib. 5. (...)
Tully told his friend Metellus mentioning their agreement: Whereas you write
of our reconcilement, I see not why you should call it reconcilement, since we
never fell out: so, strange may it seem our Savior should write to a brother
(...), be reconciled, and not rather (...), never fall out: seeing brother with
the Hebrews so much imports unity, that they call a stock or stone brother
and sister, because it is united to another, Exodus 26. 3. Ezec. 1. 9. Howbeit
seeing Satan who made Esa. 50. ^.
separation between God and man, that the father was divided against the
son, and the son against the father: has also made a division among men,
that now the bonds of brotherhood are dissolved, and brother (as Christ
prophesied) is divided against brother, Mat. 10. as it was needful for Paul to
beseech the son, (...), be reconciled to God thy Father, 2. Cor. 5. so here
necessary for Christ to say to the brother, (...), be reconciled to thy
brother: or (to paraphrase with the Gloss) be reconciled, because he is thy
brother.

But as the Lawyer asked Christ of his neighbor, Luke 10. thou will say unto
me: Who is then my brother? Saint Tem ^. ad^^ He^uid.
Jerome finds in the Scripture a fourfold brother: First, natural, as Jacob
Genesis 2^ 30.
and Esau in the old, Mat. 4. 21.
James and John in the new Testament, which are (...), and (...), borne of the
same parents: as the Greek (...) properly signifies, which Scap. Steph. and^
Linguists derive either from (...) simul, and (...) vter, because they are
couterini of the same womb: or Macro^. lib. ^. Satur. cap. 17.
from the privative (...). and (...) vnus, that is, not one, because one cannot
be called a brother, whence we call him brother in our tongue, as it were
bred-other: But the Latin frater is more general, which some think Ambros.
calap dict.
comes of the Atticke (...), which Eustathius on those words in Lib. 2. Iliad.
Homer, (...), deriues from (...), and imports men, who (...), by any law of
fellowship have community among themselves, whether they be fellow-citizens,
or fellows in religion, or of the same family, or of the same tribe, or at
the same feast, or of the same blood so near linked, that each is frater quasi
fere alter, as A^l. Gel. lib. 13 cap. 10.
Nigidius deduced it, a brother as if he were almost another. And therefore
Jerome finds a second brother, namely, by nation, as all the Jews are termed
brethren, Deuteronomy. 15. 12. because within the land of Jury ( verse. 7.) and all
other stra^ngers and not brethren, verse. 3. because alients from the
commonwealth of Israel.

Thirdly, is there a brother by consanguinitie, as all of one stock and
lineage. So Lot, Abraham's nephew is termed his brother, Genesis 13. So Paul
calls the Jews his brethren, though but kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans
9. 3. and Christ is said to have brethren, Luke 8. 20. that is, as our English
translation on the margent there renders it, kinsfolks, or cousins, as Mat.
13. 55. Mar. 3. 31. and 6. 3. Ioh. 2. 12. 1. Cor. 9. 5.
elsewhere it does interpret.

From which place, although Heluidius and other Antimarites would infer,
Christ had natural brethren, and stain so Mary's virginity, (who was a
Virgin after childbirth, and a chaste mother before marriage, as Tom. 3. apolo.
prolib. aduers. lou^^an.
Jerome speaks) yet was her womb (as with Lib. 13. in E zec. 44. and loco
^itat.
him Austine Sermon. 2. de Temp. and ser. 14.
applies it) like the gate into the holiest of all, into which our high Priest
only entered, Eze. 44. 2. and said: This gate shall be shut and shall not be
opened, and no man shall enter by it, because the Lord God of Israel has
entered by it, and it shall be shut. It appertains to the Prince, the Prince
himself shall sit in it, he shall enter by the porch of that gate, and shall
go out by the way of the same. And s Tom 3. fol 5. adu Hell. de perpet virgi^.
beat^ Mariae.
Jerome there against Heluidius by many arguments proves, she remained a
perpetual Virgin, as the Orthodoxall both Greek and Latin Fathers Ignatius,
Irenaeus, Origin, Basil, Jerome, Austine, Ambrose, Bernard, Chrysostom,
Gregory Nyssene, Epiphanius, Damascene and Theophilact, with Vide Georg. Soh.
tom. 2 art. 3 de pers. and ^ss^c. Cor^st^, quaest. 3. de nat^^
modern Writers affirm and confirm at large. No, her womb (says Lib. 4 in.
Mat. 27.
Jerome) was a tomb for Christ's body, and new sepulcher wherein never man but
he was laid. Upon proof of which point he produces this distinction of
brethren now in hand, and says there is a fourth kind of brethren, spiritual
by profession of one faith, whence all Christians by our Savior are termed
brethren, Mat. 23. Nevertheless since that 1. Ioh. 5. 7.
three-one has conjoined all persons in a triple-vnitie: natural as men,
civil as fellow-citizens, and spiritual as Christians (for he made all
mankind of one blood, as men; to dwell together on the face of the earth as
cohabitants: to seek him, as Christians, Act. 17. 26. 27. and in him as men we
live, move up and down as fellow-citizens, and have our spiritual being as
Christians. I may semblably speak of this triple fraternity: natural, of
brethren by birth and all men by blood: civil, of societies: and spiritual,
of Christian brethren.

And to begin reconcilement of natural brethren, whose being 1. Brother. (...)
was from two, leaving no less then father and mother to become one flesh for
their coexistence, whose bed was one womb for their infant growth, whose life
and vital spirits were from one concord of contrary qualities, and conspiring
temper of elements in the hodie, whose diet and meat was one milk from the
breasts of love, yea whose hearts, tongues, and hands were from one heart, one
tongue, and hands for their agreement in thought, word, and deed: this union is
(...), says Lib. 8 Eth^c. cap. 12.
Aristotle, so natural, that I may with the 1. Cor. 11. 15.
Apostle send them to the school of nature, and ask them, nonne ipsa quidem
natura hoc vos docet? Does not nature it self teach you this thing? and grace
should not need to learn them reconcilement. For even nature (as an Plut lib
de frat. amor.
Heathen notes) to teach them love reciprocal and mutual aid, has put a
book into their hands, their own body, in whose brotherly members, as in so
many columes they may read this borrowed benevolence, in whose fabric and
structure she has made most parts double, germana and gemella, not only
brothers but twins, which are most necessary in the whole, as hands, feet,
eyes, ears, nostrels, and such couples of the body, signifying hereby that
all these for mutual help and not hurt are so divided. To teach them (says
that Author) that she made also two brethren of one seed, not for disagreement
and discord, but that being severed they might help each other in distress.
Which bond of amity if they break, they are not unlike the fingers of one
hand, intangling, wringing against nature, and wresting one another, or like
the two feet tripping and overthrowing each other. And therefore when X(...)ph
lib. 2 de fa^t. and dict. Socrat.
Socrates saw Chaerephon and Chaerecrates two iarring brothers, warring each
with other: Now (says he) ye do as if the hands, which God created to help
one the other, leaving this, should hinder and hurt one the other. Or as the
feet which were framed to bear one another burden, neglecting this, should
supplant one the other, or as the ears which are coauditors of mutual good,
should wax deaf to hear good one for the other, or as the eyes which like
Caleb and Joshua are fellow-spies in this little land for the good of other,
should not look for either others help, but look asquint at the good of the
other. Were not this unnatural and great unhappiness in those members (says
Socrates) which should naturally help one another, whether in the hands, or
feet, or eyes, or other parts which are produced (...).
double and by paires? How much more monstrous in two brethren, whose aid may
exceed the cooperation of hands, or the mutual providence of eyes, or the
coaudience of ears, or the supportance of the feet? Our Polyd. Virgil. lib.
8. hist. Aug.
English Chronicle storieth, that when king Edward the Confessor and Goodwin
Earl of Kent were sItting at table together, Herald the Kings Cup Bearer the
Earls son, did stumble so with one foot, that he was almost down, but
recovering himself with the other, he neither fell, nor shed the drink.
Whereat his father the Earl (observing that of Saint Paul, how these two 1.
Cor. 12. 25.
members had the same care one for the other, and that the one foot could not
say to his fellow, I have no need of thee) merrily said, Nunc frater fratrem
iuvit. Now one brother has helped another. At which word Brother (though
spoken but in least) the King then calling to mind his brother Alfreds death
whom the Earl had slain, thence assumed the Apostles application, that one
brother might help another: whereupon beholding Goodwin with a displeased
countenance, answered, Sic mihi m^us frater auxilio esset si per te li^ uisset,
so might my brother Alfred have also helped me if thou had not been. Thus
could the Earl note in those twins of the body that lesson of Eccles. 4 9.
Solomon, Two are better then one, for if they fall, the one will help up his
fellow. And the King (as if he had been taught at his cup-bearers feet) applied
from their mutual supportance that following Verse 10.
Woe against himself, but woe unto him that is alone, for he falls and there
is not a second to lift him up. For indeed one brother helping another is l^ke
a defenced city (as Sept Ier^m. vulg. (...) (...)ra and Hug^ Card.
some read it) and their counsels like the bar of a palace which is
impregnable, Prou. 18. 19. and if one overcome him, two shall stand against
him, Eccles. 4. 12. so natural is their unity, and strong their coadiuuance,
which nature has framed double for mutual assistance. And therefore as nature
their mother produced these her twins, (I mean the eyes) (...), double and by
twoes, that they might help one the other: so did that natural father send
out his two sons, James and John, (...), by twoes also to catch fish, because
they were (...), brethren in the flesh, Math. 4. 21. And when their spiritual
father called them to be fishers of men, he Mat. 10. 2.
sent the same brethren forth by two also, Mark 6. 7. And therefore by two
(says Ser 2 ^e pur^f. Mar. gloss. Lyr^ in Luc. 10. 1. Hugo in Mar. 6. 7.
Ca^uin. Arat. Janson in id and Fer in Mat. 10. 1. use exhorting
Bernard with some other) that as yoke-fellowes they might bear one another
burden.

And it were to be wished, that parents after their example would send out
brothers into the world, as two feet to support one another through love:
howbeit themselves (as Georg. Rem^s specileg. in Prou. 18. 19.
one justly co^plaineth) for the most part offer occasions of iar, and sow the
seed of contention among their children; either when in their last wills they
make them unequal in their grace, who are equal by nature, and making Reuben
their eldest son, so the excellency of their dignity and excellency of
power, that they leave not the rest of their substance for their other babes,
who often thereby conspire against the eldest as Iaakobs sons did against the
youngest; and resolve like them in the Gospel, This is the heir, come let us
kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours, Math. 21. 38. Or when like old
Genesis ^3. 2^.
Isaac, in their dim eyesight and judgment they mistake their sons
(though he rightly alone blessed where God only loved, Malac. 1.) and
bestowing the birthright upon the younger, resolve with that irreuocable will,
I have blessed him in my will, and he shall be blessed: behold I have made him
Lord, and all his brethen have I made his servants, when the eldest cries like
Esau, I am also thy son, bless me, even me also my father. And this partial
affection causes the elder to hate the younger for stealing away the blessing;
and resolve that when the days of mourning for his father shall come, he will
be avenged of his brother.

A third occasion of filial strife, is when their parents will die without
will, and departing intestate (as he speaks) leave all at randone, to catch
that catch may. And this is indeed prouocare filios ad iram (as the Ephesians. 6. 4.
Apostle speaks) to provoke their children to anger and strife were they
never so peaceable, yea to set them by the ears for their portions, like
Ephraim against Manasses, Manasses against Ephraim, and both against Judah.

A fourth cause of contention fathers beget in their sons, when
dis-inheriting filios irae, the sons of their wrath, they adopt aliants to be
coheires in their inheritance. A law indeed which Ephialtes (as we Alex. l.
16. ca. 10.
read) gave the Lacedaemonians, and not only Val. Max. l. 7. c. 7. de test.
rescis. and cap. 8 de test. rat and iusperat.
stories, but experience gives us too great store of such, to such too
supernatural adopters, who like the Partridge Ier. 17. 11. nourish the young
they brought not forth: unnatural birds to their brood, and cruel to their
young, like the Ostrich in the wilderness, Lam. 4. which leaves his brood in
the earth, and forgets that the foot might scatter them, or that the wild
beast might break them, he shows himself cruel to his young ones as if they
were not his, and is without fear, as if he traveled in vain, Job 39. These
play Micipsa his pranke, Salust. de bell. Iugurth.
who having sons, yet adopted Iugurtha to them, and so set his children by the
ears, and for their supernatural kindness to alients and unnatural to their
own, they may perchance receive Fu^gos. l. 7. c. 9.
Velius Blessus his reward, who having diverse sons, yet adopted on his death
bed one Regulus standing by, because he was diligent about him in his
sickness, and often lapping him, bad him beware of taking cold. But this new
heir (forsooth) having gotten the will made and witnessed, Medicos hortabatur
vt cito Blessum conficerent ne diutius aegritudinis molestia laboraret, he
loved this newfound father so well, that he wished him in heaven, and feed the
Physicians to kill him quickly, and put Blessus out of his pain that the
inheritance that night might be his. What shall I say to these cruel
Ostriches, but admire with the Almighty the possibility of their memorable
oblivion, Is it possible? Esai 49. 15.
Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her
womb? What shall I say to these vnnaturalists, but from the God of nature
pronounce, that in not providing for their own, and namely for them of their
household, but especially for them of their own bodies, they deny the faith,
yea nature it self (which has taught a father to pity his own children,
Psalm. 103.) and are worse then infidels, 1. Tim. 5. 8. If Diogenes therefore
(to return whence I digressed) for his scholars fault gave the master a blow
on the cheek, and a check in the ear, Cur igitur sic instituis? why teach
thou him not better manners then? surely such fathers deserve a blow from his
hands of iron, who ouer-willing to the eldest, or too wilful to the youngest,
or unwilling to all, or mis-willing to any, by these their sower grapes so set
their childrens teeth on edge, that they bite and devour one another.

Let them on their deathbed like departing Iaakob Genesis 49. call together all
their sons into one, and to Reuben, to Benjamin, to Dan, and to Gad, divide
their just portions for auoidance of division. Or let them follow that wise
father in the parable, who divided his substance to his sons to prevent
future contention. Let them of Dan, who give nothing but judgment, learn,
that he would not without will die intestate, but divided his substance. Let
Reubenites, who are all for the eldest, learn, that he gave him not all, but
divided his goods, and so, that he gave his eldest but the inheritance. Let
Beniamites, who are wholly for the youngest, learn, that he gave him but the
portion of goods that fell unto him. And lastly, let them of the tribe of Gad,
who almost give all or most to aliants, learn that he divided all to his
sons: for says our Savior, So he divided unto them his substance, Luke 15.
12. Let them at then death bequeath concord to their children, the best legacy
in their will, semblable to Plus. de garris.
Scylurus the Scythian, who at his death bid his sons bring him a sheafe of
arrows, which he then gave each one to break in pieces, but when no one could
do it, himself pulling them out, easily brake them one by one in their sight:
showing them by this parable that which Solomon in his Proverbs, that a
brother united to a brother is like an impregnable city, and their counsels
like the bar of a palace which cannot be broken: or that I noted in the
Preacher, Two are better then one, for either may help his fellow; but woe
unto him that is alone, for he falls and has not a second to help him up.
And if one overcome him two shall stand against him: and a threefold cord, like
that bundle of arrows, is not easily broken. Let them with Xenop. lib. 8. de
Cyr. Pad.
Cyrus give in their wills this legacy of unity to their sons, and say with
him, Ye which are borne of the same seed of your father, and nourished by the
same milk of your mother, brought up in the same house, beloved of the same
parents, and call on the same father and mother, how should not ye above all
men be most knit in friendship with this knot of nature? break not therefore
these natural bonds of love, wherewith the immortal God has linked you as
brethren. Thus when in peace themselves go to their fathers, they may leave
peace with their sons: that as in their last will they give them their goods,
so in their last and most effectual affection, they may bequeath them this
goodness, the best donatiue of their will, as it was not least legacy in
Christ's testament, and say at their departure as the Savior when he left the
world, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: for else how can they
enjoy peace in heaven, when they know their parts have no peace on earth? How
can their souls sit in mirth at the supper of the Lamb, when they know these
parts of their body like wolves bite and devour another? Which unity in life
time rather should they labor to effect, seeing the holy Ghost in giving
natural brethren no peculiar charge in Scripture (that I know) of loving one
another, has sent them to the school of nature to learn them this lesson in
the members of their body. For making no question of their love, which is the
law of nature, he forbeareth to bid brethren love, and only bids other me^ love
as brethren, 1. Pet. 3. For as C^te^r ^^ as pro Ros^. A^er
Solon the lawgiuer of Greece, being asked why he made no law in Athens, nor
ordained any punishment against paricides, answered wisely, because he thought
none could be so unnatural as to kill his father from who^ he had being: so
neither our sole wise God of heaven made any peculiar law, nor appropriated
many particular punishments to fratricides in scripture, because he might well
think none would be so monstrous in nature as to hate his own flesh, and slay
his brother who is fere alter, almost himself. And therefore whereas he gave
charge to all the household and all sorts of the family to show mutual love and
duty, Ephesians. 6. as children to parents, and fathers to children; servants to
masters, and masters to their servants: he speaks not a word of children
among themselves, as if he had been ashamed to bid brethren be reconciled and
love one another. And passing over it in silence, he seems to use his Apostles
Are^ in 1. The. 4. 9.
preterition, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. But touching brotherly love, ye need not that I
write unto you, for ye are taught of God by nature to love one another, and
making no doubt of doing that, and that thing verily ye do to all the brethren,
he only entreats them to abound therein, But we beseech you that ye increase
it more and more.

But alas natural brethren have more now then called that 2. use, reproof.
into question, whereof the father and God of nature made no question, whose
precept of this love as it is rare, so fratru^^ quoque gratia rara est, their
practice also is as rare, as an heathen in his days could observe. For now
L^be^. de frat. amor.
Plutarch his experience may be our schoolmasters to bring us to many, who
become brothers with strangers, and strange with their brethren, sinful
friends with aliants in gluttony and drunkenness, and yet unfriendly to their
brethren in eating and drinking: tolerate their sins with pleasure and
delight, and yet bitter to theirs, count their slips intolerable: yea whereas
they pass away houses and lands to their harlots, yet strive with their
brethren for the floor of an house, an angle of ground, and foot of a field:
nay whereas they nourish and love their angry dogs, their fierce horses,
their spotted beasts, their toyish Apes, and their cruel Lions; they brook
not anger, nor tolerate fierceness, nor bear with blemishes, nor pardon
childishnes, nor suffer haughtiness in their brethren, which though greatest
they tolerate in brute beasts, and for which things alone they dearly love
them. A brother indeed offended is harder to win then a strong c^tie, (...)
and their contentions (says Prouer. 18. 19.
Solomon) like the bar of a castle which cannot be decided. Ruthful
examples, as of Iaakob and Esau, Isaac and Ismael, Eteocles and Polynices,
Chaerephon and Chaerocrates, as I noted before, and daily is notorious in
domestical experience, manifest this truth to be too true. The reason and
cause of which irreparable breach, is given from the Arist. l. 7. Polit
Oracle of reason, Because not only not to be helped, but greatly hurt by them
of whom we think help due by nature, not so much dissolueth as breaks the
knot of natural affection. For the nearer (as elsewhere Lib. 8. Ethi. c. 9
he notes) is the cause of coniunctio^ and bond of unity, the greater must
needs be the wrong which does dissipate it, and greater the disjunction of them
therefore divided. In least matters to be deceived by a fellow and companion,
is most abominable, says Orat. pro Rosc. Amer.
Tully, because that which he thought he adjoined for an help against others,
helping others against him, does cut him to the quick, and break the
heartstrings of affection. Caesar's wound that his son Brutus gave him, went
nearer to his heart then all the stabs of his foes, and (...), what thou also
my son Brutus? made him cry like David, Psalm. 55. If mine enemy had done me
this dishonor, I could have borne it, but it was even thou my companion, my
guide, and mine own familiar friend. And to imply his greater wrong, he does
explicate their nearer unity, We took sweet counsel together, and walked in
the house of God as friends: and this cause of disjunction of unity from so
near conjunction of amity, he cannot let pass without imprecation to his
treachery, Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into
hell, for wickedness is in their dwellings and among them. For as things which
are joined (says L^b. ^. de frat. amor.
Plutarch) though the glue be melted may be recombined, when a bodily substance
rent in sunder can hardly be reioyned: so love of men after falling out may be
reintegrated, when brethren of one body severed one from the other can with
difficulty be reconciled.

Nevertheless brotherly love (as out of De (...)
Nazianzene I noted) like the graffe or cience of a tree, though it be broken
off from the stock, may be ingrafted again: but seeing the coals of this
hatred are fiery coals, and a vehement flame, which no water can put out, nor
floods can drown, take heed of heating this Asbestos, which being once
incensed, no water, no not of tears can quench. And seeing this amity is the
chief and head of all, knit by so many sinews and arteries of nature, beware
of breaking its neck bone, which can so hardly be knit again. And let all
(...) take heed how they Judge ^^.
follow the way of Caine, 1. John ^. 12.
who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, least that woe which
ouertooke him ouerturne them: having war in his heart, he gave good words
with his mouth, and spoke Ferus in Genesis ^ 8.
friendly to his brother, Genesis 4. 8. See his hypocrisy, to oportune place for
his murderous intent, he persuades him to walk into the field: see his
policy: not into Paradise, a place of purity that abounded with fruit, but
into the field. And where indeed should his brother be slain, but in the
barren field (says L^b. 2 de Ca^^ and Abel. cap ^
Ambrose) where there wanted fruit? Opportunity of place fitting his purpose,
he rose up and slew his brother. Behold his cruelty. O audacious, abominable
and wretched mind, and whatsoever can be said is too little, says a Ch^ysost
(...) 19. 1. Genesis 4.
Father. How did not thine hand tremble at this deed? how could it hold thy
sword and strike a blow at thine own bowels? Thou art thy fathers eldest
son, the beginning of his weakness, and heir of his sins, the patriarch
of murderers; thou have not a second man to quarrel with on earth beside thy
father, and thou will slay thy brother that thou may not be a brother, and
kill the fourth part of all mankind with a blow. But see how the Judge of all
the world arraigneth this murderer at the bar of his justice: Where is thy
brother? And at his conuention see his churlish answer, I cannot tell, am I my
brothers keeper? as if he had bid God go seek him if he would any thing with
him. And see in what admiration of the fact he examineth the offender, What
have thou done? oh what have thou done! The voice, though not of thy murdered
brother, yet of thy brothers blood, yea of his bloods, of his possible
posterity, whom thou have slain in the loins of their father Abel, not only
speaks but cries unto me for vengeance: How long Lord, holy and true, do
thou not avenge our blood on him that dwells on the earth? Yea it cries from
the earth which follows thy murder for her son, for her inhabitant, and for
her keeper; and see his triple judgment according to her threefold
accusation. Judgment in his soul, Thou art cursed from the earth: judgment
in his goods, The earth which opened her mouth to receive his blood from thine
hand, mistrusting no harm from brothers, which were but two on the earth, (
Ambr. lib. 2. de Ca^^. and Abel. c. 10.
Nam quomodo poterat suspectare parr^^dium quae adhuc not viderat homicidium?
for how could it suspect brotherly murder, which had not yet seen
manslaughter?) the earth is cursed for thy sake, not as it was to thy father
Adam, to give Genesis 3. 17.
no fruit without his sweat and labor, but when thou shall till the ground,
it shall not yield thee henceforth her strength. And thirdly judgment in his
body, a vagabond and a runnagate shall thou be in the earth. And after
sentence see how this condemned caitife is carried from the bar with despair
of mercy, My sin is greater then can be pardoned: with horror of judgment,
My punishment is greater then can be borne: and with terror of conscience,
Behold thou have cast me this day from the earth, and from thy face shall I be
hid, and whosoever finds me shall slay me. But of whom (says that Ambr. lib
2. de Ca^^. and Abel. cap 9.
Father) was he afraid to be slain, that had none with him on earth but his
parents? He might fear justly the incursions of natural brute beasts, who more
beastly had broken the course of nature: he might fear rightly the teeth of
wild beasts, who brutishly had fleshed them with man's blood, yea the blood of
his brother. He could not presume of the subjection of fowls, who had taught
them that a man might be killed. He might now also fear the hands of his
parents, who had taught them that parricide might be committed, and that they
would learn to practice a murder, who had taught him the precept in their
original sin. This is Cains punishment in his person, and yet see the taint
of his blood in all his postetitie, whom Noes flood washed away (says Lib. 15 de
^i^. D^, cap. 20.
Austin) from the face of the earth, when it could not wash away their scarlet
sin of blood, double died, both in Caine the thread, and in his offspring the
cloth and garment of vengeance: whom the holy Ghost deigneth not to name in
reciting the catalogue of Adams posterity, Genesis 5. for the face of the Lord is
against them that did evil, to cut off (says David) their remembrance from
the earth. For he would not take them in his mouth, nor make mention of their
names within his lips: as if that curse of the Lord had fallen on his
progeny, Psalm. 109. Let his posterity be destroyed, and in the next
generation let his name be clean put out. O that all Caines which thirst the
blood of their Abel, that all Ismaels which persecute their Isaac, that all
Esaus which pursue their Iaacob to the death, would beware to follow the way of
Caine, that they might not perish in the gaine-saying of Core. Are they
Graecians, or Barbarians? wise or unwise? let those read Plutarch a natural
man, (...), of brotherly love, and these their own body (...), of lime-loue,
how those brethren and twins of the body, eyes, ears, hands, and feet, love
one another, and for shame of their souls be reconciled to them, who are flesh
of their flesh, and bone of their bones.

And surely if we yet look further to the rock whence we 2. Brother natural
in blood, which is, each man.
are hewne, and to the hole of the pit whence we were dug: if we consider
Adam our father, and Eve that bare us, we shall find that we have all this
Iunius and Polan in Mal. 2. 10
one father, Mal. 2. 10. and all this one mother, who is matter omnium
viuentium, Genesis 3. 20. aut iustius morientium (as one Ferus in Genesis 3. 20.
calls her) the mother of all men living, or rather dead while they live in her
trespasses and sins, and all men therefore brethren, Genesis 9. 5. and this
brotherly kindred of men made by him who made all mankind of one blood, Act. 17.
26. For as Ser. 1. de ^e^u^.
Leo truly said of neighbor, that every man whether friend or foe, bond or
free, is our neighbor: so fratrem vt proximum, vel omne hominum genus accipere
debemus, says Lib 2. in Z^c. cap. 7.
Jerome and Saint Lib 2. locut. de Exodus
Austine: Every man is our brother by nature, as our neighbor in the use of
natural things. Through which conjunction of mankind, the very heathen Cic
lib. 1. Oss^.
could see in the twilight of nature, that certain duties of amity and
fellowship are naturally due from all men every one to other: and therefore
AEsch. ^rat. cont. ^^s^ph Arist. lib. ^ ^hetor. ad The^^ect.
used the name neighbor as our Savior does here brother, generally for all
men.

And indeed seeing (as Homil 51. ad Pop. Antioch. 1. The greater world
preaches concord and unity to man.
Chrysostom well notes) the God of all has given all but one house, the
world, to be domesticos naturae, the household of nature: that father of lights
has light all but one candle the Sun, to be filios lucis, just and unjust
children of that light: seeing he that spreads it out like a curtain, has
covered all but with one canapie and roof of heaven to be one family of love.
And seeing the feeder of every living thing, has spread all but one table, the
earth, at which board we are all companions of one bread, and drink all of one
cup the air: doubtless this community of natural things should breed such a
common unity in nature, as should make men in this one house to be of one
mind, and sons of one light, to walk in love as children of the light: and the
family under one roof to walk in this house of God as familiar friends, and
companions at one table to eat their meat together with singleness of heart,
as it united those Saints, because they had all things common, Act. 2. 44.

Which communion of all things natural, if it cannot knit men in one with
these bonds of nature, yet beholding the common union of all things amongst
themselves, the music of this harmony should breed concord and peace in man
the son of peace. For whether we lift up our eyes to heaven above, behold it is
there; the heavens declare the glory of God in their peace, and the firmament
shows his handi-worke: or whether we cast our eyes on the earth below, behold
also it is there, both preaching peace to his people and to his Saints, that
they turn not again. Wherefore as Prou. 6.
Solomon sent the sluggard to the pismire as his schoole-maister to bring him
to labor: Es^. 1.
Esau the ungrateful to the ox and ass to learn thankfulness: Ier. 8.
Jeremy the neglecter of season to the Storke and Turtle, Crane and Swallow, to
learn opportunity of time: the cruel Lam.
mother to the Dragons to learn to draw out her breasts: and our Savior the
worldling to Ravens, to learn divine providence and contentation, Mat. 6. So
ask now the beasts (as Cap. 12. 8. 9.
Job speaks) and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of heaven, and they
shall tell thee: or speak to the earth and it shall show thee, or to the
fishes of the sea, and they shall declare it unto thee. If thou go up to the
heavens, it is there to be read in the large volume of the heaven: if thou go
down to the deep, behold it is there, and the natural face of peace may
thou behold in the glass of the sea. If thou go over the sea to the savage
beasts of the wilderness, behold also it is there, and thou shall find it in
the dens of the earth. For whether we look without us into the greater
world, we shall see the celes^iall orbs and sphaeres of the heaven, though
their motions be diverse, and their reuolutions thwartingly crossing one
another, as ^^a ^pacis q(...).
one notes, yet in so many ages constant in that first covenant of peace, they
keep his law of unity and order, which shall not be broken, Psalm. 148. The
elements themselves though in nature opposite, and in operation contrary, as
heat and cold, drought and moisture, yet concordi pace ligantur, as the Quid*
m^tam. lib. 1.
heathen observes, yet yield they each to other, and meet all in a middle
temper for constitution of humane bodies. Look on the earth below, which
though it be full of strife and cruel habitations, as the Psalmist speaks,
yet therein the beasts of the field armentatim pascun^, they feed by herds,
and graze by droues: the fishes of the sea gregatim natant, they swim in routes
together, and whatsoever walks through the paths of the seas: the fowls of
heaven, turmatim volant, they fly by flocks, and sing together amongst the
branches. Leonum feritas inter se non dimicat, says Pliny, Lib. 7. (...)
hist. in proam.
The cruelty of Lions and Bears fight not one with another, for quando Leoni
fortior erip^it vitam Leo? saeuis inter se conuenit vrsis: The wild beasts, and
birds fight not with their kind, but kindly hold together. Even Serpents bite
not one another, but the heel of man who treads on their head. The fishes of
rapine, though greater devour the less, yet nisi in diuersa genera non
saeuiunt: the most ravenous birds prey not on their kind. So true is that of
Syracides: Every beast loves his like, and every man should love his
neighbor, all flesh will resort to their like, and man should company with
such as himself, Eccles. 13. 16. Yea whereas all these kinds were made by
couples and twoes, Genesis 1. 22. as if nature had dispensed with their division:
man was created vnicus, but one, as a thing of unity without division verse.
26. which one though the Creator made two by an after creation, Genesis 2. 22. yet
made he presently these two one again by conjunction of marriage, verse. 24. vt
sciamus quam concorditer viuere debemus, that thereby we might know, says Lib.
11. de ciu. D^^, cap. 21.
Austine, how peaceably we should live together in one mind. But what do I
speak of sensible though unreasonable beasts? the senseless creatures, as we see
in trees, embrace one another with the arms of their love, the Vine embraces
the Elm, the Pearetree the Vine, the Woodbind the Oak: yea the hard-hearted
stones affect that in love which does sympathize with their nature; as the
Lodestone the Iron: nay, quod magis mirum est, says Erasmus, which is the
wonder of all wonders, even the wicked spirits and fiendes of hell, by whom
concord between men was first broke, and daily stir up men to strife, yet in
wisdom agree all together: seven in Luke 8. 2.
Mary Magdalene, and a whole legion in Verse. 30.
one man could agree without discord, and hold it for a Maxim in their
policy, that Satan should not be divided against Satan, lest his kingdom
should perish by dissension, Luke 11. 18. Thus the greater world without him is
like a city at unity in it self, to shame contentious man, if being the
center of all this circumference, he shall be so divided in himself, as to
make this great round a cockpit of jar, and himself a gazing stock of
strife to fowls of the heaven, beasts in the field, and fishes in the sea.

And if yet we reflect our eyes to within our selves, and behold Secondly, the
lesser world.
man the Microcosme and lesser world, we shall find him an harmony of
discords, an unity of pluralities, an epitome of* the whole, and the center of
all these divided lines. For as Solomon spoke of the fear of God, Finis est
omnium and totum hominis, Eccles. 12. 13. so may I of man who was made to fear
God, he was the end of all creatures, and the sum of them all, as Ambrose
Hexam.
with some Laurent. pr^fat. inoper. ^^ato^.
other have observed. Which little world as God in the Epilogue of his work,
(for his work was a word fiat, Genesis 1. dixit and facta sunt, he spoke but the
word and they were created, Psalm. 148. 5.) created him to be Lord of all: so
epitomized he all things of the greater, in this lesser world, to teach him
unity above the rest: (...) (...), as the Ephesians. 1. 10.
Apostle speaks of recreation, and gathered all things into this one which
are in heaven and earth: that as Paul spoke of his recapitulation, and end of
his word: Nunc eorum quae dicta sunt haec summa est, Now, of all things that
have been said, this is the sum, Heb. 8. 1. so might the Lord speak at the
end of his work: Nunc eorum quae facta sunt, haec summa est, of all things
that have been now made, this man is the sum and brief of them all. In whose
inner man though the Gal. ^. 17.
flesh and the spirit are enemies by grace, as those twins Genesis 25. 21.
strove and fought together in the womb of Rebeckah that two nations struggle
in his womb, and two manner of people seem divided in his bowels: yet in his
outward man the soul and the body, though two contrary parts of heaven and
earth, like the Wolf and the Lamb are met together, and like the Leopard and
the Kid lie feeding together, and kiss each other. Which two sisters, though
yet as contrary each to other, as Mary who sat at Christ's feet and heard his
preaching, was to Martha cumbred about much serving and troubled about many
things, Luke 10. 40. yet unite they their love for the good of man, as those
sisters their care for Lazarus their brother, Ioh. 11. 3. 19. and both like
those two brethren in the And. Alciat. embl^m. 160.
Emblem, which mutually lent the one his lame brother feet, the other his
blind brother eyes: so the body being blind, mutuat hoc oculos, it boroweth
eyes of the soul for his direction, and the soul being lame, mutuat illa
pedes, it borrows feet of the body for his procession, and both walk with
such compassion and fellowfeeling of others harm, that when the body is hurt,
the soul alone is grieved, and when the soul offends, the body offers
his back to the smiters. Whose safeguard of the one as it is concentus
qualitatu^, an harmony and consent of qualities, so is the safety of the
other consensus affectionum, an agreement and consent of the affections: and
the jar of either, the destruction of both, and dissolution of the whole.
Thus contraries conspire in the great and little world for preservation of
mankind, and why then should not man the sum of all these, conspire with man
most opposite for conservation of man-kindnesse in the earth? Thus every beast
loves his like, to teach every man to love his neighbor: thus all flesh
resort to their kind, to shame man, if he hate him that is flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bones. (...), we commend them that love men says Lib. ^.
Ethic. cap 1.
Aristotle, though it be but as they are men: and therefore when D^og L^ert.
lib. 5 ^e vii^ Ph^los.
himself in regard of this humane nature gave a wicked man an alms, and was
checked for his mis-giuing, Misertus sum humanitatem non iniquitatem, I gave it
the man (says he) but not for his manners.

Wherefore let the same mind be in you: shall I say with the Apostle, that was
in Christ Jesus? the same? nay, I am out of hope of it: he was such a (...), a
lover of men as they were but men, ( Tit. 3. 4.) that he laid down his most
precious life to the most ignominious death, for man his most rebellious
traitor. But if not the same, yet let the like mind be in you that was in
Christ Jesus, at least let the mind of Aristotle an heathen and natural man be
in Christians: for shame of mankind let not the mind of Tigers, of Wolves, of
Bears, and Lions be in you, lest ye be shame-kins to mankind. Nay, let but the
mind of these to their own kind, the mind of Lions to Lions, of Wolves to
Wolves, be in you, not to hate your mankind, and good enough. But alas when it
should be homo homini Deus, man to man a preserver, now it is become homo
homini lupus, man to man a deuourer. Every man hunteth his brother with a net,
and carries the mind of these beasts to his brother, which they bear only to
them that in nature are other. Yea whereas all minds and motions of enmity are
in them but singular and peculiar to their kind, they all meet in one man like
rivers in the sea, who is to man in mind ravenous as a Wolf, in head crafty
as a Fox, in heart fierce as a Tiger, in tongue poisonous as an Aspe, in the
evil eye deadly as a Cockatrice, in bloody hands cruel as a Lion: and
therefore the Psalmist compares this man not to one beast, but to the beasts
that perish, Psalm. 49. Video blandas consalutationes, amicos complexus, hilares
compotationes, caeteraque officia humanitatis: I see indeed (says Erasmus)
every one give faire-spoken and courteous salutations, friendly embracings and
congies, merry meetings and kind drinking one to another, and other such parts
of humanity: at o rem indignam (it is the complaint of Er^s pa^^ qu^r.
Peace her self) ficta, fucata omnia, all is fained friendship and hypocrisy.
One cannot see the least shadow of true amity among men, all is naught but
dissimulation and deceit: they cover heart-burning and malice, envy and
hatred under these duties of humanity and cloakes of courtesy: they come in
sheep clothing with the name of brother, of friend, cousin, and kinsman, Et
astutam vapido servant sub pectore vulpem, and within they are ravening wolves.
Where is now a faithful yokefellow that is alter idem, in whose ear a man may
lay his heart, and his life in his hand? Where is a Jonathan with a David, a
Nazianzene with a Basil, an Austine with an Alipius? which like a pair of
Turtle doves mourn and rejoice together? Where are two which like those (...),
bear one the others burden, and support each other through love? The heathen
found in their days but eight yoke of such faithful yoke-fellowes, Pylades
and Orestes, Nisus and Euryalus, Patroclus and Achilles, Theseus and Perithous,
Castor and Pollux, Tidaeus and Polynices, Scipio and Laelius, Damon and
Pythias: but if now the Lord should look down from heaven upon the children
of men, to s^e if there were any that would understand and seek God in the
love of his neighbor, that of David might now be returned, Psalm. 53. Ne vnus
quidem, there is scant a man to be found on the earth. If now, as once
Diogenes, sought an honest man in the street with a candle at noone day: or if
as the Ierem 5. 1.
Lord bad his Prophet, one should now run to and fro by the streets of
Jerusalem, to know and enquire in the open places thereof, if he could find one
man that is faithful to a man, he might (I fear) in many places return his
errant with Solomon, Eccles. 7. 30. Behold I sought one by one to find the
count, and yet my soul seeks, but I find it not: I have found one man of a
thousand.

But here fleshly wisdom will cover her malice to the man, with the cloak of
maliciousness to his manners, and plead, that with David, She must hate them
that imagine evil th^^^s, if his law she will love. It was indeed the
Pharisees corrupt gloss on the law, Thou sh^lt love thy neighbor and hate
thine enemy, Mat. 5. 43. which yet in every man (says Sermon. 1^^. de Iemp.
Austine) may tr^ly though not in their meaning be fulfilled, seeing in him is
both an enemy and a neighbor: for in that he is a man he is thy neigbour, in
that he is evil, not only he is thine enemy but his own: love therefore in
him body and soul, that is thy neigbour which God made, and loath his malice
and impiety, which by his consent the devil made. We must be Zanch. in ^ph. 4
26. and ^erus in Mat. 5 22.
angry against his vi^e, but sin not by anger against his person, Ephesians. 4. 26.
pax cum hominibus, be^lum cum vitijs, We must (says Saint Ser. 66 de Temp and
in Psalm. 138.
Austine and Seneca) have peace with the man, and war with his manners. And
therefore bids Christ love, not his, but our enemies, and them that hate and
hurt us, not himself, Mat. 5. 44. For sic sunt diligendi homines, vt eorum non
diligantur errores, says August. de verb. innocent.
a Father, we must so love the men, that we like not their errors: quia aliud
est amare quod facti sunt, aliud odisse quod faciunt, odimus malitiam,
diligimus creaturam: for it is one thing to love that which they are made,
another to hate that themselves have made: we hate the curstness and love the
creature: Vt nec propter vitium creatura damnetur, nec propter naturam vitium
diligatur: That neither for the vice the creature be condemned, nor the vice
for the creature be beloved. As Tertul. apolo aduers gent.
those Christians told the heathen persecutors in the primitive Church, Ye are
our beloved brethren by the law of nature our mother, though ye be scarce men
because ye are evil brethren. This is that perfect hatred of David, whereby he
loved his enemies. 2. Sam. 19. 6. and hated Gods adversaries, Psalm. 1^9. 21. Do
not I hate them O Lord, that hate thee? yea I hate them right sore as though,
they were mine enemies. He hated them sore but right, because with perfect
hatred, or as the Hebrew sounds (...) with perfection of hatred. And what is
the perfection of this hatred, (says In Psalm. 138.
Austine on these words) but I hated in them their iniquities, and loved thy
workmanship. This is to hate then with perfect hatred, that neither for their
vices we hate the men, nor for the men love their vices, as he loved them as
men, and hated them as evil men. How loved Moses the Israelites for whom he
prayed, and yet hated the same idolaters whom then he destroyed, but by this
perfect hatred? Quo sic oderat iniquitatem quam punicbat, vt diligeret
humanitatem pro qua orabat: whereby he so hated their iniquity which he
punished, that he loved the humanity for which he prayed? Thus must we follow
peace with all men, although not with all manners, but holiness also, Heb. 12.
14. without which peace of God, Phil. 4. no man shall see the God of peace,
Romans 16. and therefore puts the Apostle a condition of possibility, If it
be possible, as much as in you lies, have peace with all men, Romans 12. 18.

For though as antipathie in nature causes such discord between
sheepe-strings and the strings of a wolf, that they can never consort in
harmony, but jar always in the music, as Lib. de mirab. (...)
Albertus, Conrad G(...)r. li^ de (...) ca. de (...), h^^. D.
Cardan and Oppianus, with Lutinists observe, yet accord in place when they
discord in tune, that, the Wolf (as Esai. 11. ^.
he speaks) seems to dwell peaceably with the Lamb: so although the righteous
can agree with the ungodly man no more then the Lamb with the Wolf, Eccle.
13. 18. yet must they dwell peaceably with them in civil conversation as
sheep among wolves, Math. 10. 16. and in this time of peace must the Wolf and
the Lamb feed together, as the Prophet foretold of their conjunction, Esai
65. 25. and righteousness must have concord with all men so unrighteous,
though not with any unrighteousness of men. 2. Cor. 6. For every man (says
Ser. 10. de Quadrages.
Leo) shall so remember himself in another, as to love in his enemy his own
nature, whose natural corruption and fleshly conversation he detesteth: and
the rather, as he notes, because we see often many of godless become godly,
of drunkards become sober, merciful men of cruel, bountiful of covetous,
liberal of extortioners, chaste of incontinent, and peaceable of tumultuous, Vt
bellum vitijs potius quam hominibus indicentes, that rather warring with their
manners then iarring with the men, by love of their person they may conquer
their vices, and suffering evil men, though not men in evil* patiently, they
may instruct them with meekness that are contrary minded; proving if at any
time, if not in the dawning of their childhood, nor at the third hour of their
youth, nor at the sixth of their manhood, or in the ninth of their old age, yet
at the eleventh and last hour of their life God will call them to his grace,
as in these August ser. 59 de verbo Domin. Chrysostom. com. 65. in Math 20. Aqui.
Abulens. Ferus and Guilan Math. 20. has 5. horas exponum 5 aetates nominum
ages he did men into his vineyard, Math. 20. and till then be reconciled to
all men, though not to any evil manners, of natural brethren in birth, or
kinsmen by blood of mankind.

But, be it the law and doctrine of nature prevail nothing 2. To thy civil
brother
with men (which even in brute beasts and things without sense much avails)
yet should the law of policy and bond of civil society, like fellow-citizens
in friendship and amity: for seeing we have not only that (...) as men, but
(...) also, (as our Arist: Li. 8. ^th. cap. 12.
master of morality notes) whereby we are infranchised in a Jerusalem (I
mean now not Ephesians. 2. 19.
above, which is the Gal. 4 26
mother of us all, and Philip. 3. 20
where our (...) should be) below, which is a city at unity in it self:
surely peace should be within her walls, when society within her palaces, and
not division into parts be heard, where the vision of peace in the whole should
be seen. From which uncivil dissociation, how can I better dissuade civil
societies, then as the 1 Corinthians. 12.
Apostle bid the 1. Cor. 1. 11, 12 and chap. 3. 3. 4.
factious Corinths look on the unity of natural bodies: so seeing omnis
societas and collegium corpus est politicum, every society and college is a
body politic or corporation, as Calum. in 1. Cor. 12. 12.
one speaks on these words, to desire them to behold their politic head and
civil face in this natural glass of the body; for whereas Ar^. and Gualt.
in 1. Cor. 12. 12.
omnis fere hinc dissentio solet nasci, almost all jar and dissension springs
from hence, when either inferiors envy superiority, or superiors contemn
those below them, both are so 1. inferiors must not envy their superiors.
lessoned in the book of the body, that if they read but the numbers, those
marginall notes will instruct them. For as the foot makes not a scisme because
it is not the hand, nor the ear because it is not an eye, 1. Corint. 12. 15.
16. so neither must the lowest member of policy come against the highest with
the foot of pride, because it is no higher; but (as the Apostle speaks of
resurrection of the natural body from the grave, so may I of the politic
from the dust) Every man in his own order, 1. Cor. 15. 23. that as in the
Church and body mystical there is one glory of the Sun, another glory of the
Moon, and an other glory of the stars: so in every corporatio^ which is a
golden image of that celestial monarchy, the feet of clay be not swift to
shed blood, because they are not the legs of iron; nor they refuse to support
through love, because they are not the thighs of brass: nor those strong men
bow themselves, because they are not the arms of silver: nor they smite with
the fist of wickedness, because they are not the head of gold in government, or
the ear of justice in magistracy, or the eye of wisdom in counsel: seeing
that body cannot stand, whose f^ete will be as high as the eye, and men as low
in gifts and government as Zachaeus in stature, will climb up into the wild
fig tree of their own conceit to ouertop him above them in place, as Saul was
in height, colloque tenus supereminet omnes, and is higher then they by the
head. Wherefore seeing the Judge 9 15.
Bramble, by affecting superiority over the Cedars of Lebanon, sets on fire
the trees of the forest, which like that wood in the Thu^ydid. lib. 2, bell.
Pelop.
Poet, being shaken by the wind, Sponte edidit ignem qui ipsam consumpsit, of
it self gave fire which consumed it all: let no tree, whether it be the Olive
for her fatness, or the Fig Tree for her sweetness, or the Vine for her
cheerfulness, or the Bramble because of her lowness, advance themselves above
their height; but every member, though a foot of the body, abide in the same
vocation wherein he was placed, till the heavenly promoter exalt him on high,
as said the feast-maker to the lowest guest, Friend sit up higher; or as the
Angel to our Savior, Be there til I bring thee word, Mat. 2. 13.

And as the foot kicketh not the hand, nor the ear envy the 2. Superiour^
must nor contemn their inferiors
eye: so neither looks the eye disdainfully at the hand, nor says the head
contemptuously to the feet, I have no need of you, 1. Cor. 12. 21. Which
brotherly regard, as the higher have it to the members below, so should it
lesson them, who like low Zachaeus are got up to the top of the tree, that they
boast not them selves against the branches, as said our Savior, See that ye
despise not these little ones, Mat. 18. 12.

When Alexander the Macedonian had once got the surname of Great, it is Alex.
ab Alex lib. 2 cap. 19.
storied, that through pride of that title, contemning his old friends, he
would never after write in his letters commendations to any but Phocion and
Antipater. And we have such an Alexander, who as he has the name of a man
without speech, so also his proud nature, that when he is become (...), a
certain great one, like Acts 8
Simon the witch and sorcerer of Samaria, he despises all below him, and says
scornefully to the feet, I have no need of you. For as he noted it in some of
base birth, Asperius nihilest humili cum surgit in altum, set a beggar on
horseback and commonly he begins to gallop: so when these are exalted into the
1. Sam. 2. 8.
seat of glory (as Anna calls it) they ride over our heads, When they are
exalted, the children of men are put to rebuke, Psalm. 12. 8. When thou wast
little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the Tribes?
disswasion of contemning inferiors.
says Samuel to king Saul: for who separateth thee? or what have thou that
thou have not received? If thou have received it, why do thou boast as
though thou had not received it? says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 4. 7. The greater
thou art, the more humble should thou be in all things toward others,
Eccles. 3. 19. Wherefore if thy promotion come neither from the East, nor from
the West, nor yet from the South, but from some other part, yet seeing God
sets up one and pulls down another, boast not thy self against others,
be not high minded, but fear, and Luke 22. 16.
let the greatest among you be as the least, and the chiefest as he that
serves.

For seeing ^. Corin. 12. 22
infirmissima corporis, these most feeble and meanest 2. disswasion.
members are as necessary for the preservation of more glorious parts, as
Goats hair and Rams skins were needful for covering the fine linen, silk,
purple, skarlet and gold of the tabernacle, Exodus 26. surely the poor man
which delivered the besieged city by his wisdom, when the mighty were not
so wise, should have been remembered what he did, Eccles. 9. 15. For as God
shows his wisdom, in that not many wise men, not many mighty, not many
noble are called, 1. Cor. 1. so as a Lord declares he more his might, when by
the mouth of these babes and sucklings he perfiteth his praise; when in these
hands of 2. Corin. 12. 9.
weakness he declares his power, and with the Exodus ^.
basest things, as frogs, lice and flies, he ennobleth his great name.
Wherefore seeing he that made the Numb. 22. 23. 3^. 33.
Ass see more then Balaam the Seer, and 2. Pet. 2. 16.
forbid the foolishness of a Prophet, has 1. Cor. 1. 27.
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: he that with
David's 1. Sa. 17. 39. 40.
sling, rather then Saul's sword, would conquer Goliath, has chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the mighty: he that with Frogs, Grasshoppers
and Lice, rather then with Bears, beasts and Lions, would fight against
Pharao, has chosen vile things of the world to confound the noble: seeing he
(I say) who with Ios. 6 20.
Rams horns overthrew the walls of Jericho, has chosen things despised,
and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are: see that ye
despise not one of these little 3. Diss^^asion
ones, which are so mighty through God, and so much regarded of the Lord of
hoastes.

That as upon those members of the body which we think most dishonest, we put
more comeliness on: so he has given more honor to that part which lacked, 1.
Cor. 12. 24. It was he that went after that lost sheep till he found it, when
he left 99. in the wilderness behind him, Luke 15. 4. He welcomed the
prodigal son with better cheer at his return, then ever he did his eldest
which went not away, verse 29. He gave him as much that labored but an hour,
as them that bore the burden and heat of the day, Math. 20. I will give to
this last and least as much as to thee. He rewarded him that gained but two
talents with his masters joy, as well as him that got five, Math. 25. as Ho^^.
31. in 1. Cor. 12.
Chrysostom observes on these words. Wherefore seeing a little one sooner
enters his strait gate, then a Camel through that eye of a needle, and when
they are entered that narrow door, the first may be last, and the least become
the greatest. Romans 14 10.
Cur contemnis fratre^ tuum? why do thou despise thy brother because he is
here thine inferior? And let them, who (as Genesis 16.
Agar because she had conceived before Sara, despised her mistress) having
conceived their own worth, and with child with self-conceit, are swollen and
puffed up in the heart that they are somewhat, when indeed they are nothing, Gal.
6. 3. Let none that excel, be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another, Gal. 5. 26. but in meekness of spirit esteem other
better then himself, Phil. 2. 3. And since all inequality is with danger of
discord among civil societies; when all cannot be equal, he that excels
his fellow (says an Plut. li. de frat. amor.
heathen) should, if not communicate with his brother his things that are
excellent, yet friendly adopt him into part of his glory. As Pollux imparted
his immortality to Castor, and became partly mortal with his brother for
avoiding dissension. That as in gathering Manna, he that gathered much had no
more, and he that gathered little had no less then his fellow, Exodus 16. 18:
so upon like condition (as in another sense the 2. Corint. 8. 14
Apostle speaks) your abundance may supply their lack, and their want be for
your abundance, that there may be equality. Which modest demission, as it
takes away inequality the corrupter of concord; so it is put by S. Paul as
the preserver of civil amity, when we are not high minded, either with Caesar
to brook no peace, or with Pompey no mate, but make our selves equal with them
of the lower sort, Romans 12. 16. When Plutarch was sent Ambassador with his
colleague to the Proconsull, (as of himself Re^p. gerend. praecep.
he reports) and by occasion of his fellows stay in the way, was forced to
dispatch all the business alone to his great commendation: when at his return
he was giving an account of the arrant, his father standing by took him aside,
and warned him he should not say profectus sum, but profecti sumus; and
diximus, not dixi: not I, but we were Ambassadors, and we said thus to the
governor, and after this manner in his relation communicate all parts of the
business with his fellow, for avoiding of envy and coffeehouse.

And indeed when the eye or the head in dispatch of civil affairs admit the
hand or the feet into part of their glory, as 2. Corinthians. 5.
Paul did the Apostles in that spiritual embassage, with Nos legatione
fungimur, and the Apostles their brethren in the Acts, without whose consent
they decreed not: this making of our selves equal with them of the lower sort,
makes a consort of minds which are unequal. But if in singularity of spirit
we be so high minded, as to arrogate what he assumed in the 63. of Esai, I
alone have done it, and of all the people there was not one with me: this
arrogance of Nebuchadnezzars Dan. 4. 27.
possessiues, breaks the bond of amity, which Phil. 2 4.
not in self-love should look on its own things, but in brotherly love on
the things also of other men.

As the members have the same care one for another, 1. Cor. 12. 3. They must
have the same care one for an other.
25. For to detract from another (says an Cic. lib. 3. Offic. cap. 3.
heathen) and to make his own profit of another disprofit, this is more
against nature in civil associates, then poverty against riches, then sorrow
against their mind, yea then death it self against their body. And if thus we
shall desire to build with other men's ruins, this is as if each member should
think it best for its own health to turn and convert to it self the
nutriment of another, which weakneth the body and destroys the whole: and
every one thus to seek his own good, and not the good of many, that they may
be safe, dissolueth the joints of civil society. We read in the fable, that
the other members mutining against the belly, complained, by their industrious
care and service omnia ventro quaeri, that all was for good of the belly, as if
the belly had been their God; whereas it quiet alone and idle in the midst did
nothing at all, Quam datis voluptatibus frui, but enjoy (as speaks 2. Pet. 1.
13.
Peter of belli-gods) the pleasures of sin for a season; and counting it
pleasure to live deliciously for a season, like that crammed chuffe Luke 12.
said to it self, Thou have much goods laid up for many years, eat, drink, and
take thy pastime; o^ Luke 16. 19.
with that son of Belial, all for the belly, being clothed in fine linen,
fared well and delicately every day: whereas the other members, like the rich
man's servant having filled his barn full, was feign with poor Lazarus lying
at his gate, to be refreshed with the crummes and nutriment that fell from his
table: whereupon all conspiring, that neither the eyes should provide, nor the
feet fetch, nor the hands reach, nor the mouth receive, nor the teeth chaw
meat for the belly, in pining it with hunger, they brought also themselves
into extreme consumption. With which natural parable I wish all Philautians
may be drawn from seeking their own things alone, as Liu deca. 1 and la. and
Dion (...). antiq. Romans lib. o.
Menenius Agrippa the Roman Orator with this apologue won the factious
Commonaltie from mutiny against the Senate. For seeing our immanent self-love
to our selves, must be the measure of our transient love to others (as not
only Math 22. 39.
grace commands Christians, but even ^^rist. (...). cap. 4.
nature teaches all men) it is most repuisite in civil amity (says an C^^.
lib. 1. de leg.
heathen) Vt nihilo sese plus quam alterum diligat, that no man love himself
better then an other, but that Idem in (...)
as every one by nature is loving to himself, he naturally translate the same
affection to others, without which true amiable society is not preserved. But
alas, whereas (...), brotherly love meteth back again to others in the same
measure that she measured to her self, and loves them sicut scipsam as her
self: now (...), self-loue, leaves out sicut, the measure, and loves her
self without measure; that we may now turn round about, and cry to all with
Saint Phil. 2. 21.
Paul: All seek their own, and not the good of others: or at the least with
him in the Comedy Ter. And. act. 2. scen. 5.
complain: Omnes sibi melius malle quam alteri, that all men wish better to
themselves then to other. And if the limbs of corporations have some jar,
yet not like the corporal members, the same care one for another.

Which evenness and aequilibrium, as it is the temper of contrary elements in
the world, of opposite humors in the body, of diverse affections in the soul
of man: so should it be the harmony of contrary factions in civil society:
for seeing (as Lib. 2. de ciu. Dei. cap. 21.
Austine out of Lib. 2. de r^p.
Tully well observes) concord in society is the same that consort in music:
as in that whether isntrumental or vocal, a consent of diverse and distinct
sounds is made like a concord of discords: so of the highest, middle, and base
orders consent should arise from minding one thing, though they differ in
degree, as the members distinct in function, have the same care one for another,

Lest there should be a division in the body, 1. Cor. 12. 25. And 4. They must
beware of faction and division.
from whence are wars and contentions among you? are they not hence, (says
Iam. 4. 1.
Saint James) of your lusts of other men's things, that fight in your members?
Ye lust and have not: ye envy and have indignation, because ye cannot obtain:
ye fight and war, because ye get nothing that belongs to others. And it is
a world to see, how men in self-loue and private respects, like the factious 1.
Cor. 1. 11. 12 and 3 3. 4.
Corinthians, rent the body with that voice of schism: I am Paul's, and I am
Apolloes, and I am Caiphas, I am the heads, I am the eyes, and I am the hands
member, and make a rent without ruin (as they suppose) of society. As if
truth it self could lie, which has said, that not only every kingdom
divided shall not stand, but also an house or city divided in it self shall
not long continue, Mat. 12. 25. The reason of which domestical ruin, as it is
discord and faction, Quae omnia oportunae insidiantibus faciunt, which give
opportunity (said Tit Li^. animal.
Quintius Flaminius) for the waiters of advantage, quum pars quae domestico
certamine inferior sit, externo potius se applicabit, quam ciui cedet, when
that side which is weaker at home, will rather seek aid of any then be
trampled by his own: so is the reason more unreasonable, since (as the best
Arist. lib. 5. Ethic. cap. 6.
Philosopher teaches) wrong against any domesticals, as children which are
bona corporis of the same body: or brethren, which are bona animi, of the same
heart and soul: or servants, which are bona fortunae, part of their goods, is
most unnatural; and can hardly be imagined, but that the holy Ghost
prophesied, that men in these last days should be (...), lovers of themselves,
and so without natural affection, 2. Tim. 3. 2. as to be enemies to the man of
their house, Mich. 7. 6. For as Lib (...) animal. cap. ^^
Aristotle notes of hiues, that in them still are some drones, which do
nothing sed eaeteris quibuscum viuunt iniuriam faciunt, but iniure and wrong
the Bees with whom they live. So that is as true in the swarm of civil and
collegiat societies, 2. These. 3. 11. There are some among you which walk
inordinately, and work not at all, but are busybodies: yea like them, fight
eagerly in the hiue where they are predominant, sed cum ruri sunt (as there he
notes) but when thrust out by a new swarm, they are in the country, nec sibi
nec vllis alijs iniuriantur, they neither then strive among themselves, nor
with others, but are as tame as a lamb, and as quisht as a Be. I would tell
in the ear of some, what Lib. 8. de ^ra cap. 8.
Seneca diuulged to the eye of the world: Inter istos quos togatos vides nulla
est pax: alter in alterius exitium l^ui compendio ducitur: felicem oderunt,
infelicem contemnunt: maiore grauantur, minori graves sunt, ferarum iste
conuentus est. I speak now to them that have understanding, judge ye what I
say: and I wish I might not pronounce of some evil beasts and slow bellies,
what of Monks and Friars Pacis quar^m.
Erasmus observed in his days: Au(...) salutationes pacis, cerno rerum omnium
coniunctum collegium, templum idem, leges ^asdem, conuentus quotidianos, quis
hic non confidat pacem fore? Who would not look for a vision of peace within
her walls, where is such society within her palaces? Sed o rem indignam
(says he) nusquam fere collegio conuenit cum Episcopo: parum hoc nisi and ipsi
inter se factionibus scind^rentur, Dominicales dissident cum Minoritis,
Benedictini cum Bernardinis: tot factiones sunt quot sodalitia: imo idem
sodalitium factionibus scinditur: Not only Ephraim against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim, but the 1. Chron. 5.
tribe of Manasseh is divided in it self: some following the head and governor
of the city, saying, We are Paul's, and like those Arist. lib. 4. de hist.
animal. cap. 7.
insecta, as Gnats, Ants, Flies, and Bees, which being divided in the body,
that part which goes with the head commonly lives and thriueth: others
following the feet or belly, saying, we are Apolloes, and these parts which go
not with the head, commonly die (as we see by experience) and never thrive
after their division* Others like the ambidexter Iud. 2^.
Gibeonites play on both sides, and halt between two opinions: if the head be
for their profit, they go after it: if the eye, they go after it. And these
neuters or rather vters are like those sea-Calues, Crocadiles, Otters, and
sea-Colts in Aristotle and Pliny, which are one while in the water, another
while on the land for greater booty: justly termed dubia by Isidore, because
ye cannot tell where to have them: sometime they are natatilia, and swim with
the tide: other sometimes gressabilia, and go back for advantage. But where is
the man of peace, who in time of jar turns neither to the right hand nor
the left, but goes straight forward? where is that son of peace, who can
boast with Cic^r. ad ^am. 11. Epist. 21.
Hortensius, that in these civil garboiles, nunquam civilly bello interfuit, he
never sided with either part in civil or rather uncivil dissension? Indeed
Aul. G^l. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Solon made a law in Athens, that whosoever sided not with the one part in
faction, should forfeit all his goods, and be banished his country. Which,
howsoever Gellius apologizing Solon, interprets as fit to compose sedition,
since wise men joining with the one faction, may rule and moderate their one
side, and so bring them to seek agreement and peace with the other: yet taxes
R^ip. gerend. pracept.
Plutarch this law of Solon, and teaches to be so indifferent between both,
that thou join with neither in faction; or rather to be of either to join
both, as Christ our head was both God and man, that as a mediator between both
he might reconcile them each to other: as Nestor between Agamemnon and
Achilles, Socrates betwixt Chaerephon and Chaerecrates, Moses between the two
Hebrews, Menenius Agrippa between the Commons and the Senate, and that
town-Clark between Paul with his companions, and the seditious Ephesians, Act.
19.

And since indeed (as Plato well observed) the commonwealth 5. Gouernour^ of
bodies p^liticke must prevent faction, and heads join the members together.
like a fish commonly first putrifieth and rotteth at the head: (for as the
Judge of the people is himself, so are his officers: and what manner of man the
ruler of the city is, such are they that dwell therein, Eccles. 10. 2.) it
stands them upon who are chosen as Exodus 18. 25.
chief of the tribes of Israel to be heads over the people, be they rulers
over thousands, or rulers over hundreds, or rulers over fifties, or rulers over
tennes, that as each of them is an head of the house of their fathers, Number. 1.
4. which is a body politic: so like Ephesians. 5.
Christ the head of the body mystical, he be seruator corporis, such a wise
Savior of that body, as to couple and knit it together by every joint and
sinew of concord, that it may increase in every part, and edifying it self in
love may follow the truth in peace, and in all things grow up unto him which is
the head, Ephesians. 4. 15.

But if in their civil regiments they consult with that Florentine Ma^h. cap.
^^ de Princip^.
Secretary, (whose counsel by their practice, s^emes to some Politicians like
the Oracle of God) who advises his Prince in time of peace to nourish faction
among his subjects, vt facilius eis ex voluntate vtatur, that by their fire
himself may better see what to do, as another of them speaks: surely, I must
ask them and answer with Saint James, chap. 3. 13. Who is a wise man and
endued with knowledge among you? let him show by good conversation his works
in meekness of wisdom: but if ye have bitter envying and strife among you,
rejoice not, neither be liars against the truth. This wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish: for where envying and
strife is, there is sedition and all manner of evil works: but the wisdom
that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, without
hypocrisy, and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that
make peace. It was a devilish lesson Idem com. lib. 2. cap. 2 and lib. 3. cap.
3.
he gave his tyrant, (and they show themselves no less who practice his
precept) that seeing the concord and agreement of his subjects and
subordinates, may hurt his tyranny, and hinder his wicked proceedings: he must
in policy serere odia and alere factiones inter eos, sow hatred and maintain
factions among them, whereby being troubled among themselves, he may fish in
that troubled water, and thereout suck no small advantage for distrusting one
another, nihil audebunt in communi in eum m^chinari, they will not dare to
combine against him.

And to such Machiuelian politicians, whose pot seetheth with the fire of their
peoples faction, I may justly imprecate with Psalm. 58. 9.
David, Or ever their pot be made hot with these thorns, so let indignation
vex them even as a thing that is raw* Behold all ye kindle a fire (says the
Esai 50. 11.
Prophet) and are compassed about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire
and in the sparks ye have kindled. This shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow. Reip. gerend. praecep.
Plutarch (though an heathen) teaches them a better lesson in the school of
policy, Ex officio ciuilis viri subiectis rebus hoc vnum ei restat, etc. It is
the only duty of a man who has civil government, wherein he cannot better
be employed, to to teach his people to use concord and traffic friendship
among themselves: that he abolish all strifes, discord and hatred from among
them, and give all diligence that he remedy private wrongs: that some strifes
rise not at all, other be allayed and buried, others make no increase. And if
dissension happen, that he so talk and confer with him iniuried, that seeming
to participate of his wrong, he pacify his fury and appease his mind; that he
be their peace to make of two one, and breaking down the partition wall, slay
hatred thereby. For seeing policy learned her platform of government from
the hiue, as framers of commonwealths do confess: surely though other Bees
carry stings to fight and wound one another, yet as Rex apum, the governor of
the Bees is Senec. lib 1. de Clem. cap. 19.
without a sting, or A^^st lib. 5. de ^^st a^^^al. c. 21
uses it not though it have one: so should praepositus, says Seneca; a
governor be without gall like a Dove, with Paul gentle among his own, like a
nurce cherishing her own chilldren, and be like (...) a Lamb, not like (...)
a Lion, lurking in his den that he may ravish the poor. Psalm 10. 9. Be not
as a Lion in thine own house (says Ecclesiasticus), neither beat thy
servants for thy fantasy, nor oppress them that are under thee, Eccles. 4.
30. Howbeit if with Cleo for maintaining their faction, aculeatos fucos in
rempublicam inducant, as Plato speaks, they bring in not industrious Bees,
but biting drones into their hiues, how carry they not many stings in their
hinder parts? And I may send them to the Be, as Solomon did some to the Ant,
to learn and consider her ways, that as she ignauum fucos pecus a pres^pibus
arc^t, they keep out idle drones which trouble but the swarm. Or if like that
theefe-Bee they steal in another way then by the door, yet as duces apum
improbos alucis p^llere conantur, ne seditiones in examine faciant, as Lib. ^.
d^ (...) a(...) cap. ^0.
Aristotle notes: so they would cut off those that do disqu^et them, and let
no root of bitterness, though planted, yet not spring up to trouble all, ne
pars sincera trahatur, lest many thereby be defiled, Heb. 12. 15. Melius vt
pereat vnus quam vnitas, says Tom 2 Epist. 10^.
Bernard: Mat. 5. 29. 30.
Better that one member perish, then that the whole body should be cast into
hell: better that one man die, then that the whole nation should perish. God
forbid, that Bethel the house of God should become Bether an house of division:
God defend, that Bethmarraboth, the house of bitterness wiped out, should
become Behoram, the house of anger and wrath. God defend, that Jerusalem the
vision of peace, which in David's government was like a city at unity in it
self, ( Psalm. 122.) should in Lysias the chief captains time, be like
Jerusalem all on an uproar, Act. 21. God forbid, that the head should rejoice
to see the members bite and devour one another: or nourish drones in the hiue,
which work not at al, but are busybodies. For howsoever skilful Beekeepers,
and cunning hiue-heards judge that swarm to be best fruitful in making honey,
apud quod strepitus, susurrus frequens, tumultusque plurimum est, which buzzeth
most, and makes the greatest stir and tumult, as Loco cita^.
Aristotle notes: yet that regent cui Deus ciuilis examinis curam imposuit,
who has government of the civil hiue, says Reip. g^rend. praecept.
Plutarch, must judge them to make then most honey, when they are most
peaceable and quiet, and think that when they are busybodies, they work not
at all. For where strife and envying is, there are all manner of evil works,
Iam. 3. 16. Let me end this point with the Romans 16. 17.
Apostles exhortation, Now I beseech you brethren mark them diligently which
cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have received,
and avoid them: for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus but their own
bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple.
Phil. 2. 1. 2 3. 4.
And if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of compassion and mercy, fulfill my
joy: my joy? yea, your heavenly Fathers joy, the Church your mothers joy on
earth, men's joy, the Angels joy, and the devils grief and sorrow, that ye be
like minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of one judgment,
that nothing be done through contention or vainglorie: but that in meekness of
mind every man esteem other better then himself. Look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of other, and the God that makes
Psalm. 68.
men to be of one mind in an house, give you that ye be like minded. 2. Cor.
13. 11
Be of one mind, live in peace ciuilly with your brethren, and the God of peace
and love shall be with you.

But be it that natural brethren of one Adam and Eve break 3 To thy
spiritual brother.
the linkes of consanguinitie, and civil brethren of one head and common weal
dissolve the bands of brotherhood in civil society: yet seeing (says Lib. de
discip. Christ. cap. 1.
Austine) as Christians, we have all one father, which is God; one mother the
Church, whereby we are brethren in the spirit, let us keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace. For seeing almighty God our Mat. 23. 9.
heavenly father has 1. Pet. 1. 2 3.
begot us by the immortal seed of his word, in the Esa. 46. 3.
womb of his Cant. 4. 9. 10. Hos. 2 19
spouse the Church, which is the Gal. 4. 26. Esa. 54. 1. 13.
mother of us all: all ye Christians are brethren, says Christ our elder Romans
8. 29.
brother, Mat. 23. 8. Which spiritual fraternity (so the 1. Pet. ^. 9.
Apostle calls it) as it is more holy then carnal brotherhood: (for sanctior
est copula cordium quam corporum, says Tom. 1. lib. de mod. be^. vi^. ser. 5.
de ch^r^^.
Bernard) so should it be nearer linked in love, seeing coniunctiores sunt qui
animis quam qui corporibus coniunguntur, nearer are they of kin which are
allied in the spirit, then they who are but of lineage in the flesh, as Lib. 6
divine. instit. cap. 10.
Lactantius observes. Whereupon, as for that, the son of the Virgin Mary
counted his mother more blessed for carrying him in her heart by grace, then in
her womb by nature, Luke 11. 28. so for this, our elder brother Christ
preferred his spiritual brethren to his mother, and brethren in the flesh, Mat.
12. 49. Which mystical body of the Church, since Christ has knit together by
joints and bands proceeding from him, Col. 2. 19. as the head does our natural
body by arteries and sinews derived from it: therefore shows the Apostle to
us seven of these bands and nerves of love, Ephesians. 4. 4. First, we are one
body, whose members must needs be knit together: secondly, we have all one
spirit, whereby we are united together: thirdly, one hope of our vocation, for
which as hopeful coheires we should rejoice together: fourthly, one Lord, whom
as fellow-seruants peaceably we serve together: fifthly, one faith, which we
maintain together: sixthly, one baptism, in which we promised against his foes
to fight together: and seventhly, one God and Father of all, who will have his
children to be, and rejoices to see them in unity together. Which bonds of
peace, common to us all, should link us in love, as those primitive Christians
were one heart and one soul, when they had all things common, Act. 2. 4.

For seeing amity and love springs from likeness and equality, as Lib. 8.
Ethic. cap. 8.
Aristotle, Lib de amicit.
Tully, and Lib. de multit. amicorum.
Plutarch teach: this (...), this though earthly oneness and identitie,
wrought even with heathen men so much, that old Hegio in the Terent. Adel. act.
3. s^en. 5.
Comedy from this could resolve never to break friendship, Cognatus mihi
erat, vna a pueris paruoli
Sumus educati: vna semper militiae and domi
Fuimus: paupertatem vna pertulimus grauem.
Animam relinquam potius quam deseram.
We were borne together, we were brought up together, at home and abroad we
always were together, we suffered want both together, nothing but death shall
divorce us.

Val. Max. li. 1. cap. de ^ira^.
Philostratus and Hippoclides, because they were borne in one day, had one
schoolemaister and lesson of Philosophy, and one decrepit age, they had one
mind and one affection, and one purse, their love continued to the last hour
of their death, and dyed both together.

What knit Tully and Scipio so together, that they were of one heart, and one
soul in two bodies, but this (...) and likeness, as himself Lib. de amicit.
confesses, whereby they both lived in one house, fed at one table, learned
one knowledge, fought in one war, traveled in one peregrination, and
conuersed in one rustication and country life? Such unity of minds this
oneness of manners bred in these men, that he professes himself, he never
offended him in any thing to his knowledge; and confesses of his friend, that
he never heard any thing from his mouth that displeased him: wherefore well
might he speak as he Ci^. in Lalio.
does from his experience, that nothing does more beget and bring up amity,
then paritie, equality and likeness, in the things of the body, of mind, and
of fortune. What knit Austine and Alipius so indissolubly together, (to come to
more spiritual friendship) but because (as he Lib. 6. 8. 9. conf.
confesses) they were borne both in one town, Togasta in Affricke, brought up
in one study of learning, almost of one age, converted by one Ambrose at
Myllaine, at one time, from one heresy, received one baptism and one spirit
of new birth? And what should more link our hearts then that we are all borne
of one immortal seed, in one womb of the Church, growing up in one body to
the full stature of Christ, as members knit together by one spirit, all
traveling to one Canaan and hope of our calling, in this way serving one Lord,
maintaining one faith, fighting together in one Sacrament and oath of Baptism,
and lovingly living together as sons of one God and Father of all? O hearts
harder then Adamant, complains Eras. pacis quarim.
peace: In rebus tam multis consortium, and in vita tam inexplicabile
dissidium? In so many things fellowship, and in life no friendship? All one
body, and in the members no sympathy? In all one spirit, and in the
affections no harmonic? All one hope of heaven, and in coheires no symphonie?
All one Lord, and in fellow servants no unity? All one faith, and in opinions
no symmetrie? Al sworn in one Baptism, and in fellow soldiers no symmachie?
all adopted by one Father, and in brethren no fraternity? For all these ones
no unity? This of all other is argumentum maximi momenti, the most inducing
motive, says a Beza mayor ann. in Ephesians. 4. 4.
Writer, and strongest argument that may be to love, that we are all by one God
and Father, made one body through one Spirit, to serve one Lord in one faith,
and consecrated to him by one Baptism, do hope all for one glorious
inheritance whereunto we are called. Which seven Zach. 11. 14.
bands of brotherhood, seeing Satan has dissolved, as Antiochus cut off the
seven brethren which were knit together, 2. Match. 7. give me leave to bind them
faster then before, and seeing the unity of one God and Father is Rolloc. in
Ephesians. 4
first in order, somewhat inuerting the linkes, to order them as Beza in that
golden chain has proposed them.

First, we have all one God and Father of all, who as he is the 1. link of
Christian brotherhood, One Father.
author not of confusion but of peace, 1. Corint. 14. 33. so will he have all
things in his house done honestly and by order, ver. 40. And rather so done,
because as mightily he has showed himself a Father of generation to us all,
Esai 64. 8. (wherein yet are both Acts 17. 24. 28
beasts and Verse 26.
beastly men our brethren and our sisters but the Job 17.
worms): so mercifully has he been a Father of regeneration to redeem us his
children, Esai 63. 16. for which cause we may call Math 13. 9.
none our father on earth but him, nor any brethen but the children of his
spirit. From which former paternitie of creation, as he called his creatures
only good when they were severed apart; but then indeed very good when in one
view he saw them Iun. in Genesis 1. 31.
in symmetrie united together, Genesis 1. 31: so from this later fatherhood of
recreation he counts his new creatures good, when in peace they serve him by
Mat. 18. 20.
two or three; but then only commends them for very good, when they all
continue together with one accord in the temple, and in symphonie praise him
together, Acts 4. 46. yea so good, that in admiration thereof he cries out in
exclamation, Ecce quam bonum, behold how good it is when brethren dwell
together in unity, Psalm 133. For indeed as the eye (says Saint Lib. 3. de
Genesis ad lit. cap. 24.
Austine) the light of the body, though it seem fair and is well favored in
it self when it is apart from the whole, is yet more beautiful and comely
when united with the members of this little world: so the light of the world
was glorious and good in it self, when it was without the firmament of his
luster; Genesis 1. 4. but then only called most glorious and very good of its
Father, when he saw it joined with the members of the greater world, verse 31.
Which unity of creatures, if it be so good and comely in the eye of their
mighty Father, who formed them of dust by his word, then Quam bonum and quam
iucundum, how good and comely is it in the eye of their merciful father, who
framed them anew by his essential word, to see his children like brethren
dwell together in unity? Which duty of accord, though as father rightly he
might claim by that title of father, A son honoreth his father; If then I be
a father, where is mine honor? And which service of unity, though as God
justly he might challenge by that right of master: a servant honoreth his
master, If then I be your master where is my fear? Mal. 1. 6. yet draws he
them with promise of reward in that Psalm, that they might do it at least like
hired servants for their profit, which they would not for his pleasure as
dutiful children: Ecce (says he) behold how profitable and how pleasant it
is; which since, for himself, is not pleasant any thing unto the Almighty that
thus thou art righteous, nor profitable unto him that thou make thy ways
thus upright, Job 22. 3. (for as thy goods are not profitable, Psalm. 16. so
neither is thy goodness pleasant unto him for himself, Job 35. 7.): surely
the profit and the pleasure of this concord redounds to them alone that like
brethren dwell together in unity. And though virtue have no reward better, as
vice no punishment greater then it self, so that we should not need the spur
of reward to be pricked forward to this, as neither the bridle of punishment to
be restrained from that: yet is he here driven to call on our dull nature with
the spurs of profit and pleasure, when we behold how profitable and pleasant
a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. For seeing omne
amabile, every object of our love, which lodestone-like draws our iron hearts
to affect and embrace it, must be (as our Arist. li. 8. eth. cap. 2.
Moral-master teaches) either good, or profitable, or pleasant: he sets
here this Psalm before our eyes as a glass, wherein we may behold how good,
how profitable, and how pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together
in unity. The glory of which virtue was so eminent to the eye of his
knowledge, that (as Ser. 2. de pace ad frat. in erem.
Austine notes) Prius miraretur quam ostenderet quid vtilitatis and
iucunditatis haberet, He first stood admiring it before he showed what profit
and pleasure it affoorded: and therefore that Father admiring this admiration
of our heavenly Father, cries out and exclaimeth, O quam grandem admirationem
proposuit! O what admirable and wonderful admiration he showed when he cried
out, Behold! What marvelous profit and pleasure he proclaimed, when he
wondered, how profitable and pleasant a thing it was. For pleasantness he Psalm.
133. 2.
likeneth it to the sweet savor of Aarons precious ointment, which ran
down from his head to the skirts of his clothing: and for profit, to the
Verse 3.
deaw of Hermon, which watered the mountains of Sion, and made them fruitful
hills. Some things indeed are good (says Ibid.
Austine) but not delightsome, as fasting, watching, and afflictions are
profitable but not pleasant, Hebr. 12. 11. some things are delightsome but not
good, as gluttony, drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, and sin is
pleasant but not profitable, 2. Pet. 2. 13. But would thou have a good thing
sweetened with pleasure, and a pleasant thing relishing of goodness, Ecce,
Behold how good and pleasant it is: Miscuit vtile dulci, he has mingled here
pleasantness to make thee taste, with good to make thee savor this great thing
of God, and both procuring health in this life, and happiness in the oother.
For there (says the Prophet) the Lord promised his blessing in this life, and
life for evermore in the world to come, Psalm 133. 3. Behold then how good and
pleasant it is, when love faiths younger brother, like Genesis 43. 34.
Benjamin the youngest has his mess doubled of our Joseph, and this holiness
that is so pleasant and profitable unto all things, has the promise of the
life present, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8. The profitable
pleasure of which brotherly unity, as God the Father did admire when he beheld
it, so fell that good father into admiration of this peace and union of
brethren when he saw it. O peace (says Ibid.
Austine) mother of Eremites, father of Caenobites, sister of solitaries, thou
bond of the Patriarks, thou chariot of the Prophets, thou refuge of the
Apostles, thou solace of the Martyrs, thou girdle of Confessors, thou dance of
virgins, thou glass of widows, thou spectacle of married folks, thou hate
of tyrants, and halter of robbers. O peace and brotherly love, thou calmness
of the mind, thou tranquillity of the soul, and singleness of the heart. This
is the happiness which stantheth grudges, and quenches broiles, and stinteth
garboiles, pulls down the crest of pride, embraces the humble, appeaseth
the disagreeing, and pacifieth the fury of foes. O peace, let thy possessor
keep thee, let him that wants thee seek, and him that has lost thee go after
thee: for behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity. Which as it was joyful for David to behold in some of his
kingdom, for ostende bat qui dicebat ecce (says In hunc Psalm
Austine) he pointed the finger to some whom he said Behold: so I wish this
Psalm might now be said as truly Ecce, behold how brethren of one heavenly
father dwell together in unity. I wish they that are without might point at
us, as did the Tertul. 39. apo. aduers. Gent.
heathen at those Christians in the Primitive Church, and say, Behold how these
Christians love one another. This was the Prophet David's Ecce: but I fear
another ecce of the Prophet Esai may point out too many. He that is their
father looked for judgment, but ecce behold oppression: for righteousness,
but behold a crying, Esai. 5. 7. Beloved in Christ Jesus, have we not all one
Mal. 2.
Father? has not one God made us? why then do we transgress every one against
his brother, and break the covenant of our father? Though some false brethren,
as they dealt with Gal. 2. 4.
Paul, that crept and came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in
Christ Jesus of things indifferent, to bring us into bondage, have appropriated
this name of brethren to themselves, yet conference found them like Simeon and
Leui, but brethren in evil; and into their secret descend not thou my soul, my
glory be not thou joined with their assembly, and a Cano^ has discharged and
dissolved the bonds of their brotherhood. That all Christians are indeed
brethren, Romans 8. 29. and (...), a fraternity among our selves from this one
Father, 1. Pet. 5. 9. and therefore must be (...), and love as brethren, 1.
Pet. 3. 8. there is an herb almost in every hedge, which for it nature by some
Vid. Kemb. D^d
Herbalists is named (...), lover of brethren or Cliuer, because in love it
cleaues to every one that does but touch it. This herb we pluck up, and let
the root of bitterness spring up in our hearts, whereby many are defiled. But
Paul the 1. Cor. 3.
best planter would have us let it grow on in our gardens, Heb. 13. 1. (...),
let brotherly love continue. For as in a garden knot, diversity of flowers and
sweet herbs cause a more fragrant smell to him that keeps them: so incundum
est, it is a sweet smelling flower in the nostrils of him whom Mary supposed
to be a gardener, when brethren dwell together in unity. I might add with
David, It is also profitable unto them: for surely (says Ser. 11 de Quadrag.
Leo) Apud suum patrem, qui non fuerit in charitate fratrum, non habebitur in
numero filiorum, he shall never have the inheritance of sons with God his
father in heaven, who has not the love of brethen with his mother the Church
here on earth. Let us not then by our iarres grieve the holy spirit of God our
Father, whereby we are sealed for sons unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.
30. as Esau would not be avenged of Genes. 27. 41.
Iaakob least he should vex his father Isaac, who the rather should not be
grieved with his contentious children, because he has made them all

One body, whereof his own son is the head. Ye are the 2. link, one body.
body of Christ, and every man a member thereof for his part, 1. Cor. 12. 27.
Now how absurd in nature would it seem to a natural man, that the members of
the body (as I said before) 1. unity in the body.
should be divided? That head was mad in Judas which plotted, the feet were
unnatural that went, and the hands cruel which executed the other members
with an halter, Mat. 27. 5. they were lunatic feet and possessed with a devil,
which often times carried their fellow members into the fire, and often times into
the water, Mat. 19. 15. It was a tongue denying the faith, and forswearing
nature, which cursed its fellow members, Mat. 26. 74. They were hands possessed
with a legion of devils, which stroke their fellow members with stones, Mark 5.
5. and most unnatural teeth which did Esai. 9. 20.
eat up the arms and Esai. 49. 26.
devoured their own flesh. For if thus the feet of the body mystical shall
presume to rise against the head, and each member against his fellow, what is
this (says Orat. 1. de reconcil. Monach.
Nazianzene) but the dissolution of the joints and destruction of the whole? If
the mystical members shall thus strive each with other, the reverend body of
Christ must needs be rent asunder, and Satan by our hands shall divide the
seamelesse coat of Christ, which by the cruel soldiers that crucified the
head he could not effect, John 19. 24. Because indeed the twelve tribes of
Israel according to the flesh should be divided in themselves and rent in two
parts, Ahijah the Prophet tore Ieroboams garment in twelve pieces, 1. Kings 11.
30. but because Israel after the spirit should not be rent in schisms, 1. Cor.
3. Christ would not have his seamelesse coat divided, as De vnit^t. Ecclesia.
Cyprian well observes: and yet it is doleful to see what division among the
members of Christ; in whose body humorists like distempering humors in the fit
and fever of blind zeal, run beyond the sobriety of knowledge and the temper
of Christ's body. But blessed be that Physician which gives them a cup of cold
water to drink for allaying of their hot fit, verily he shall not loose his
reward. It is ruthful to see, how when the Galatians would have plucked out
their eyes to give Gal 4. 15.
Paul, the hands of Christ's body would pluck out the eyes to give themselves
sport, as the Philistines did Sampson, and our tongues of persuasion would
teach the eyes to be no higher then themselves in the body, and have no
greater lights then stars in the Church, which is a 1. Tim. 3 15.
firmament of truth, nor those to differ one star from another star in
glory. We have not wanted many a Diotrephes, Qui quoniam non possunt primum
locum obtinere in Ecclesia, idcirco eam scindunt vel ab ea deficiunt, as Mayor
ann^^. in 1. Cor. 12. 15.
Beza speaks, who (it seems) said by experience of some in our Church, and
for love of good brethren concealeth the Church, who because they could not
have the pre-eminence among us to be one of the two eyes of this body, would
therefore not be of the body; and when blazing comets could not be the Sun or
Moon, would fall from heaven with the tail of the Dragon and become wandering
stars, as the Iud. 13.
Apostle well terms them. And though as 2. Tim 3. 8. 9.
Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, these also resist the truth; yet the
comfort is, they shall prevail no longer, for their madness shall be evident
unto all men as theirs also was, but of this more anon: and mean while let
them know from Saint Ser. 2 de pace a^frat. in erem.
Austine, that as the spirit of man viuifieth not the corporal members unless
they be joined in unity; so neither the spirit of God quickneth the spiritual
members unless they be united in peace: and so united, that like as those,
though they have not the same office, have yet the same care one for another,
1. Cor. 12. 4. 25. so these though they have diverse gifts and operations of
the spirit, yet be one another 2. Community.
members in the body, Romans 12. 5. 6. For as the eye sees more for other parts
then for it self: so must the wise with Job 29 15.
Job be the eye of wisdom in counsel to the ignorant and blind, and look
not every man on his own things, but on the things also of other men, Philip.
2. 4. As the hands are not strong for themselves alone, but for defense of the
rest: so must with Verse 12.
him the hands of help in the Nobles deliver the poor, the fatherless, and
him that has no help. As the feet sustain not or carry themselves, but the
whole: so must those strong men of supportance in the gentry, with Verse 15.
him be feet to the lame, and support one another through love, Ephesians. 4. 2. As
the head deuiseth not so much its own as the good of the whole; so with Verse
16.
him must the head of advice in the Lawyers, seek out the cause for them that
know it not. As the ear hears not alone for it self, but the whole: so with
him must the ear of justice in the magistrates deliver the poor that cries,
Job 29. 12. and so as they did him, the eye that sees their justice, shall
give witness to magistrates; the ear that hears their wisdom, shall
bless the counsel; the hands that receive their help, shall defend the
Nobles: the feet that feel their sustenance, shall support the gentry: that
(as In Psalm. 130.
Austine notes) though the eye see and hear not, the ear hear and see not,
the hand work and neither hear nor see; and the foot walk, and neither
hear, see, nor work: yet the eye may say, the ear hears for me, and the
ear may say, the eye sees for me, and either say, the hand works for me,
and the hand say, both see and hear for me, and all three confess the foot
walks for them: seeing singula seruari totius interest, the safety of one is
the safeguard of all, as Lib. 2. de ira cap. 31.
Seneca well observes. Thus those three thousand Christians which were members
of this body, had such care one of another, that none among them lacked, but
had al things common which were communicable, Acts 4. and each distributed to
other as he had need, as the natural members have care one for another. Thus
those other Christians in the Primitive Church, had a community of hand and
heart one with another, Omnia indiscreta sunt apud nos praeter v^cores, All
things (said they by Apol. aduers. G^mez.
Tertullian their mouth) are common amongst us, except the marriage bed, In illo
loco consortium soluimus, in quo solo caeteri homines consortium exercent, in
that place we break company, in which alone these heathen are companions. This
should be the mutual care of Christ's members, since the members of the body
have such care one for another: that as these, if one suffer, all suffer with
it, 1. Cor. 12. 26. 3. compassion.
so also they suffer one with another, 1. Pet. 3. 8. Which place of Saint Paul,
father Tom. 10. homil. 15. de mod. quo no^ inuic. dilig. deb. and tract. 32. in
J^an. and in Psalm. 130.
Austine in his works often expounding, most excellently shows this mutual
compassion: Behold (says he) the foot treads on a thorn, and see how all
the members condole it: the back bends it self, the head stoupeth, the eye
most remote in place diligently searches, the ears attend where it is said to
be, the hands pull it out, every member is busied to succor it: and yet
neither head, nor eye, nor ear, nor hand, nor any part but the foot was
pricked with the thorn. And this is that memento of compassion and
fellow-feeling, which the Apostle enioyneth fellow members of this body, Hebr.
13. 3. Remember them that are in bonds, as if ye were bound with them: and them
that are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the body. This
sympathy of Christ's members Paul commands Christians, Rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Romans 12. 15. This like-affection even
nature A^ist lib. 9. Ethic. cap. 4.
teaches all men, who would have a friend to be not only (...), but (...) also,
to be of like affection one toward another, that whether our fellow-member
sing of mercy or judgment, pipe unto us of his wealth, we dance for joy, or
mourn for his woe, we lament. This was Job.
Jobs commiseration, Did not I weep with him that was in trouble? and was not
my soul in heaviness for the poor? But alas, where is this weeping with them
that weep? We weep often, but it is like the Crocadile, who first kills a man,
and then weeps fainedly for him, but for all her tears, after deuoureth him.
Such a Crocodile was Ier. 41.
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, who having slain Gedaliah, wept for him
forsooth, and with his fained tears moved Gedaliah his friends to come and
mourn for him, and at advantage slew them with the sword. These weepers for
their fellow members afflictions, are like those hired womenmourners, Ier. 9.
17. 18. which with the woman of Tekoah feign themselves to mourn, and put on
mourning apparel, 2. Sam. 14. 2. which can now so weep with them that weep,
as presently rejoice with them that rejoice, and are rather passionate then
compassionate members, whose heaviness may endure (it may be) for a night, but
joy comes in the morning. Those that indeed will be true condolers, must so
be (...), 1. Pet. 3. 8. and suffer with another, that (as Beza paraphrastically
well turns it) they be mutuo molestiarum sensu affecti, be touched with the
sense and feeling of their griefs.

We Diodor. Sicul. lib 4. dereb. ant. cap. 1.
read of such compassion among the AEthiopians, that if any one be hurt or
harmed in any part by misfortune, all his domesticals and friends hurt
themselves in the same: if he halt on the right, they limpe on the same: if on
the left leg, in compassion they halt on the left, and communis est omnium
felicitas and infelicitas, says mine Author, these natural men like the
natural members are touched with the sense and feeling of one another
griefs. And if we will not learn of barbarous and unwise, yet let us learn
of the wise and holy men of God, at least let us learn of our members which we
still carry about us. Behold and consider thy self, O man. If Paul's face be
smitten with the rod, the tongue it complains, why smitest thou me? the heart
it sobs and sighs, why grieuest thou me? the eye it waters with grief, why
saltest thou me? the head it shakes, why vexest thou me? the hand it points him
out, why wrongest thou me? Behold in a throng and preasse of people (says Hom.
15. citat.
Austine) if the foot be trod upon, the tongue complains, thou treadest on
me: if he reply to it, I trod on the foot, I touched not thee: Yes thou
trodest on me says charity, 4. co^gratulatio^
thou trodest on me says sympathy, thou trodest on me says unity: their
suffering is mutual as their joy reciprocal,

If one member be had in honor, all rejoice with it. Is the back to be decked
and adorned with costly raiment? for joy the head will invent it, the eye will
lust it, the feet fetch it, the tongue prize it, the hand inuest it, and the
head like our Mat. 25.
Savior will congratulate them all. In that ye have done it to the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it to me. This was the rejoicing of Paul with
the Ph^lippians for their heavenly health, and their resounding joy with him
for his spiritual wealth, Phil. 2. 17. 18. We were comforted (says 2. Cor. 7.
13.
he to the Corinths) because ye were comforted: and this confidence have I of
you all, that my joy is the joy of you all, 2. Cor. 2. 3. This is the
congratulation of Saints, to rejoice with others joy, and be glad they have
that in others, which they possess not themselves, vt singulorum beatitudo sit
omnium, and omnium beatitudinum vniuersit as singulorum, says Tom. 4. lib. de
amicit. cap. 22.
Austine: That the wealth of each one may be the weal of all, and their common
prosperity each ones particular plenty: that one body being at unity, the
members may have community, and that common care move sympathy, and compassion
of the members which are linked by a nearer bond of

One spirit. Which as a soul in this mystical body knitteth 3. link, one
spirit
all her members with joints and nerves, nearer then the spirit of man does the
lims of his body with arteries and sinews of the flesh. For as in the divine
essence, though there be three persons which are in themselves distinct, yet
because they all have one spirit and nature, 1. Ioh. 5. they have therefore but
one will, Ioh. 17. 21. So we also though we be many persons and members of one
body, 1. Cor. 12. 12. yet because we have all but one spirit, verse. 13. we
must needs be like them ( Act. 4.) of one heart and one mind. And therefore
since from one soul and spirit humane, contrary judgments, disagreeing
thoughts, and opposite motions cannot properly proceed, but (as Arist. lib. 9.
Eth^c. cap. 4.
Nature teaches) the same desire, the same lust and will: well concluded Paul
his Philippians in the bond of peace from the unity of this spirit, Phil. 2. 2.
If there be any fellowship of the spirit, says he, be like minded, having the
same love, being of one accord and of one judgment. And indeed, seeing as
corporal wedlock puts two souls in one body, Ephesians. 5. 31. so spiritual
marriage with Christ through this spirit, makes but one soul (as it were) in
two bodies, 1. Sam. 18. as Lib. 8 Ethic.
Aristotle spoke of friendship. Surely as the former couple being (...), (as
Ephesians 3. 6.
Paul speaks) of the same body, must needs be Philip. 4. 3.
(...), yoke-fellowes, to Eccles. 26. 7.
draw both one way: so these latter pair, being (...), of the same spirit, (
Phil. 2. 2.) must needs also be (...), yoke-fellowes, to mind one thing, and
draw both one way in their judgments. Thus were those former Christians of one
heart and soul, because they had this one spirit, Act. 4. 32. This witnessed
Apol. ad Gent.
Tertullian of those later Christians in his time: Animo animaque miscemur, We
are of one heart, of one mind, and one judgment, because we have one spirit.
And this is the nearest of all bonds that heaven and earth can afford. For our
God of peace to knit our affections, binds us with all cords of love possible
to be found. First, because men of one kingdom love one another better then
strangers, that we might do so, he made us one kingdom, 1. Pet. 2. not any of
us alients and forreiners, but all of one commonwealth, Ephesians. 2. 12. And
because in one kingdom, men of one city commonly love best, that we might do
so, he made us fellow-citizens, and that with the Saints, verse. 19. And because
in one town factions do arise, and domesticals love more: that we might do no
less, he made us one household, as there we may read. And because often man's
enemies are they of his house, and brethren of all the family love best: that
we might do likewise, he made us all brethren, Mat. 23. And yet because
brethren may jar, and the members never fall to war: that we might never
fall out, he made us one body, Ephesians. 4. And yet again, because the members
of his body may be divided, and our soul is never at division: that our
minds, wills, and judgments might for ever be united, he gave us this one
spirit, which is the bond of peace. Wherefore (that with Phil. 4. 3.
the Apostle I may exhort) I pray Euodias, and beseech Syntiche, that they be
of one accord in the Lord. Let the body of Antichrist, because it has not
this one spirit, but like that mad body in the Mark 5. 1.
Gospel is possessed with a legion of evil spirits, let her members beat one
another as did his, which cannot be bound with these chains of unity, as his
could not with bands. But seeing Christ's body, which ye are, has one spirit:
1. Cor. 1. 10.
I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that ye all
speak one thing, that there be no dissentions among you, but be ye knit
together in one mind, and in one judgment, Ephesians. 4. 3.
indeuouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: and rather
because it is commanded by

One Lord. For though on earth there be many Lords, yet unto 4. link, one Lord
us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by who^ are all things, and we by him.
1. Cor. 8. 6. who as he came in the Luke 2.
reign of Augustus, a time of peace, and was brought from heaven with an Verse
14.
Angelical song of peace; so being indeed the Esai. 9. 6.
Prince of peace, at his return to his Father, left he his servants the
cognizance of peace, Ioh. 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you.

For as malice is Satan's liuerie, whereby even Caine is discerned to be of that
wicked one, 1. John. 3. 12. so is love Christ's badge, by which each one is
known to belong to this Lord, verse. 19. By this (says he) shall all men know,
that ye are my disciples and servants, if ye love one another, Ioh. 13. 35. Not
by crying, Lord, Lord, not by casting out many devils, not by doing any great
miracles in my name, not by prophesying in my name, Mat. 7. 22. not by speaking
with the tongue of men and Angels, not by having the gift of prophecy, not by
knowing al secrets and al knowledge, not by faith that ca^ remove mountains,
not by feeding the poor with all your goods, nor by giving your bodies to be
burned, 1. Cor. 13. But in hoc cognoscent, by this cognizance shall all men
know ye are my servants, if ye love one another. Other that are wicked may have
all these gifts, as before I have showed; but (...), says the Apostle, by this
badge are the children of God known and the children of the devil, 1. Ioh. 3.
10. This was the badge, whereby as the Scribes and Pharisees Acts 4. 13.
knew by the boldness and learning of Peter and John, that they had been with
Christ: so the heathen knew those primitive saints to be Christians and
belonged to Christ, when they cried, Vide vt inuicem se diligant, See how these
Christians love one another. Ipsi enim inuicem oderunt, for they hated one
another, says Apol. 39. adu. Gent
Tertullian, and showed by their badge, that they were of their father the
devil, seeing the John 8. 44.
lusts of their father they would do, and be as ready to kill one another, as
we to die one for another, and lay down our lives for the brethren. Which
badge of one Lord, seeing to wear on one arm is not sufficient for them, who
like Publicans and sinners love none but their friends, Math. 5. 46. our prince
of peace, because he is Lord of Lords and King of Kings, will have his servants
to wear it not only on their breast, but also on their back, and love their
foes as well as their friends, Math. 5. 44. A new commandment (says this one
Lord) I give unto you, that ye love one another, Ioh. 13. 34. But how one
another? Even as I (says he) have loved you mine enemies, that ye love one
another. Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye do
well, for so am I. If I then your Lord and master have washed your feet in
love to my foes, ye ought also to wash one another feet. These are (beloved
fellow-seruants) the arms of your one Lord, whereby ye may show of what house
ye come, and whether to one Lord, as servants? yea as brethren ye belong.
Lovers of their friends are to him but half a kin, yea are but his brethren
in law, even of their wrested law, Mat. 5 43.
who taught to love a friend and hate an enemy: nay they are not allied to
this one Lord, unless Publicans and sinners be his kindred. Lovers of their
foes they are his nearest kin, even his father, and mother, his sisters and
his brethren, Math. 12. 50. Now (beloved in Christ Jesus) since this one Lord
left us his badge when he went, to know us to be his servants when he returns,
what will he say when he finds on our backs the mark of the Beast, and on our
breasts the badge of the devil? He will say to such Christians as Mat. 22.
he said of the coin, Whose image and superscription has it? whose badge and
cognizance is this that you wear? Satan's? why then give to Satan that which is
Satan's: ye serve not one Lord alone it seems by your arms: ye Zeph. 1. 5.
swear by the Lord and by Malcham: your Hos. 10 2.
heart is divided into an Psalm. 12. 2.
heart to your friends, and an heart to your foes, that ye halt between me and
Satan. If 2. King. 18. 21
he be your Lord go after him, but if I be your one and only Lord, come after
me alone: for Luke 16. 13.
ye cannot serve us two masters, whose service is so Gal. 5. 17.
contrary, as the Iam. 4. 4.
amity of the one is the enmity of the other, and whosoever will be a friend
of Satan, makes himself the enemy of God this one Lord. O then ye servants
of my God, lean not to Satan, unless ye will leave this one Lord. Keep not
back like Act. 5.
Ananias and Saphira part of his possession. The son and Lord of David, like
his 2. Sam. 16.
father will not be served with followers whose beards are half shaven, and
with curtald wedding garments of love. He who requires the whole heart and not
the half, Prou. 23. like the true 1 King. 3. 26.
mother will not have it divided into parts, but will have all the heart, all
the soul, and all the mind, thrice all, least a thought of malice should stay
behind, Math. 22. 37. For which service of your one Lord, if doubting your
reward ye resolve with them in Malachie. 3. 14. It is in vain to serve God,
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandment, and walked humbly
before the Lord of hosts? Therefore we count the proud blessed: even they that
work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God, yea, they are delivered;
O tarry the Lords leisure for his reward. Erit tempus, there will be, there
will be a time, when he will discern between the righteous and the wicked,
says the Prophet, between him that serves God and him that serves him not,
Verse. last. He that waits on his Lord shall come to honor, Prou. 27. 18.
says Solomon. Which though it often be not so with our earthly Lords, yet the
Lord will not forget his people, nor forsake them that be godly. Thou Lord,
says David, have never failed them that serve thee, Psalm. But as he promised
his followers a reward, and appointed unto them a kingdom, because they had
continued with him, and followed him in the regeneration, Luke 22. so will this
one Lord, if him alone ye serve in love, give you the kingdom when that great
donatiue shall fall into his hand, for you to receive it.

Howbeit if this one Lord cannot link fellow servants in love, yet the

One faith wherein all we serve him, should knit the faithful 3. Link, One
faith.
in affection. Where, by faith, whether we understand that faith in God, Mark.
11. 22. by which Romans 5. 1.
hand we receive Romans 6. 23.
that gift of God, and 1. Tim. 6. 12.
lay hold on eternal life; or that faith of God, Apocal. 14. 12. by which seed
of the word we conceive this hope of that kingdom (as Aquit and Zench. in
Ephesians. 4. 4.
some do them both): either of them is so specifically one in the object of one
Lord which they apprehend (though neither numerically one in the subjects
wherein they are comprehended) that they should link the subjects together
wherein they dwell, to this one Lord whereon they work.

And touching the former, though each man has his own One faith in God.
particular faith, by which alone he shall live, Abak. 2. 4. which in S. Paul
is not numerically one with the faith of his Titus, yet have they both one
faith of the elect, Tit. 1. 1. which specifically is one, and called a common
faith to them both in respect of the object, verse. 4. and still through the
Scripture termed in the singular number, the faith of the Saints, whether Jews
or Gentiles. For howsoever that Apostle may seem unto some, to distinguish Two
doubtful places expounded.
the Jews faith from the faith of the Gentiles, in saying, One God shall
justify circumcision (...).
of faith, and through Former.
faith uncircumcision, Romans 3. 30. from which diverse prepositio^s in As Romans
11. 36. (...). And 1. Cor. 11. 12. (...)
other places Lib. 3. in To. 3. 30.
Origin here proposes some diversity: yet is not this spoken (says Lib. de
spirit. and lit. cap. 29.
Austine) to make any difference between the faiths of these two nations, as
if of, and as though through faith did really differ; for as here he auerreth,
circumcision shall be justified of faith, so elsewhere he avouches that God
will justify the Gentiles (...) of faith also, Gal. 3. 8. And as here he
affirms, that uncircumcision shall be justified by faith, so elsewhere he
confirms, that the Jews shall be justified (...) likewise by faith, Gal. 2.
16. But this one faith shadowed under these two prepositions, whether it was
thus spoken ad veritate^ locutionis, as that Father notes, as Pharaoh his
dream though one in Gen 41. 25.
matter was doubled in manner, Verse 31.
because the thing was certain and of importance: or whether it was to
increase and exaggerate the thing (as Martyr thinks) with these two diverse
phrases, as Col. 1. 16. All things were created (...), of him, and through him.
elsewhere he does in another cause: or whether (as Jerome judges) he would
rather change the phrase the^ ingeminate the same, as 1. Cor. 12. 8. (...), etc.
elsewhere he does in one verse: or to check the Jews supposed real
difference of their justification from the Gentiles, by a verbal difference,
as with Calvin I rather think: surely though these prepositions be diverse,
yet the propositions are the same, as generally most ancient and late writers
do agree. As if, when the Jews looked for a difference from his mouth, he
should have said: And will you needs have one? here is all: God will justify
the Jews of faith, and through faith the Gentiles, which differ but in word.
Or those of faith, says Calvin, because they were borne heirs of the
covenant, and received it ex patribus, of their fathers, Romans 9. and these by
faith, because it was to them aduentitious and through the fall of the Jews.
Romans 11. 11. ^atter doubt^ll place.


There also may seem one faith of the Jews and another of Gentiles, where the
Apostle says, By the Gospel the righteousness of God is revealed from faith
to faith. Roman. 1. 17. Which revelation nevertheless, whether it be meant
from the faith of Preachers to the faith of their hearers, as Lib. de spirit.
and lit. cap. 11.
Austine: or from the faith of the Jew to faith of the Gentile, as Jerome: or
from the faith of God promising, to the faith of man believing, as Ambrose: or
from faith in the old, to faith in the new Testament, as Chrysostom: or rather
from faith imperfect, to faith more perfect in degree, with Musculus and
Aretius I rather deem: surely it is not distinct in either, but one in both
them and us, which like Macrob. Sat. lib. 1.
Ianus being bifrons, two-faced, in the Jews (as it did in Ioh. 8. 56.
Abraham that saw Christ's day) looked forward to him that was to come, and in
us Gentiles looks backward unto him who is already gone, as Peter witnessed
of us both when he spoke of this bifrons fides, Act. 15. 11. We believe to be
saved through the grace of Christ even as they. For he has put no difference
between us and them after that by faith he had purified their hearts. Which
last exposition of our latest expounders, as it suteth with the limbs of the
text, so is it semblable to like phrase of Scripture, where the godly are said
to grow from strength to strength, Psalm. 84. and to be changed from glory to
glory by the spirit of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3. 18. and here from faith to faith,
To. 1. 17. from a Mat. 6. 30.
little faith to a Mat. 15. 28.
great faith, as he prayed in the Mat. 9. 24
Gospel, Lord I believe, help my unbelief, or as the Luke 17. 5.
Apostles, Increase our faith. For howsoever the Apostle, says Strom. lib 5.
in princip.
Clemens Alexandrinus, seem to import a double faith in this place, yet he
purporteth but one, quae per augmentu^ ad perfectionem contendat, a musterd
seed of faith planted by Paul, which watered by Apollo, may grow up to a great
tree, in whose branches the graces of heaven may build their nests, as he
seems to allude. Thus then have we all, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or
free, rich or poor, one faith, one I say, though not in every subject wherein
it dwells, yet one in the object on which it works, the free grace of God
in Christ Jesus, who was yesterday Caluian Heb. 13. 8 and aly.
under the Law, and is to day in the Gospel the same Jesus and Savior for
ever. Heb. 13.

How should we not then all agree in one light of truth, being 1. Use.
so many beams shining from this one Sun of righteousness? How should we
not all bear one fruit of the spirit, being so many branches ingrafted in this
one vine and root of Iesse? How should we not all relish alike each to other,
being so many brooks derived from this one fountain of grace? How should we
not all consent in one sense and judgment, being so many nerves proceeding
from this one head of wisdom? How should we not all be of one affection, being
so many arteries springing from this one heart of love? How should we not all
be of one mind, being so many veins drawing our nourishment from this one
liver of life? How should we not all be of one accord in Christ Jesus, being so
many lines drawn from this one center of grace? How should we not lastly
square and proportion all our souls and bodies each to other, being so many
living stones coupled and built together on this corner stone and foundation
Christ Jesus the author and finisher of this one faith? O what sympathy in our
bodies, and unity in our souls should it make, that these desperate
compatients are healed by this one Physician? O what symphonie of tongues and
free affection should it cause, that forlorn captives we are freed al together
by this one redemption? O what unity of spirit and conjunction of mind bred
it in the children of Israel, that this one Savior made them all Exodus 15. 1.
one miraculous way into the holy land, through the red sea wherein he drowned
their enemies? And what union of mind should it cause in us true Israel, that
he has Heb. 10, 19. 10
made us all enter into the holy place by one new and living way, eue^ his
blood, in the red sea whereof he has drowned all our foes the fiends of hell?
As we all then (blessed brethren) go this one way thorough truth unto life, so
let us not fall out by the way through any error in this life; we have all one
faith and grace of God in Christ Jesus, the one and only means of our
salvation.

Which one faith, seeing our adversaries of the Romish sinagogue 2. Use.
rent in sunder by their idolatrous superstitions, how can we be but unequally
yoked with those infidels? What fraternity and fellowship can the
righteousness of Christ have with the unrighteousness of Antichrist? What
communion or common union can light have with darkness? What concord Christ
with Belial? What part the believer aright with the infidel? and what
agreement the temple of God with devils? says S. Paul 2. Cor. 6. 16. For
though Lib. 4. princip. s^d. cap. 10.
Stapleton slander our Church with renting this one faith, yet since the
foundation of their faith is not the rock alone whereon we build, but that other
of sand. 1. Cor. 3. as has bin in By D. K. throughout his conference.
conference learnedly showed: if their religion be superstition, and their
Christian profession Antichristianisme, which has been as solidly and
substantially By D. D. and D Ao. in their Tracts of Antichrist.
proved: without doubt we have rightly come out from among them, and separated
our selves justly as Tract de Eccl. cap. 10. per totu^.
Philip Mornay has sufficiently demonstrated. For seeing this one faith and
only means of life they refuse at his hands who freely offers them
all sufficiency, and answer wickedly, what 2. Sam. 24.
David did well, Not so, but I will buy it of thee at a price: seeing they
count Christ's robe of righteousness not large enough to cover their nakedness
of sin, but patch too a piece of new cloth, as if this old were out worn:
seeing they botch to it the Esa. 64. 6.
menstruous and filthy clouts of their own righteousness, which like the 2.
Sam. 10. 4. 5.
curtald garments of David's servants cannot hide their shame, but do indeed
defile them as Job. 9. 31.
Job confessed: Mine own garments defile me, and had more need to be washed
themselves in the blood of the Lamb, then be able to wipe away their scarlet
sins: truly if they will be our brethren in this one faith, they must know,
that when they came to buy food of life at our Genesis 42. 25.
Joseph with money in their bags, and merit in their hands, that they have
corn enough at his hands for naught, and their money back again: that they
have salvation for naught, and their merits back again. For as God took from
our first parents their clothes of fig leaves which covered not all their
shame, and made them coats of skins to hide all their nakedness, Genesis 3. 21.
so till Christ take from them their rags of righteousness and fig leaves of
merits, and put on them his sheep clothing, which is the robe of his
innocence, we must think they have not put on the Lord Jesus the author and
finisher of this one faith, neither says Christ here in my text Be reconciled
to these brethren. Yea, since they Ier. 2 13.
leave the fountain of living water, from which wel-spring of life they should
draw their health, and dig to themselves broken cisternes that can hold no
water; since as Jonah 1. 5.
Ionahs mariners called in their trouble every man on his god, so to them in
their misery are as many gods, and (to speak with 1. Cor. 8 5.
S. Paul) as many Lords as ever had the Aug. lib 4. de ciuit. Dei, cap. 8.
heathen, on whom they call. In G. So(...), to 3 in Psalm. 65.
dangers, Nicholas in shipwreck, as the heathens did Neptune: Laurence and
Florianus in house-burnings, as the Ethnicks did Vesta: John and Paul in
tempests: Leonard in bonds and imprisonment: for diseases, Valentine in the
falling sickness, as they did Hercules: Roctius and Sebastian in the Plague:
Ottilia for sore eyes; Apollonia for the toothache: Margaret in childbirth, as
the pagans did Juno: and Petronella for fevers. For te^porall things, generally
Anne, as the painims did Juno: S. Lupus for their corn, as the other did
Ceres: Urban and Medard for their vines, as they did Bacchus: Gallus for their
geese: Anthony for their swine: Wendeline for their sheep: Eulogius for their
horses: Pelagius for their oxen. In liberal sciences, in general Gregory and
Catharine, as they Apollo and Minerua; in special, Augustine for divinity,
Iuo for law: Casman and Damianus in physic, as the other Esculapius. In
mechanical trades, Crispine in the shoes trade, Gudman in the butchers,
Seuerine in the weauers, and Joseph in the carpenters trade. In hunting
Eustachius, and in riding Saint George on horseback. Yea since every nation,
region, province, nay town and village, have their tutelar, or rather titular
gods, on whom they call for help in distress, as in Germany S. Martine and
S. George: in Italy, Peter and S. Paul: In Spain S. James: in France Michael
and Dionysius: in Heluetia Marie: in Hungary Lodouick: in Poland Stanislaus: in
Muscouie Nicholas: in Borussia Albert: in Colen the three wisemen of the East,
called the three Kings of Colen: in Auspurge Huldericke: in Millaine S.
Ambrose: and at Francfort Bartholomew: and quomodo possint vno loco libri huius
commemorari omnia nomina deorum and dearum quae grandibus voluminibus vix
comprehendere potuerunt? as speaks Austine in that catalogue of the gods
among the heathen, how can I in one Chapter of this book reckon the beadrole
and recite all the names of their gods and goddesses, which a large volume
could not contain, seeing singulis rebus propria dispertiunt officia numinum,
as he speaks of them; they have tutelar gods in every toy and trifle, that I
may justly exprobrate to them as Jeremy did to the idolatrous Israelites,
Where are thy gods that thou have made thee? Let them arise if they can help
thee in time of thy trouble. For Ier. 11. 13.
according to the number of thy Cities are thy gods o Judah. Ierem. 2. 28.
Seeing (I say) they have made this shipwreck of this one faith on the sands of
their merits, and have not built but run against the rock, and stumbled at
the stone of offense: seeing wicked men, like those false Prophets Deuteronomy. 13.
13. have gone out from among us, as the Raven from the Arc never to return,
and drawn away the inhabitants of their City, saying, Let us go and serve
other gods which we have not known: seeing they 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
went out from us, that were not of us (for if they had been of us they would
have continued with us) either for ambitious pre-eminence, like 2. Ioh. 9.
Diotrephes, by that serpentine persuasion, Genesis 3. 5.
Here shall ye be as gods: or with 2. Tim 4. 10.
Demas for gaining this present world with that Mat. 4. 9.
diabolical promise, All these things will I give thee: or as said 1. Sam. 22.
7.
Saul to his servants, Hear now ye sons of Gemini, will the son of Ishas,
will Christ the root of Iesse, give every one of you fields and vineyards,
will he make you all Captains over thousands, and Captains over hundreds,
that ye all have conspired against me? Seeing they have forsaken us in the
foundation, justly we them in the building of this one faith, as Genesis 7. 1. 7.
Noah forsook the old world, Genesis 12. 1.
Abraham the Canaanites, Genesis 19. 17.
Lot the Sodomites, Exodus 12. 37. 41.
Israel the Egyptians, and Christ himself the Pharisees: and though they would
build with us, how can we build with them, when they on the sand and we on the
rock, when they Babel and we Jerusalem? How can we go with a right foot to
their work, when they give us not the right hands of fellowship, but
sinistraes societatis, the left hands of their Jesuitical society? Wherefore
no reconcilement to them who are the enemies of one faith, as Israel was
forbidden to make peace with Moab and Ammon, Deuteronomy. 23. 6. And though they cry
like 2. ^.
Iehoram, Is it peace Iehu? is it peace Protestant? we may answer like him,
What peace, whiles the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel and her whichcrafts are
yet in great number? For as the Prophet 2 ^
Iehu asked Ichosaphat, Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate
the Lord? Should Christians be friends with them who are enemies to the cross
of Christ? No, no, says God to his Prophet, If thou return to them, then will
I bring thee back again, and thou shall stand before me: and if thou take
away the precious from the vile, thou shall be according to my word. Let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them, Ier. 15. 19. and I will make
thee unto this people a strong brazen wall: and they shall fight against thee,
but they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee to save thee and
deliver thee, says the Lord.

Howbeit if ever God shall grant the^ repentance, that they may know the truth,
and come out of the snare of the devil wherein they are taken: if ever they
shall come into the unity of this faith, we will glorify God for them, when
they preach this one faith which before they destroyed: yea we will give thanks
unto God with these words of David, says Comment. i^ Psalm. 133. 1.
Calume, Ecce quam bonum and quam incundum habitare fratres in vnum. We will
sing and make a merry noise to the God of Iaakob, when he shall turn them
from the power of Satan to God, as Genesis 9. 27.
he persuaded Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Shem. Mean while (says that
writer) we must embrace all of them which submit themselves to this one faith
and righteousness of God: and let us wish with stretched out arms to embrace
all that dissent from us, if to return in vnitatem fidei, into this unity of
faith they refuse not. If any kick against the pricks, valere sinamus, let us
bid them adieu, because no fraternity must we have but with the chilof God and
brethren in one faith. Which seeing we hold fast as 2. One faith of God.
the anchor of our hope, steadfast and sure in all storms, we should not like
Paul's mariners so iar in our judgments, as to leave the ship of the Church in
her straight course of heaven, and fly each one to the cockbote of his private
opinion. For seeing that one faith in God is grounded on this one faith of God,
which is the word of truth: surely as that doctrine is no other but the Ephesians.
2. 17.
Gospel of peace; nor has any author but the 1. Cor. 14. 33.
God of peace, nor any ministers but the Romans 10. 15
messengers of peace: so requires it no duty more then the Rom 12. 18.
study of peace, nor commends any unity so much as the Ephesians. 4. 3.
bond of peace, nor commands any profession so often as her followers to be
Luke 10. 6.
children of peace, nor any charge so strait as her Apostles and sent ones to
be Ambassadors of peace. Nevertheless though we all proceed by one rule of this
matter, yet mind we not so all one thing in the manner, but that consenting in
the doctrine which is according to godliness, we dissent in some questions and
strife of words, whereof comes envy and evil surmises, 1. Tim. 6. 5. Of
which teaching otherwise, I dare not, as Lib 3. Off. c. 3.
Tully said of some, Nobis nostra academia magnam licentiam d^t, our
University this way gives us much liberty, vt quodcunque maxim probabile
occurraet id iure nostro liceat defendere, that we may broach whatsoever
strange doctrine we think probable. Yet dare I with Lib. 18. Moral. cap. 6.
Gregory avouch of some newfangled questionists, Praedicamenta doctrinae quae
quaerunt ad questionem, habere non valent ad refectionem, that they give heed
to brawlings about the law, which breed questions rather then godly edifying
which is by faith, 1. Tim. 1. 4. as whether the late writers are not to be
preferred to the ancient fathers: and whether humanitu in sermons be not
unlawful. The Apostle bids such put away these questions, because they are
foolish and unlearned, 2. Timoth. 2. 23. Foolish in preferring the children
before their fathers, as our green hair does it self before gray heads, and
imberbis theologiae thinks it self able to teach grave Doctors how to preach,
Unlearned, in calling the lawfulness of learning into question; and in Timothy
and Titus commands all Bishops which are the heads of the tribes and
overseers of the seers, not only to put them away when they are broached by
them, but to stay foolish questions, or as the word may import, to quench them
in one before they set many or any in the Church on fire, 2. Tim. 2 16. Tit. 3.
9. For as fire (says ^^rp. ger^nd. p^aec. p.
Plutarch) begins not first in the sacred and public places, but breeds
first in a private house by some snuff of a candle among straw, and after sets
on fire the church of the town: so these snuffes of candles that fall among
our papers in the study, if they be not staid will fire the Church of God. How
much the more were it to be wished, that as our reverend fathers have happily
caused an uniformity of discipline in the Church; so they would not only
execute that peacemaking Canon, that none preach against the doctrine of
another, but prescribe also generant tenants of our Church to be followed by
Churchmen in the lesser matters of doctrine, that these foolish questions and
unlearned might be stayed. And if the Jews be tied to their Cabala, the Turks
to their Alcaron, Logicians to the axioms of their Aristotle, Physicians to the
aphorisms of their Hippocrates and Galen, Geometricians to the compasses of
Eisclide, Rhetoricians to the precepts of Tully. Lawyers to the maxims of their
Justinian, yea Grammatians to the rules of their Lilly, why not babes in
Christ's school to her rules, who is a Lilly of the valleys, and as a Lilly
among thorns, so this Christ's love among the daughter^? Cant. 2. 2.

We read of a crafty King in Lib. de (...) and Oris^a.
Plutarch, who knowing his enemies the Egyptians would out match him in
strength if they matched in minds and accorded in their counsel, enioined each
country the worshipping of diverse beasts which were enemies by nature, and
would prey each on other; and while every one defended his beast against the
rauin of another, and took his wrongs impatiently, it came to pass at last
(says mine author) vt ob animaliu^ immicitias ipsae quoque gentes re no
obserua^a infestae sibi inuicem hostesque reddere^tur, that by the enmity of
their beasts the people themselves unawares became such enemies that he subdued
them. Thus and more then so subtle is the Prince of darkness, who perceiving us
to be insuperabiles nisi separabiles, impregnable while knit in one mind and
judgment, he sows strange questions among us, as tares among wheat, which
no less we adore then they did their several gods (for alas though in
general like the 2. King 17. 33 41.
Samaritanes we worship one God, and hold alone truth of faith yet some have
like the^ their household gods, and private opinions, which as idols they
adore): and these contray opinions while we defend against others, and contend
about strife of words, ob opinichum inimicitias re no^ obseruata ipsi quoque
h^stes reddimur, of this doting on questions and strife of words (to English it
from S. Paul) comes envy, strife, railings, and evil surmisings through vain
disputations of men, 1. Tim. 6. 4. After which novelties as men's ears do
naturally itch, 2. Tim. 4. 3. when Acts 17 21.
Athenian-like they give themselves to nothing so much as to heat some new
things: so are thereby Ephesians* 4* 14.
wavering children carried about with every wind of vain doctrine, (...), by
hazard-cast and chance-throw of men that speak at advantage, or as F^^^er in
C^^t. 215.
some expound it, that can cogge a die with craft for advantage, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive the simple. And therefore as spiritual fathers must
forbear to carry them up and down with diverse and strange doctrines, Hebr. 13.
9. so must they, if they will bear and beget children of peace, be them selves
the messengers and fathers of peace, least their life cast their doctrine in
the teeth with that reproach, Romans 2. 21. Thou which teach another peace,
teach thou not thy self? and thou that preachest a man should not ^ar in the
house, do thou war in the temple of God? For as Orata de reconcil. Monac.
Nazianzene said wittily of Zacharies silence, the strings of whose tongue his
son John Baptists birth unloosed, non decebat vt pater vocis sileret cum vox
progrederetur, it was not meet the father who had begotten a John 3. 23.
voice and a crier, should himself remain silent: so neither is it fit the
spiritual father, who begeteth peace in his people, should continue himself
an unpeaceable pastor. From which, whether strife of words in his doctriue, or
railing and envy in life, (the two Two motives unto peace in preaching.
daughters of teaching otherwise, 1. Tim. 6. 3.) how can I better dissuade my
fellow-seruant, then insinuate with Saint Paul, that while in the one he takes
no heed to himself, and attends not to his doctrine in the other, he shall
neither save himself nor those 1. (...) of himself.
that hear him, 1. Tim 4. 16. For though he swell with the abundance of
supposed revelations in the profunditie of his knowledge, yet that science
puffes him but up, says the Apostle, ^e. 4 and like a bladder with a prick of
his conscience shall he ineuocably shrink, being destitute of true wisdom,
and corrupt in his mind. And if thus he sit in Math. 23. 1.
Moses chair to his people, and in that Psalm. 1. 1.
seat of wickedness to fellow-pastors, he may happ^ly save his flock by
preaching to others, but shall be a castaway himself in not consenting with
his fellows, 1. Cor. 9. And ^^deed if his doctrine cry peace, peace, to his
people, when there is no peace in him with other Preachers, as he is but like
the Cook dressing meat for others, and Heb 6*
tastes not himself of the good word of God: so shall he be like Noah's
carpenters, that made the Arc to save others, and perished themselves in the
flood. For if thus like Mercury, he point out the way of peace to others which
himself does not walk, he shall be that unwise witty man which has
instructed many, and yet is unprofitable to him self, Eccles. 37. 18. yea so
unprofitable, as although like the water of Baptism, says Homil. 27.
Gregory, he wash away by Gods grace the sins of other men, and send them to
heaven, ipse tamen in cloacas descendet, yet shall him self like it go down
into the sincke of sin and pit of perdition, that all men may truly cry of
him as they did of Math. 27 4^.
Christ untruly, He saved others, but himself he cannot save, and himself at
his end most wretchedly complain, Ca^^. 1. ^.
They made me the keeper of others vines, but I kept not mine own vine. 2.
Saving them that hear him


Which the rather he should attend, seeing as by strife, envy, and hatred,
which come of strange questions and teaching otherwise, he shall not save
himself: so his sheep refusing to drink of his troubled water, he shall
hardly save those that hear him. Wherein, since loquere vt videam, speak in
the pulpit that I may see it in thy practice, is still thy peoples voice to
their Pastor, as they said to the chief shepherd of our souls, Ioh. 6. 30.
quid facis, quid operaris, vt videamus and credamus tibi? What do thou
work, that we may see and believe thee? surely thy flock like Genesis 30. 38. 3^
Iaakobs sheep in drinking of thy water, will conceive of the immortal seed
like the rods (I mean examples and works) that are before their eyes. And
therefore as Christ the archshepheard Act. 1. 1.
first wrought and then taught, Luke 24. 1^*
first was mighty in deed, and then powerful in word, and wrought that in
thirty years, which after he taught but in three; as first in the^ showed the
blessedness of poverty, and then taught in these, Luke 6. 20.
Blessed are the poor: first wept in the cratch, and then taught, Verse 21.
Blessed are they that weep: first himself hungered* and then taught, Verse 22.
Blessed are the hungry: first would be persecuted into Egypt, and then
taught, Blessed are the persecuted for my sake, to make his doctrine more
effectual: so these sub-shepheards and pro-pastors too, if they will persuade
Israel to go the way of peace into the promised land, must like the Deuteronomy. 1. 25.
spiers that searched that country, show them first the good fruit thereof in
their hands, before they preach and bring them word, It is a good land which
the Lord does give you, go up and possess it. For as Epist. ad Her. (...)
Cyprian said truly in the person of our people: If when I ask a
fellowtraueller the right way to our country, he point me out one, and go
himself another, I will not regard his words that he speaks, but follow his
paths that he walks. Which yet neither he, nor I speak from him, to stay
any from going the way of peace, which at the pointing of Mercury they should
run, though it go not before them: but to tell the leaders of the people,
whose works should be miracles to conduct, as their words are oracles to
instruct, that unless with Phil. 3 17.
Paul the^ can say, Be ye followers of me, and walk so as ye have us for an
example, they will not follow peace nor ensue it. And indeed etsi ^ultis
projunt dicendo quae non faciunt, pluribus tamen prodessent faciendo quae
dicunt, although they win many by saying as they do not, yet should they
gain more by doing as they say, says Lib. 4. de doctr. Christ cap. 27.
S. Aust^ne. And therefore as the house Cock, says P^sto^al part. 4. cap. 6.
Gregory, the b^tter to waken others by his crow of day, to make them rise to
their labor, first waketh him self thoroughly by clapping of his wings: so he
who is the watchman of Israel, the better to waken others with that day-crow of
Paul* Romans 13. Hora nunc est nos e somno expergisci, It is now the hour we
should arise from sleep, must first waken him self thoroughly with these two
wings of taking heed to himself, and to doctrine, before he cry Ephesians. 5. 14.
Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light. We read of John Baptist, that not only he had a voice, but he was a
voice, Ioh. 1. 2^. a voice in his head, a voice in his hand, a voice in his
word, a voice in his work, a voice in his eye, a voice in his ear, a voice in
his feet, and a voice in his apparel, a voice in his meat, and a voice in his
fasting* that I may truly say of him as said ^. Cor. 14. 10.
Paul in another meaning* There were so many kinds of voices (as it came to
pass) in the (...) word, and none of them was dumb: and he might say of
himself with Verse 18.
S. Paul of as good tongues, I thank God I speak more languages then ye all.
And this cloven tongue of John Baptist, this vox, vocis and vitae, of life and
learning, drew the wicked Pharisees to his baptism. And as the Poets fable of
Amphtons voice, that it drue savage men to civility, as it had been trees and
stones to the building of Thebes: so this voice drue dead trees to be trees of
righteousness, and of stones raised children to Abraham, Math. 3. Many have a
voice indeed, like Herod the voice of God rather then of men, but like John
they are not a voice. Or as Plutarch spoke of the Nightingale, Voxes, praeterea
nihil, many a sweet singer in Israel have a voice and nothing else, which
cries, peace, peace to their sheep, when there is no peace in them to the
sh^pheards: and their sermons of peace to their babes confuted by an
unpeaceable life to stronger men, nourishes them not with sincere milk, since
like milk under too much fire, in turns in the seething.

Wherefore as Publicans and harlots came to John in the way of obedience,
because he came to them in the way of righteousness, Math. 21. 32. and even
the Priests and elders re^oiced for a season in his light, Ioh. 5. ^5.
because he was both a shining in doctrine, and a burning lamp in life: yea
many walked in his light, because this star went before them to Christ, and
standing over him, pointed him out both by life and doctrine. Behold the Lamb:
so will thy sheep flock to thy food, when thou leadest them by life to green
pastures, and come to thy light when thy deeds are not reproved. Otherwise if
thou hold out the word of truth and peace to others, when thou art unpeaceable
thy self, thou art but as a swifler, which carries a torch in his own hand,
to show others his deformity, whereby he is derided: and thou let thy
light shine before men, that they may see thine evil works, whereby thou art
despised. Thou breakest down with one hand what thou bu^ltest with the other,
like the mother that waking nourished her child, but with her falling asleep
killed him, 1. Reg 3. 19. Wherefore (to conclude this point) if pastors will
have their people to bring aures and dextras, their ears and right hands to
build up themselves in love, as the women brought in aures and dextralia, their
eare-rings and bracelets to the building of the Tabernacle: they must like the
high Priest have Vrim and Thummim written in their breasts, as those beasts in
Chap. 1. 8.
Ezechiel had an hand for every wing, and a work for every word as he had a
Exodus 28. 34.
Pomegranate for every bell. And then illa vox libentius auditorum corda
penetrat, quam dicent is vita commendat, as Past. part. 2. cap. 3.
Gregory speaks, that preaching best speedeth, which has commendatorie
letters from the practice; and validior est operis quam linguae vox: more
effectual to persuade (says Ser. 59. in Ca^t.
Bernard) is the word of a work, then the work of ame word, to them whose
ears are in their eyes, and their eyes in their hands, that like Thomas they
believe not thy words, unless they see the print of Eccles. 12. 11
those nails in thy hands and thy feet, which were sastened by the masters
of the assembly. And seeing the contentious pastor that beats his fellow
servant, carries a sword in one hand to cut down what he built with his
trowell in the other, let him take heed, says Lib. 5. divine. instit. cap. 2.
Lactantius, least as his good preaching reproves his evil life, so his evil
life reprove his good preaching, that it become a castaway. That when men
refuse his doctrine, he may answer with the Ioh. 5. 36.
shepherd of his soul, The works that I do, they bear witness of me that
the Father has sent me, and if ye believe not me, at least believe me for the
very works sake, which are the fruits of the spirit. And let these spiritual
fathers be brethren of peace, if they will beget sons of peace with one
faith, that as by having salt in themselves, they may save their souls, so by
atte^ding to this one faith they may have peace one with another, and save
those that hear them. Which unity of faith we should the rather keep in the
bond of peace, since we have all

One baptism, the solemn sacrament and oath of our warfare, 6. Link, One
Baptism.
wherein we have sworn before God, men and Angels, to fight under our Captain
against his enemies together as one man. For seeing Arist. lib. 8. Ethie. cap.
12.
nature has taught even natural men (...), a love and unity among
fellow soldiers, whose affections and fists the same cause combineth in the
field: much more may grace teach Christians, who are fellow soldiers for the
soul, to fight together, like Israel, as one man, Iud. 20. 11. Let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, says Paul to his
Philippians, that ye continue in one spirit, and in one mind, (...), fighting
together through the faith of the Gospel, Philip. 1. 27. Lib. 9.
Curtius storieth of certain barbarous people, that though they were ever
banding in arms one against another, yet when Alexander the Great came upon
them, quos alias bellare inter se solitos, tunc periculi societas iunxerat, the
quality of danger wherein they were joined, joined also their hearts and hands
together as one man. Lib. de frat. amor.
Plutarch reports no less of the me^ of Crete, who though they were often at
civil war and sedition among themselves, yet when foreign power did assault
them, pacem ac societatem coierunt, they conjoined their mutual aid, and
took truce with themselves, which they termed Erasm Chil. cent. 1. adig. 11.
syncretismum, the joining of the Cretans together as one man. And seeing we
wrestle not like them against flesh and blood, but principalities and powers,
the governors of the world, and princes of darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12. for this
cause should we take unto us the whole armor of God, that we may be able to
resist them in the evil day, and having finished all things stand fast. This
should be our synchristianismus, the Christian-continuance in one mind and one
spirit, fighting together for the faith of the Gospel against the enemies of
the cross.

Which, as it is glorious to see, how we all accord against the common
adversary in matter of faith and religion: so is it as doleful to behold, how
they who consent in the substance, dissent in the circumstance, and they who
agree in the corner stone, disagree in a corner cap. It cannot be denied what
long jar has been between two Captains of our host, as that long war
twixt the house of 2. Sam. 3^
Saul and the house of David; I mean those mountains, which as the Psalmist
speaks, should have brought peace to the valleys and people below them, with
those two hills in the story, have fought so fiercely each against other, that
they shaked the cottages, and weakened (I fear) the houses that were built
upon them, and would have continued if the house of Saul had not waxen weaker,
and David's house grown stronger from the Lord. It cannot be denied how some
humorists (like distempering humors) would have altered the state of this
mystical body, wherein frigida pugnarunt calidis, humentia siccis, and
moisture or deaw of the spirit has striuen against drought, as cold charity
against heat in a good cause. It befell Epist. 8 ad p(...). de 5 presbyteris
scis^^aticis.
S. Cyprian, as he complains of five scismaticall presbyters, and I wish some
in our Church might not sing the same song. Quorundam presbyterorum malignitas
and perfidia, dum coniurationis suae memores, and antiqua illa contra
Episcopatum me^m, (...) contra suffragium vestrum and Dei iudicium venena
retinentes* instaurant veterem contra nos impugnationem suam, and sacrilega
(...)chinas insidijs solitis denuo renouant. A nobis no^ ciecti vltro se
(...)unt, and de Ecclesia sponte se pellunt. Nunc apparuit Felicissimi f(...)
vnde venisset, quibus radicibus and quibus viribus staret; hi foments olim
quibusdam confessoribus and hortamenta tribuebant, ne concerdarent cum Episcopo
suo, nec Ecclesiasticam disciplinam cum fide and quiet iuxta praecepta
Dominica continerent, ne confession^s suae gloriam incorrupta and immaculata
conuersatione seruarent. Which whether it be the puff of ambition in some, who
like Diotrep^^ would have pre-eminence, qui quoniam non possunt primum ^^cum in
Ecclesia obtinere, idcirco illam s^indunt, vel ab ea d^ficu^t as Mayor annot in
1. Cor. 12. 15.
Beza himself truly speaks, or the prick of their private spirit, who would
have all things made according to the pa(...) showed to them in the mount: sure
I am with De unit. Eccl.
Cyprian, the devil has invented scismes, whereby he might subvert faith,
corrupt verity, and rent unity, vt quos detinere non potuit viae veteris
c^citate, deciperet noui itiner is errore. That them, whom he could not keep
in Popery, he might deceive with Puritanitiue. Wherein as they plead that the
Church government might be (...)^crely ministered according to Gods word: so
build they on a false ground, both fashioning the ripe years of the Church to
(...): infancy* and seeing the Apostles who perfited the rules of doctrine,
scant drew the lines of discipline for every Church. All discipline of the
Church according to Gods word? I wonder their reading has not read, or their
faith believes not Calu^^ that great reformer of Geneua, (...) in 1. C^r 11. 2
who tells them all so expressly, Seimus vn^^uique Ecclesiae liberum esse,
politiae formam ins(...)re sibi ap^am and vtilem: quia Dominus nihil certi
praescripscrit. We know (says Calvin) that it is free for every Church to make
a form of discipline or policy fit and profitable for it self, because the
Lord has prescribed no certainty in this behalf. Let them hear ^ Christ.
cap. ^^
Martin Bucer another of that mind, Ecclesiis Christi sua est permittenda
libertas, quo vnaquaeque eum praefiniat modu^ and rationem sacrarum lectionum,
interpretationum Scripturarum, Catechismi, administrationis Sacramentorum,
precum and Psalmorum: item public peccantium reprehensionis, etc. quam possit
quaelibet Ecclesia confidere suis populis maxim conducturam, etc. And
exhorts every reformer or deformer rather, vt quantum possis, in his rebus
observes conformitatem, that as much as thou can, in these things thou
conform. Let them hear (...) 56 ^ 1. Cor. 11. 2.
Gualther, who so often wished reformation, Quoad fidei and salutis doctrina^
traditiones Apostolorum nullas agnoscimus, quam quae symbolo continentur, q^oad
externam vero Ecclesiae formam non inficiamur illos passim multa tradidisse, de
ordine coetuum Ecclesiasticorum, de Sacramentorum administratione, and tota
Ecclesiae oeconomia. In quibus cum non possit eadem vbique gentium forma
obseruari, sic illa instituerunt, prout vrbis aut gentis ali^uius conditionem
requirere videbant. Et constat omnibus seculis Ecclesias in his liberate sua
vsas fuisse: and proinde iniquos nimirum esse, qui body vel sub traditionu^
Apostolicarum nomine, vel quocunque alio praetextu omnes ad eandem formam
astringere conantur. Of this mind is Loc corn. de potest. minist.
Musculus, De potest. Eccl. cap. 10. 11. 12 1^
Danaeus, Lib. 8. de sum. script. cap 4.
Kimedoncius, and even Confess. cap. 5. de Eccles. art 17 18.
Beza himself, most strict disciplinarians that might be. Wherefore they
grievously offend, says Lib. 1. in 4. pr^cept. cap. 19. vid.
Zanchius, who for these indifferent ceremonies, trouble the churches of God by
their scisme; haeccine est pietas quum iactamus? haeccine est charitas quam
debemus Ecclesiis and fratribus? Is this the piety says he, and purity
whereof we brag? Is this the charity we owe to our mother the Church and our
brethren? Shall we thus Pharise-like tithe Annise and Cummin, and leave the
greater matters of the Law? Shall we thus strive and struggle in the womb of
Rebeccah? Is this the oath we took in our baptism, to sight together as one
man against Satan? Shall we thus stand amazed at squares and rounds* at white
and at black? Surely then the bystanders will say, A Puritan is a Protestant
frayed out of his wits, that swalloweth a Camel in life, and straineth out a
Gnat in discipline. I wish they would rather hear S. Epist. 118. cap. 2. ad
Ian.
Austines judgment, speaking of these ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies:
Totum hoc genus rerum liberas habet obseruationes, nec disciplina vlla est in
his melior graui prude^tique Christiano, quam vt eo modo agat, quo agere
viderit Ecclesiam, ad quamcunque forie deuenerit. Quod enim neque contra fidem,
neque contra bonos mores iniungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum
inter quos viuitur, societate seruandum est. Cum Romam venio (says he) ieiuno
Sabbatho: cum hic sum, non ieiuno. Sic etia^ tu ad quam forte Ecclesiam
veneris, eius morem serua, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec quemqua^ tibi.
If our gnat-strainers weighed this well, they would not for wearing of a
surplise bury their talent in a napkin; they would not stand on a corner cappe,
as on the corner stone; they would not trouble Christ's spouse for a ring in
marriage, and refuse to present her as a chaste virgin to Christ: they would not
for the cross in Baptism leave the fountain of living water, and become such
enemies to the cross of Christ Jesus.

The use whereof, if it be Antichristian and Popish (as they pretend) then was
the good Emperor Constantine a Papist, then were the ancients all Papists,
who used it so often.

I find indeed three uses of it among them. First, they signed their foreheads
with the sign of the cross at their going out, coming in, apparelling,
shooing, washing, eating, lying down, sitting, lighting of candles, as Lib de
Cor^n. milit ad omnem progressum atque promotum* ad omnem aditu^ and exitum ad
vestitum, and calceatum, ad lauacra, ad mensa^, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad
sedilia, quamcunque nos conuersatio exercet, frontem cru^ is signaculo terimus.
Harum and aliarum eiusmodi disciplnaru^ si legem expostules, scripturarum
nullam inuentes, traditio tibi praerendetur auctrix consuetudo confirmatrix,
and fides obsiruatrix. Rationem traditioni, consuetudeni fidei patrocinatura^
aut ipse perspicies, aut ab aliquo qui perspexerit, disces.
Tertullian shows those Primitive Christians did by tradition and custom,
which afterward Ierom Epist. ad Heliodor. and Epist. ad Eustoch. de
virgi^^tate. Lact in. lib. 4. de vera sap. cap. 27. Chrysostom. tom. 3. demonst.
aduers. Gent. Cyrill. Ierysol Catech 4. August in Psalm. 141 and lib. 2 de Symb
ad Catech. cap. 1.
others used (as they thought) to drive away the devil. And thus the Gregor.
mag. lib. 3. dialog. Vincent. lib. 23. cap. 29. and 103. etc.
Papists (who never found an error spued out by any ancient which they licked
not up) superstitiously do abuse it. Secondly, as the Jews for better
remembrance sprinkled the pascall Lambs blood on their door posts, Exodus
12. so those ancient Christians in like manner, for better memorial of
Christ's death and passion, signed their forehead with the sign of the cross,
as Lib. 4. de vera sapient. cap. 26.
Lactantius and Saint Austine observe. Thirdly, whereas the heathen taunted
Christians with their crucified Christ, as the Apostle 1. Cor. 1. in his days
insinuates of some, We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews even a
stumbling block, and unto the Grecians foolishness: the ancient Christians
stoutly resolving with Saint Paul, Gal. 6: But God forbid that we should
roioyce in any thing but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the f
Cap. 20. de Catec. rudib.
world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world, in the place of al shame
make the sign of the Cross, in sign that they were not ashamed of their
crucified Christ. And this Austine in his 10. sermon on the feast of the holy
Cross, preaching on that cited text of the Apostle, Gal. 6. But God forbid
that I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of Christ, etc. does
observe. His words, because I speak only to the learned, I will cite in
Latin, Non est magnum in Christi sapientia gloriari: magnum est in cruce
gloriari. Vnde tibi insultat impius, gloriatur inde pius: vnde exultat
superbus, inde gloriatur Christianus: noli erubescere de cruce Christi^ideo in
front, tanquam in sede pudoris, signum accepisti. Recole frontem tuam^ne
linguam expauescas alienam. And ser. 8. de verb. Apost. he says, As low
Zacheus climed up into the fig tree to see Christ; so must we up to the cross
to find our crucified Savior, De cruce Christi nobis insultant sapientes huius
mundi, and dicunt, Quale cor habetis qui Christum colitis Crucifixum? Quale cor
habemus? says he, non vtique vestrum. Sapientia huius mundi, August. lib. 4.
de Symb. ad Catech. cap. 5. non debet erubescera anima Christiana, in
crucifixum se credidisse Christu^. Crux illa fidelibus non est opprobrium, sed
triumphus. Crux illa vexillum nostrum est contra, aduersarium diabolum.
stultitia est apud Deum, etc. Apprehendat Zachaeus sycomorum, ascendat humilis
crucem. Parum est ascendat, ne de cruce Christi erubescat: in front illam
figat, vbi seeds pudores est: ibi omnino, ibi in quo membro erubescitur, ibi
figatur vnde non erubescitur: puta quia tu irrides sycomorum, and ipsa me fecit
videre Iesum. Sed tu irrides sycomorum qui homo es, stultum autem Dei
sapientius est qua^ hominum. This third use is religious, howsoever the other
be judged superstitious, and this is the end, reason and cause why it is used
in Baptism by our Church, as the Common prayer book teaches, where the
Minister at Baptism gives this reason of using that sign, We do sign him
with the sign of the cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed
to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his
banner. In this respect was it used in Baptism in Saint Austines days, Signo
crucis consecratur vnda baptismatis, says he, lib. 6. in Julian. cap. 8. and
his judgment Aug. tract. 11^ in Euang Joan, cap. 19.
is, that without it Baptism cannot rightly be administered: Quid est (says
he) quod omnes nouerunt signum Christi, nisi crux Christi? Quod signum, nisi
adhibeatur sieve frontibus credentium, sieve ipsi aquae qua regenerantur, sieve
oleo quo chrismate vnguntur, sieve sacrificio quo aluntur, nihil eorum rite
perficitur. Quomodo ergo per id quod mali faciunt, nihil boni sig ufi atur,
quando per crucem Christi quam fecerunt mali in celebratione sacram^ntorum eius
bonum nobis omne signatur? Yea that father ser. 15. in festo sanctae crucis
says further, Signum veteris Testamenti circumcisio in latenti carne: signum
noui Testamenti crux in libera front: ibi occultatio est, hic reuelatio. Illud
est sub velamine, hoc in facie. Nos enim reuelata facie gloriam Domini
speculantes, in eandem imaginem transformamur de gloria in gloriam, tanquam ^
Domini spiritu. Nouum testamentum in veteri velabatur: Vetus te ^^mentum in
nouo reuclatur. Ideo signum ab occulto transcat in manifestum, and incipit esse
in front quod latchat sub vest. And surely since Papists receive Antichrists
mark in their foreheads, Ap^c. 13. 16. why should not Protestants contrariwise
receive Christ's mark and sign in their foreheads? Those that were saved in the
cities destruction, Ezekiel. 9. were signed in their foreheads with T. which last
letter of the Hebrew alphabet, to this day used by the Samaritans, has the
form and figure of Christ's cross which we make in our forheads, as Jerome
avouches, and the elect also who are saved from the power of hell, Apoc. 7. are
and must be sealed in their foreheads, as the Angel auerreth. I speak not now
of the Popish abuse, but of the right use of it in baptism. I know some
ancient did attribute too much thereunto, while La^tan. lib. 4. cap 26.
some thought it drove away devils; Ruff. lib. 10. c. 8.
others that it raised the dead: Epion. haeres 30. Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 3.
some others that it expelled diabolical incantations: that it Niceph. lib 8.
cap. 3. Eusebius. lib. 1 de vita Consta. Niceph lib. 7. cap 37.
gave and caused great victories: that it Niceph. lib. eadem, cap 32. August.
lib. 22. de ciuitat. Dei. cap 8.
helped and healed diverse diseases: that it Procr^p. apud E^agrium. lib. 4. cap
26. 27.
quenched fires: that it Jerome. in vita Hi. ar.
appeased the raging of the sea: that it Sophron. in prat. spirit.
expelled poison out of the cup: and that it Prudent Cath. him 6. Cyril lib. 8.
in Joan. cap. 17.
expels all faults. And the Papists who believe and use it to this end,
superstitiously abuse it. But this is no reason, Protestants may not lawfully
use it, because Papists ^nlawfully abuse it. This is to give advantage to the
adversary, who Annot. in Tertustian.
calls Caluinists Claudius Taurine^sis his sectaries for this, and may be
likened to Abeant in malain rem Caluinist^e, ait annot. in Tertull. Abeant
Iudai, qui citra coninmelid far nequeunt transuersa in medium crucis festucas
velligna, quibus si proponeres ad solunt sieve pe lem crucifixt mill aureos
quos d^res ausere^^i, mallet eorum, qui(...) ^^tam pauperimus, tanta carere
pecunia, quam hoc pa^io se ad maginem crucifixi inclinare, ait De^ arben lib.
de m^rib. Iud. cap. 3 and 30.
Jews, who cannot abide to see two pieces of wood laid cross one over the
other: for who^ if any should lay down a thousand crowns at the feet of the
crucifixe, promising to give it them for stouping and bending to take it up,
each of them (though most poor and needy) would rather want so great a mass of
money, then thus bend and incline themselves toward the crucifixe. Let me rather
exhort al men or wisdom to prefer the Churches peace before their private
credit. And though some think it conscience to make a scisme in the Church,
and sever themselves like those five Presbyters, whereof Cyprian so complained,
yet as he adds to some other, Sed nemo vos filios ecclesiae de ecclesia
tollat. Perea^t si^t soli qui perire voluerunt. Extra ecclesiam soli remancant
qui de ecclesia rec^ss^ru^t. Soli cum Episcopis non sint qui contra Episcopos
rebel(...). Conuirationis suae poenas soli, subeant qui per Dei iudicia
sentitia^ ceniurationis and malignitatis suae subire meruerunt: si quis autem^
Felicissimi and satellitum eius parts concesserit, and se haeretic^ factioni
coniunxerit, sciat se postea ecclesiam redire, and cum Episcopis and plebe
Christ communicare non posse, says Cyprian.

For alas, whence are these wars and contentions among you? are they not hence,
says ^
S. James, even of your lusts that fight in your members? Ye lust and have not:
ye envy, and have indignation because ye cannot obtain: ye fight and war
because ye get nothing. They would and will not; they dissemble ambition under
the cloak of dislike, because the master of the feast bids them not, Friend
sit up higher, as of some here, in his days speaks Ioannes Lib. ^. de m^gis
curial. c. 18 v^d.
Sarisburiensis. And we have many a John, who if he could be Sarisburien^ss,
would preach the faith which before he destroyed, and retract like Paul, When I
was a little one I spoke like a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a
child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things, 1. Cor. 13. 11.

And as these mutine in the camp against the discipline of our warfare: so
other gregarij milites in doctrine, sheath their pens like swords in the
captains of our boast. For as Plut. de garra^.
Antipater the Stoic when he neither could nor would dispute with Carneades
that wise and learned Philosopher, who oppugned the Stoickes, wrote yet bitter
books against him, whence he was well called Calamoboas, as pen-pratler: so
have we some Stoical Antipaters, sons fighting against the fathers of our
Church, whom self-love (as the Torent Eunuc. Act. 3. Scen 1.
Parisite counseled Thraso to cross Thais in every word) has made contradict
their fathers in every point of least moment.

And though they cannot preach against them by mouth, because the strings of
their tongues are tied up: yet dicere quae nequeunt scribere iussit amor,
seeming love to the truth makes them love what they cannot utter, and may be
termed calamoboontes, pen-preachers. I wish these who have the voice of Iaakob
but indeed the hands of Esau, that as their tongue justly cleaues to the roof
of their mouth, so they could not have pen and paper to fight against their
fathers, but their right hand also might forget her cunning. For certainly, as
they of Athens said truly of their divisions: Auximus Philippum nostris
dissentionibus, so have we strengthened the Pope and Philips faction by these
our dissentions, and many (as said our wise Solomon and living Library) are
drawn to be Papists by such factious behavior: (...). Good Lord, it brings
great sorrow to all Greeks, (said Homer. lib. 1. Iliad.
Nestor of the strife betwixt Agamemnon and Achilles:) it causes much grief
to Gods Church, when sons fight against their fathers, green heads against
gray hairs, and men of yesterday cross antiquity when verity does concur.

(...).
(...),
(...).
Truly king Pryame and his sons, the prince of darkness and his children
will laugh at it: and other Trojans, our Romish enemies that trouble us, will
rejoice at it.

Contention (I grant) may often fall among Christ's Saints and fellow soldiers
of one faith, as between Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. betwixt Paul and Peter,
Gal. 2. Cyprian and Cornelius, Origin and African, Chrysostom and Theophilus
of Alexandria, Epiphanius and John of Jerusalem, Ruffinus and Jerome, Jerome
and Austine, Austine and Simplicianus, Prosper and Hilarie, Gregory and
Eutychius of Constantinople: but especially Austine and S. Jerome, who fought
as hotly with their pens, as ever did Caesar and Pompey with their swords, as
one speaks: but see their challenge and combat each with other: Ierons
Epist. ad August. ^ Tres s^^^l, etc. Tom. 2.
Faxit Deus vt veritas ipsa nostrae disputationis elucescat: God grant (said
they) that the truth by our disputation may appear: for if I be overcome
(says Jerome) I shall overcome in my brother Austine, and conquer mine error
wherein I was entangled: for I seek not mine own praise, but the glory of
Christ Jesus. But alas, when we write, like Aeschines and Demosthenes, we write
bitter things one against another: Et nos discordes sumus sine vlla
reconciliatione, vt nunquam in vnum conueniamus, as Oras. 2. de pace.
Nazianzene speaks of such like. We are so stiff in our opinions, that when
we are persuaded of the truth, we cannot be persuaded to confess it.

For which iarres, whether in matter of some doctrine, or manner of our
discipline, if any Jesuit of Philips faction, as Not. 7. de E^^l.
Bellarmine does vpbraid us with rents and scismes among our selves: I may
bandie it back again, and answer him as Pl^t. de ad^l. and amic. d^^cor^.
Demaratu^ did Philip of Macedon, who asking him tauntingly: How do ye
Graecians agree at Athens and Peloponnesus, when himself was fallen out with
his wife and own son: Indeed thou do well (quoth he) Philip to enquire of
our concord, qui familiam tuam tanta patris seditione and dissentione laborare,
who have so great discord and dissension at home in thine house. I may answer
them with Orat. 2. de Pace.
Nazianzene asking in a like imputation: Vbi sunt qui vulneribus sunt pleni,
nobis vero cicatricis exprobrant? qui pedum offensiones traducunt, quum ipsi
pleno ruant casu? qui coeno sunt obuoluti, and propter maculas nostras
exultant? qui trabem in oculis habent, and festucas nobis obijciunt? Where are
these fellows, who are full of wounds, and vpbraid us with scarres? which
traduce us for slipping, when themselves fall down headlong? which are covered
with mire, and triumph at our spots? which see a mote in our eyes, and have a
beam in their own? And though Bellarmine boast of their unity, that They are
brethren in one religion, he put in a li too much, as that Mus^. loc. com. de
minist. and Rainold. admon^t. ad Typog.
Printer, who put out a di to such, made it Carnales for Cardinales, Carnals
for Cardinals. For since they have Monks, Nuns, Eremites, Anchorites, Friars,
black, white, gray, Augustines, Benedictines, Franciscans, Dominicans,
Carthusians, Capouchians, Carmelites, even an hundred Orders, as ^ox tom. 1.
page 339.
one counts their catalogue, which have as many dissentions in their Vide Mus
loc. com. Marra^^a.
Papisme, as ever had the Vide August. lib. 18. de ciuit. Dei, cap. 41.
heathens in their Paganism: Et quot sunt sodalitia tot sunt factiones, as
Pac^s quaer.
Erasmus well observed, and so many orders so many factions, so many men so
many minds. We may think the Lord has come down to these builders of Babel
and confounded their language, seeing he has thus set every man's sword (I
mean tongue and pen) of these Iud. 7. 22.
Madianites upon his brother in the host. And I may answer the Jesuit with
the H^rat. lib. 2. Sa^ 3.
Poet: O mayor tandem parcas insane minori: hypocrite, first cast out the
beam, the beam in thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast
out the mote that is in ours.

Wherefore seeing we all (to end this) like lines meet and consent in the center
of religion, though not all in the circumference of opinion: this harmony of
minds in the matter of doctrine, should breed such a consort in the manner of
discipline that henceforth we should be all of one mind and one judgment.
Rather, seeing as good Eusebius. lib 2. de vit. Constable. ca ^7.
Constantine that great Emperor, exhorted Arius and Alexander to put away a
foolish question that fired the Church: so our gracious Sovereign like a
blessed peacemaker, has decided the difference of ceremonies indifferent: who
as he has joined the wood of Judah and the wood of Joseph in one tree by his
happy succession, that they shall no more be two peoples, nor divided
henceforth into two kingdoms, as the Ezekiel. 37. 19. 22.
Prophet speaks: so has he been in these controversies our peace, and made
of two one, by breaking down this partitio^ wall: whose pacifying wisdom in
that Conference, seems to me like that counsel of Constantine. There is no
cause offered you to strive about the greatest commandment in the Scripture,
nor any new error of religion brought in: but ye all hold one and the same
Creed of faith, so that ye may easily agree in one judgment. Consider then
whether it be meet, that for a light and vain strife of words brethren should
contend, and unity by our iarres, who strive for such trifles, should pitifully
be rent. Popularia sunt ista, and puerili inscitia magis quam sacerdotum and
prudentum hominum sapientiae congruentia. These strawes rather Laickes then
Clericks, children then Churchmen, idiots then Preachers, should stumble at.
Since then we have one faith, Eusebius. ibid. cap 68.
and one judgment of our religion, and lastly one decree of the law and
discipline, this that has bred so great contention, seeing it concerns no
great matter of our religion, there is no cause it should breed any
disagreement in your minds. Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one to
another? Join then hearts and hands against the common adversary of the
truth. The P^ut. de so^^^ animal.
Wolf and the Serpent, because they have a common enemy the Eagle, take truce
with their mutual enmity, and combine their force: As Luke 23. 1^.
Herod and Pilate of foes became friends when they joined against Christ.
Though these be conspirationes non amicitiae as Lib. 3. O^^ic.
Tully speaks: and seeing we have not the Eagle, but the prince of the air
for our adversary, Ephesians. 2. 2. me thinks it should unite us against the
common foe of our faith. Seeing therefore ye are sworn fellow soldiers in one
Baptism, continue knit together in one mind and one judgment, fighting
together through the Gospel; the rather, since after we have fought this good
fight, there is laid up for us a crown of victory, which is

One hope of our vocation, that is, the riches of one glorious 7. and last
^^nk* One (...)
inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 18. whereof we hope to be coheires. We are all here in
this world, like the sons of Israel in Egypt, compassed with enemies on
every side, and are traveling homeward to our heavenly Father in the promised
land, let us like fellow-citizens of that (...), and countrymen of one
kingdom, stick fast together in a strange land. Our Joseph has charged us
his brethren, Genesis ^5. 24.
fall not out by the way, fall not out in thought, word, or deed, by the way,
about your victuals and provision, about your sackes and your money, about your
Ins and your lodgings, about baiting in this earthly pilgrimage. And if ye
chance here to fall out, agree with your adversary quickly while ye are in
the way, Mat. 5. 25. for seeing by many tribulations we must enter into this
kingdom and hope of our calling, as the children of Israel went thorough fire
and water into a wealthy place: let common danger of this red sea unite our
hearts for a common hope of the haven, that like fellow-swimmers we support one
another through love, and hold them up that they sink not. We ^lin lib. 8.
not. hist. cap. 32.
read of the Hearts, that when they pass the sea to an Island for pasture, the
strongest swim foremost to bear up on their hanches the heads of the weaker,
and when they are weary, the hindmost sustain them. Which loving nature of
the Hearts perchance Solomon meant, says Lib 83. qu^st. 71. and Ser. 21. d^
ver. Apost.
Austine, Prou. 5. 19. where he calls the Hind amicissimam, most friendly, or
as the Hebrew, ceruam amicitiae, the Hind or Heart of amity. Such Hearts, says
that In Psalm. 129. and loc^ c^t.
Father, (often applying this story) should Christians be one to another, that
while they pass these waters of affliction to their fortunate Island, and Cape
bone Speranze, their Cape of good hope: They which are strong ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves alone, Romans 15. 1.
They must bear one another burden of misery, and so fulfill the law, Gal. 6.
2. though every one must bear his own burden of transgression, Vers^. And
then indeed as the Hearts by mutual supportance in common danger safely
attain the haven, and make not shipwreck in the sea, Quia quasi nauis est
illis charitas, because charity, as he speaks, is their ship, their hope,
their dread-nought, which conuoyeth them over. So we communicating our help in
community of peril, shall in this ship of charity which supporteth all,
arrive safe at heaven the haven of this hope. For as the Church of God is
semblable to Act. 27.
Paul's ship, wherein we must sail to these Fair havens, so must there be
in this seafare, which Lib. ^. Ethic. cap. 12.
Aristotle requires in every ship, (...), the amity of fellow-sailers:
which common danger hanging over them, as it did in Ionahs fellows, Christ's
disciples, and Paul's mariners, should effect. And as their ship, continued
they friendly in it, would save them all; but the boat were it kept in to it
would loose all, Act. 27. 31. even so while we continue with one accord in the
temple, the Church of God, tied to the anchor of this Hope, will save us all,
and like the arc land us on the mount of Armenia: but if any forsaking the
ship and the fellowship we have among our selves, as the manner of some is,
shall fly into the cocke-boate of his private humor and spirit of
singularity, it endaungereth him to make shippewracke of faith and a good
conscience. Wherefore as wisely did they in their course, who cut off the boat
and let it fall away, lest the mariners leaving the ship, should cause a
wrack of the rest: so was it their wisdom of the spirit, who have cut off
the spirit of singularity, least many flying from the Church, should make
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience.

Wherefore seeing the tenure of this Hope, and inheritance we hold in capite in
our head Christ Jesus; surely as at his farewell he left us here in peace, Peace
I leave with you, John 14. so unless at his return he find us in peace, this
Hope his peace he will not give unto us. Peace I leave with you, and if you
keep it till I come, my peace I give unto you. Nec dum capaces estis (says
Ser. 4. in v^g^^. not. Dom.
Bernard in his person) interim relinquo vobis viam pacis, and tunc dabo
patria^ pacis. Ye are not yet capable of the end of this hope, in the mean
time I leave you the way of peace, and after your journey will give you this
Hope the country of peace. In the way to this hopeful inheritance, in the
world ye shall have affliction, but the^ in me ye shall have peace. Rejoice in
the Lord (says Ibid.
Bernard) that here ye receive the gifts of his left hand: but now I say again
rejoice, yea always rejoice in the Lord, that then ye shall have this hope and
rewards of his right hand: for in his left hand is but riches, honor, and peace
external; but in his right hand is eternal peace and length of days, Prou. 3.
16. These be the two arms of the bridegroom (says Ser. 4. de ^^^^uent. Dom.
he) wherein his hopeful spouse resting, said of her husband, His left hand is
under my head, and his right hand does embrace me, Can. 2. 6. His left hand of
peace external was under her head, before his right hand of this Hope and
eternal peace did embrace her. Laeua quidem leuat, dextra suscipit (says
Bernard) laeua medetur, and iustificat; dextra amplectitur and beatificat, in
laeua eius merita, in dextra vero praemia continentur: in dextra deliciae, in
laeua sunt medicinae. This is the reward of the right hand, which he bestows
on them that kiss his left hand of peace: this is the hopeful inheritance and
substance, which that father in the Gospel will divide to his sons that are
not at division. This is the country of good hope, which the Prince of peace
in heaven will give to his spouse of peace in earth. In this marriage dinner
indeed on earth, which is but a feast of desponsation, here often wants wine of
comfort and peace, and here is great store, even six water pots of affliction:
but in that marriage supper of the Lamb, which is the feast of copulation, when
he shall take her to himself, the Bridegroom will turn that water into wine,
John 16, Ye now sorrow (says he) but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

O that the consideration of this country of peace would draw and drag us along
the way of peace! O that we would rejoice again and again, I say rejoice on
earth, in this hope of rejoicing in the Lord always in heaven! When he shall
fill us all with love of ^ll without jealousy of any, peace without
distention, and joy without envy and emulation. Where he shall fill animam
rationalem sapientia, concupiscibilem iustitia, irascibilem tranquilitate, as
Bernard speaks, all our understandings with wisdom, all our wills with
righteousness, and all our affections with rest and tranquillity. Where within
us al, the glorification of our selves; without us, the association of his
Saints; under us, triumph over our enemies; above us, the vision of our God and
Father; over us, his right hand of comfort; and round about us, delectation of
joy and blessedness, proceeding from the strongest love of a father, and the
strength of a God shall fill us, and yet not satiate us with joy. For there
shall be sati^^as insatiabilis, says Ser. 59. de Tem.
Austine, they shall hunger and thirst when they are filled with
righteousness. Lord show us thy father, and it suffices; for in his presence
is the fullness of joy. Or, Father show* us thy right hand and it suffices,
for at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore. This is the inheritance
of Hope which should link coheires in love: this is the peace of God, and good
will to men of peace on earth: this is the nemo scit in heaven, the Apoc. 2. 17.
hidden Manna, that none knows but he that tastes it: this is the white
stone, wherein is a name written which no man knowth, saving he that receives
it. These be the 1. Cor. 2.
things which eye has not seen, nor ear has not heard, nor ever man's heart
could conceive, which the God of peace has prepared for his sons of peace.
This is the light that none can approach unto, and peace that passes al
understanding, Non vidit oculus lucem inaccessibilem, non audiat auris nec
intelligat cor pacem incomprehensibilem, says Bernard. But why do I bring you
some clusters to show you of the fruit of this good land? Why do I labor with
this lure of peace to call ye on in the way of peace? Why do I speak of the
praise of peace (says In Psalm. 14^.
Austine) which passes all your understanding, and is not possible for me to
utter? Let us defer the praise of peace, till we come to this Hope and
country of peace: Ibi eam planius laudabim us, vbi eam plentus habebimus. Si
m^hi tercentum linguae and centum ora darentur, ^f I had the tongue of men and
Angels to declare and speak of them, they are more then I am able to express.
But truly glorious things are spoken of thee thou city of God. Where is a
city, and the gates of it p^arle, and the streets of it gold, and the walls
of it precious stones, and the temple in it the Almighty God, and the light of
it the father of lights, and the Sun of it the Sun of righteousness, and the
vessels to it Kings of the earth, Apoc. 21. where is a river, the spring of it
the throne of God, and the water of it water of life, and the banks of it set
with trees of life, Apoc. 22. where is the great supper of the Lamb, and the
cheer of it fulness of joy: where is mirth, and the exercise of it singing:
whose subject is God: the quire, Angels: the dittie, praise: and the song,
Alleluia. And beloved son of peace, when thy soul like the 1 King. 10.
Queen of Saba shall travel to this new Jerusalem to see this Salomons
wisdom and prince of peace (for behold a greater then Solomon is here) and
his house, whose builder and maker is God, and the meat of his heavenly table,
and the sitting of his servants, and the order of his ministers: she will be
astonished with admiration of his kingdom, and say unto the King, It was a true
word that I heard in mine own land of thy glory and of thy wisdom, howbeit I
believed not this report till I came and had seen it with mine eyes. I Job 42.
5.
have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees thee, and
lo the one half was not told me, for thou have more glory, more wisdom and
prosperity, Jesus my Prince of peace* then I have heard by report: happy are
thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand before thee and hear thy
wisdom. This beloved brethren (which shall be the end of al) is our hope, which
being such a country of peace, should persuade coheires in a strange country
here to be at peace. This is new Jerusalem, the vision of peace, whither this
one God and Father shall bring us, whom he made one body, that its members
might be knit by one spirit, to serve him one Lord, in one faith, through one
baptism; where the God of peace shall keep sessions for eternal peace; where
conscience shall be the clarke of peace, an Angel the crier of peace, Messiah
the Judge of peace, Saints the Jury for peace, Innocent the verdit of peace;
Come ye blessed of my Father, the oye of peace; and receive the kingdom, the
sentence of peace. To which country of peace, the Father of peace bring us
through his Son of peace, to whom with the holy Spirit, three in person, one in
essence, immortal and only wise God, be ascribed all honor, majesty, glory
and dominion, now and for ever: And let all creatures say Amen: Praise and
glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto our
God for evermore. Amen. Apoc. 7. 12.

Psalm. 122. 6. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love
thee.

7. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

8. For my brethren and companions sake I will wish thee now prosperity.


An Apology, of the use of Fathers, and Secular learning in Sermons.
IN handling and persuading this Christian union, if I have borrowed Jewels of
the Egyptians, and called secular learning to serve and wait on her mistress
Theology; think not (good Christian) that I feed thee with Onions and Pepins
of Egypt in stead of heavenly Manna; or leave the fountain of living water, to
dig cisternes that can hold no water of life, as some humorists slander our
manner of preaching. While some in Athens, and mother of all learning, with
their black coal grime and besmeare the face of the Muses, and make collation
between the ancient Fathers and modern writers, as if the gleanings of
Ephraim were better then the vintage of Abiezer, And what have these done in
comparison of them? Others in most famous places of this land, edify Gods
people by preaching, or rather speaking against learneder preaching of others
then themselves can attain unto, so far, that if they can find in their text
but Thus says the Lord, they make the Lord speak against cleanly and learned
handling of his word, when thus the Lord has not said. But thus says the Lord
of such men, The Prophets prophecy lies in my name, I have not sent them,
neither did I command the^, neither spoke I thus unto them; but they prophecy
unto you a false vision, a lying divination, and deceitfulness of their own
heart, says the Lord, Ier. 14. 14. and yet cry they at the cross that which
crosses Paul, and shall anon be showed to be against the cross of Christ. A.
W. Lect. 13 on Jude.
Others, not with their tongue alone, but with their pens also have joined in
next rank to Papists, Young wanton Divines (as some, shall I say old
want-diuines? term them) in both Universities, that stuff their Sermons with
the quotations of Philosophers, Poets, and make ostentation of humane
eloquence, and so preach themselves and not Christ Jesus. But of all other,
fair so him W. B. Ser. 3. God wooing of his Church
who condemns all secular learning in the pulpit, in precept affirming, that
Arts, and Doctors, and Fathers and the tongues, in private study may be used,
but not publikly in the pulpit by the testimony of the Apostle, except against
the Papists: and yet in practice uses arts, Philosophers, histories, Poets and
tongues so often in those sermons when no controversy is in hand. Thou know
(gentle Reader) who should have a good memory, Op^rtet mendace^ esse memorem.
least he break down with one hand of practice what he built with the other
hand of precept. What edification was this to Gods people, to condemn the
preaching of their fellowlabourers? as if we fed them with acornes and husks
instead of bread, or brought our children a serpent for an egg, and a scorpion
for a fish, when we bring humane learning as a knife, to divide every one their
portion aright. It had showed a good mind to have spoken this only to fellow*
laborers, and not to their people: or have spoken it to some, and not written
it to all: or if they must needs write it, to have spoken to us in the Aramites
language (I mean Latin) for we understand it, and not have talked with us in
the Jewish, in the English tongue, in the audience of the people that are on
the wall, if they meant not hereby to disgrace our manner of preaching with the
people.

For my part I have reuised the ancient Fathers and late writers in this
point, and find not one among them all of this mind, that humanity is
unlawful in sermons, save only Zanchius in his oration de conseruando in
Ecclesia puto puro Dei verbo, set out after his death by his heirs, and it may
be was adulterated by some gatherers of his notes that foisted in this opinion
of their own.

The state of this foolish question (which they make) is, whether Humanity.i.
any thing beside the words of Scripture; whether of Ecclesiastical writers,
as Fathers, Doctors, and Schoolmen; or profane writers, as Philosophers,
Poets, and Historians be lawful, quoad esse or quoad gradum, at all, as some
deny, or only against adversaries, as some hold, in sermons academicall or
popular.

The Objections against it, which I have heard or seen, are threefold: 1. from
Scriptures: 2. reasons: 3. Ecclesiastical writers.

1. Ob. Christ's voice only should be heard in his Church, Ioh. 10. The sheep
hear his voice and follow him, for they know his voice; and they will not
follow a stranger, but they fly from him, for they know not the voice of
strangers: Therefore Ethnicke learning, which is not his voice, but the voice
of strangers must not be heard in sermons.

1. Resp. Our Savior by his voice means all truth agreeable to his will.
Christi vox est quicquid verum est (says Explana^. in Psalm. 1. 6.
Bucer) quicquid recti aliquid praecipit, eam vndemque sonuerit, exaudiamus
atque sequamur, Whatsoever is truth, whatsoever commands any right, is
Christ's voice, from whencesoeuer he shall sound it, let us both hear and
follow it. And therefore all truth in the heathens being a part of Christ's
voice, and a portion of his law (as that writer well proves), this place
rather includes then excludes humanity in Sermons.

2. By the voice of strangers, he means false doctrine of deceivers, whom he
terms thieves and robbers, verse. 8. and from their voice, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or profane writers, must we not speak, 1. Tim. 1. 3. Command
them that they teach none other doctrine, says his Apostle. And if any teach
otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing,
from such separate thy self. 1. Tim. 6. 3.

3. Christ alone was still heard in Paul's preaching, 2. Cor. 4. 5. 2. Cor. 13.
3. and therefore when he cited truth out of a Poet, Tit. 1. 12. And he gives
the reason, both why he alleged it, and why it should be believed as Christ's
voice, verse. 13. Hoc testimonium verum est, this testimony is true, though
Callimachus was a most lying and fabulous Poet in the rest, as some truly
observe. Wherefore seeing truth in the mouth of Balaams Ass is from God, and
all true sayings of the heathens from the holy Ghost, as Coment in 1. Cor. 1.
17.
Calvin and In ^und^ locu^.
P. Martyr witness, this place rather admits then dismisseth secular learning
from sermons, seeing it is from the holy Ghost, and a sound of his voice,
though not so special as his word.

2. Ob. The Scripture of it self is sufficient to salvation, and is able to
make the man of God absolute, and perfect unto all good works, 2. Tim. 3. 16.
therefore secular learning is needless, the alleging whereof iniureth the
Scripture as if it were not sufficient. Therefore neither needs it, nor must
it be cited in Sermons.

1. Resp. Although the Scripture afford Gods steward sufficient food for his
household of faith, Luke 15. 17. They have meat enough: yet must he divide this
bread aright to every one their dimensum and due portion, 2. Tim. 2. 15. which
without the knife of secular learning and help of other Writers he can not do
aright, as anon shall be showed more at large. Wherefore this reason is not
sound to exclude it from Sermons.

2 S. Paul wronged not the sufficiency of the Scripture, when he quoted
secular Writers and Poets which he had read, Act. 17. 1. Cor. 15. Tit. 1. To
convince Atheists he was feign to appeal unto the heathens for witness. To
persuade Epicures of the resurrection, he urges natural reason, of seed in
the ground, from Astronomy of stars in the sky, 1. Cor. 15. and thought
this the best way of preaching. And how can we in popular Sermons not only
convince Papisme of error, but Atheism which now pipeth in the thoughts of too
many, of irreligion, without it? What better weapons can we use in these
things, then take in our mouth Philip Mornay of the trunesse of Christian
religion? How can a teacher persuade a natural man better, that the soul is
immortal, then with Zanchius out of natural reason, laid down by Aristotle
and other Philosophers? Wherefore seeing neither the citing of Doctors,
Fathers, Schoolmen, Co^menters, nor profane Writers, for opening the
Scripture, and giving the sense, nor for confuting of natural men by reason,
makes the Scripture insufficient: this reason is not sufficient to exclude it
from Academicall or popular Sermons.

3. Ob. Thou shall not plow with an Ox and an Ass together, nor sow thy field
with diverse kinds of seeds, Deuteronomy. 22. 9. that is, as Philosophers could teach
us: Non est de vno genere disciplinae transeundum in aliud: We must not
confound Philosophy with Theology, or Aristotle with Christ. For which Ierom
taxed Eustochium, saying, What communion has light with darkness? what
concord Christ with Belial? what agreement the temple of God with idols? Quid
Horatio and Psalterio? Virgilio and Euangelistis? Ciceroni and Apostolis?
wherefore come out from among and separate your selves. Or as Tertullian
speaks: Praes^r^pt. ad^er. H^reti^.
Quid Athenis and Ierosolymis? Quid Academiae and Ecclesiae? Quid Haereticis
and Christianis? Nostra institutio de porticu Salomonis est: viderint, qui
Stoicum, and Platonicum, and Dialecticum Christianis praetulerunt. The believer
has no part with the infidel, Divinity must not be unequally yoked with
humanity, nor an Ox with an Ass: therefore away with humanity out of
Sermons.

1. Resp. That law in the old, the Apostle expounds well in the new Testament,
2. Cor. 6. No fellowship should righteousness have with unrighteousness, nor
any communion light with darkness. And so secular learning which is darkness,
and descended not from the father of lights, but ascended rather from the
bottomless pit, should not be brought to the Scripture, but to be reproved of
the light. Yet when it is true, he that commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, makes (as the Psalmist speaks) this darkness to be light.

Wherefore if the Ass will know his masters crib, (for I must answer this
brutish reason in it own kind) this beast (as one well notes) may like Balaams
ass, be taught to speak to good purpose: and as an Ass carried a false
Prophet then, so may it now carry Christ, as once one did Isis, and speaking
with man's, or rather Gods voice, forbid the foolishnes of a Prophet: whence
reverence secular learning as the people did him, with Non tibi, sed religioni,
not for it self, but for Gods truth that it caryeth. And when Caesaris
effigiem quilibet assis habet, any farthing of their coin bears Gods image
and superscription of truth, we bring it unto God to whom it belongs, and
cast it (though but a farthing) into the treasury of the Lord. And therefore
seeing it may bring Christians to his Church, as the Ass carried Christ to the
temple, I say to all Preachers as spoke he to his disciples: Go ye to
Bethphage, go to Poets, Historians, and Philosophers, and there shall ye find
an Ass tied and her colt, loose them and bring them hither, for the Lord has
need of them.

4. Ob. Moses though learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, yet preached
he naught to the people, but from the mouth of the Lord. The Prophets, though
filled with knowledge, yet prophesied they not of any private motion, or by the
will of man, but spoke only as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.
21. Yea even Balaa^ durst not for an house full of gold go beyond the word of
the Lord to say more or less, Number. 22. 18. Christ himself preached nothing
but what he received from his father, Ioh. 12. 49. 50. and charged his Apostles
to preach whatsoever he commanded them, and naught else, Mat. 28. 20. therefore
his sent-ones and messengers may preach nothing but his word.

1. Resp. By this reason no Preacher may speak a sentence in his Sermon, which
is not immediately the Scripture, according to matter, form, and words: and
shall we so condemn all the men of God, preaching since the Apostles times?
Nay, out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, o evil servant and slothful:
For what shall we think then of our talking Preachers, who speak most of
their own brain, and in many sentences speak often neither Scripture, nor
scant good reason to their people?

2 By this reason, they may not allege Caluins exposition, unless they will
make him the thirteenth Apostle, and has his Comments by divine inspiration,
as had the Apostles. Nay, this excludes Fathers, Doctors, and Schoolmen out
of our Sermons, when we dispute against the Papists.

3 Who knows whether these holy men of God used not secular learning in their
Sermons as well as Saint Paul? Their Prophesies that we have, are but general
notes, and summa capita of their Sermons, as the Prophetis fui^ mos, postquam
iuss^ crant aliquid populo nunc^are, paucis summas rerum co^plecti, and val^^s
templ^ praefigere, ait Calvin. praefat. in Esa. and Comment. in cap. ^. 1. and
in Aba. 2. 2. Soleba^t Prophetae ex more suarum concionu^ argumenta and
pracipua capita scripto comprehensa public legenda proponere, a^^ Gual^. homi.
5. in Abac 2 2. Sic Dan(...) prol^g^m. in 12. Prophet. cap. 12. and Sohn. lib.
1. de verb De^. Vnde fit, vt parts librorum Propheticorum interdu^ non sat^^
coh^rere videantur. De quo Origin. lib. 1. in C(...)u^ cant. and Ierom. in
Ierem. 21. and a^^bi annota^^t.
Learned observe. And yet S. Ambrose Lib. 3. de fide, cap. 1. dare avouch, that
even in these general notes of their Sermons, the Prophets have relation to
poetical stories. And Saint Jerome, Epist. ad Romans avouches it of both,
saying: Quis nesciat and in Mose and in Prophetarum voluminibus, quaedam
assumpta de Gentilium libris: Who can be ignorant, that in Moses and the
Prophets, some things are taken out of the books of the Gentiles?

For the Apostles, though in their Epistles to particular Churches, none (save
Saint Paul) cite humanity, yet who can show that in their popular Sermons to
the Gentiles throughout the whole world, they alleged not truth out of Poets,
Philosophers, and Historians, seeing Christ promised them, that his spirit
should lead them, not only into truth, but in omnem veritatem, into all
truth? Ioh. 16. 13.

4 Though neither did, as in showing us the immediate will of God, and laying
down the grounds of faith, it was not so convenient to mix it with men's
precepts: yet in expounding this will, in explaning the sense of words and
phrase of speech, in declaring the nature of birds, beasts, and stones, etc. to
which they allude, we cannot cut the word aright, without the use of
Grammarians in the propriety and acceptance of words: without help of
Logicians in distinguishing ambiguities: without aid of Rhetoricians in
following precepts and rules of speech to persuade: without help of
Historiographers to calculate times: of natural Philosophy, to scan causes
and their effects: Geometry, to find sites and situations, and such like.
Wherefore though they only spoke immediately from the Lord in declaring his
will, yet can we not without these helps, expound it fully to every man's
conceit. Moses received the law from the Lord at mount Sinai: brings he
naught else to expound it to Israel? The Prophets explane Moses pentatench:
bring they naught else to declare it to the Jews? Christ and his Apostles
explane the Prophets: did not the holy Spirit cause them to bring Allegories,
Tropes, Parables, and Similitudes, with many other things, which are not in the
Prophets to expound them? And how can we silly ones of our selves, open all the
meanings of all these, show the nature of things to which they allude, note the
right acceptatio^ of words which are ambiguous, find out the distance of places
which they insinuate, and such like, without Philosophers, Poets, Historians,
who have truly declared them at large? The reason then follows not, The
Prophets and Apostles in laying down the will of God and grounds of faith,
spoke nothing but what they received immediately from the Lord; therefore
Preachers in further opening of this will, may not bring any truth from writers
to expound it, or make it more plain to the ignorant. Why then are any
expositions of commenters alleged? why do we open it by our own discourse,
ranging one sentence beyond the very words of the word? but only because they
and we speak that which consents with the doctrine of faith? And why is it
not as good from Philosophers, Poets and Historians, as from our own brain,
when it suteth with truth of the word, and is according to the analogy of
faith.

5. Other reasons kept the Prophets and Apostles from alleging Secular
learning to their people, which restrain not us Christians. First there were
few or no secular writers before Moses wrote, as witnessed Lib 1. contra Appion.
Josephus with others, therefore he could not cite any. And yet being learned
in all the wisdom of Egypt, see how in his books, especially Genesis,
Philosophy, Astronomy, Geographie, Arithmetike, Histonographie, and the
liberal* Arts show themselves: without the axioms, maxims and principles
whereof, we see commentators cannot fully expound him. And how then can we
divide that word aright, and search his scriptures to the bottom, as we are
commanded John 5. without these helps affoorded us from the Lord? Secondly
for the Prophets, for Christ and his Apostles, to what end should they have
alleged any learning of the profane Gentiles to the Jews, who hated them
extremely? They abhorred their company, and would not meddle with them, John
4. 9. much more would they detest their doctrine, according to that law, Deuteronomy.
7. They thought it pollution to eat of their meat, Acts 11. 3. much more to
taste of their learning. They thought it pollution to admit their persons into
their Temple, Acts 21. 28. 29. and Joseph. lib. 2^ contra Appion.
made them stand without as strangers, Luke 18. 13. much less would they admit
their doctrine into their hearts, though they heard it with their ears. And
yet Paul being taught by Gamaliel, and skillful in secular learning, thought it
fit to cite it to the Gentiles, who he knew would receive and believe it, which
for the contrary reason he would not do to the Jews. Wherefore fith neither
this reason hinders us, for God has given us these helps to explane and
contestate to his word: and seeing we learn these heathen authors from our
youth, to inform our understandings, and reform our wills, and know them to be
truth from the Lord, who is the author of al truth, we may more lawfully use
them for opening of his word when we find them agreeable thereunto.

5. Ob. Yea but Jeremy (chap. 14. 14) counts them false Prophets, who spoke
any thing which they had not from the Lord, but prophesied their own vision,
vanity, and deceitfulness of their own heart. And chap. 23. 21, They
prophesied (says the Lord) when I spoke not unto them. But if they had stood
in my counsel, they would have declared my words unto my people, and not have
prophesied the deceit of their own heart. They think to cause my people to
forget my name by their dreams, which they tell every man to his neighbor. The
Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that has my word,
let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chafe to the wheat, says the
Lord? Ergo they are false teachers, who speak from any but the Lord in his
revealed word.

1. Resp. This place touches them most, who in a private spirit of
singularity, refusing all other men's writings, open and preach his word,
presumptuously relying wholly on their own judgment, and so make the Scripture
propriae explicationis, condemned by the Apostle 2. Pet. 1. 20. It touches not
them, who follow the judgment of Gods Church, and conduct of that spirit which
animateth the whole body of Christ, the true expositions of Fathers,
commentators, and grather truth dispersed among the heathens, seeing the truth
in all these is only from the Lord.

2. Jeremy reprooueth them who spoke that which was not from the Lord: but all
truth in secular writers being from the holy Ghost, even from the Lord, as
anon shall be showed, this place rather is for it then against it. He counts
them false Prophets, because they spoke their own vision that was falsehood, as
he after expounds it verse. 26. 27. and mixed their lies with his truth, as
chafe with wheat; as the ancient and modern both expound it. And if any
preach falsehood out of secular writers, this place checketh his teaching: if
truth suitable to the rule and square of Gods word, he speaks from the Lord,
who is author of all truth, as in my next answer shall be showed. Wherefore as
the Apostle prophesied of these latter times, that some should so far give
heed unto spirits of error, and doctrine of devils, that they would command to
abstain from some kind of meats, 1. Tim. 4. so may I say of them that forbid
us the lawful use of profane writers; which God has given to be received
with thanksgiving of them that believe and know the truth. For as every
creature of God, so every truth from God is good, and nothing of it ought to be
refused if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer.

6. Ob. Yea but Saint Paul charge every Minister, (...), 1. Tim. 1. 3. that
he teach none other doctrine, but keep the pattern of wholesome words which
we have of Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 1. 13. And if any man speak in the pulpit, let
him speak as the words of God, 1. Pet. 4. Therefore neither may we speak any
other thing, nor otherwise, then is in the word, which is to adulterate, and
like hucsters, to mingle it with humane devices. 2. Cor. 4.

1. Resp. By (...), the Apostle means teaching otherwise then agrees with
truth and analogy of faith in the scriptures, as he expounds himself, 1. Tim.
6. 3. (...), etc. If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness: and no secular learning which consents not to Gods
word, may we bring, I confess.

2. These places (if they mark them) make most for the use of secular learning
in sermons: for the Apostle forbidding to teach any other doctrine then
co^senteth to Gods word, implies, that we may bring ab extrinseco, whatsoever
is consonant thereunto. He says not, If any man preach any other thing then
the scripture; but if he preach any other thing, and consents not to the
doctrine of godliness. If he meant, our doctrine should be naught but
scripture, why wills he it to consent thereunto? He bids us keep the pattern
of the wholesome word, therefore allows he to use whatsoever truth is
consonant to that pattern. He says not, Keep the wholesome word, and speak
nothing else; but keep (...), the pattern, whereto all doctrines must accord.
We must use it as a samplar of truth: how is it a samplar and pattern if we
bring naught else but it self? Neither says he: If any speak, let him speak
the words of God and naught else, but sicut loquatur, let him speak as the
words of God, that is, secundum analogiam fidei, according to the measure,
proportion and analogy of faith in the word, Romans 12.

3. Wherefore the Apostle here allows Preachers to bring all truth whatsoever
agrees with the word of truth, and consents to the doctrine of Christ.

7. Ob. Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words, least
the cross of Christ should be made of none effect, says Paul 1. Cor. 1. 17.
And I brethren when I came to you, came not with excellency of words, or of
wisdom, neither stood my speech and my preaching in the intising speech of
man's wisdom, but in the plain evidence of the spirit and of power, that your
faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, 1. Corin.
2. 1. 4. 5. Therefore all man's wisdom of secular learning and pleasant
eloquence should be abandoned in the lips of the Preacher. And this place is
their Achilles that kills us, as they think.

1. Resp. Hic locus placet crassis istis theologis, qui sibi in coeli videntur
esse, quod procul absint ab omni eloquentia: This place indeed (says Schol in
Ier(...) ^pi. ad Pam^ach
Erasmus) pleases these grosse-pated Divines, who think themselves in heaven
because they are far from all eloquence. Qui suae ignorantiae patrocinantur
sentiunt Paulum hic damnnasse Rhetoricam eloquentiam, exquisita and selecta
verba, sermonem mundum and tersum didacticam docendi rationem, humana^
sapientiam suo in gradu consistentem: They who patronage their ignorance says
Pomeranus on these words, think Paul here condemned Rhetorical eloquence,
exquisite and choice words, fine and cleanly speech, and humane wisdom of
words in it own measure and degree. Hoc loco abutuntur nonnulli contra bonas
literas, vt barbariem and ruditatem defendant tanquam rem Euangelio
congruentem: cruditionem vero and studium politioris sermonis in ministro
minime ferendum esse censent, says Pro^^^ loc. 151 eru litto mundana number in
ministro Euangelij ferri debeat.
Aretius, discussing this question and answering this place. This place they
abuse (say these three learned men) to pratronize their barbarous ignorance and
rudeness in preaching.

Shall I answer them with the ancient Fathers on this point? No, it were in
vain: they are not ashamed to proclaim in Athens and ear of all learning,
Nos non curamus quid dicunt Patres, we care not whatsoever the Fathers say.
Wherefore seeing in stead of the Fathers they have children, whom they make
Princes in all lands, I will answer them with Calvin, P. Martyr, Aretius,
Hemingius and Gualther on these words.

To begin with the chiefest and first. Here two questions arise, says Calvin
on this place; one, whether Paul here condemns wholly the wisdom of words as
adversary to Christ? No, says he, a ratione valde dissentaneum est, It is very
dissonant from reason, that Saint Paul should condemn those arts, which is
evident, are the excellent gifts of God, whereby as with instruments men are
helped to good uses. The arts, as they are not superstitious, but contain
solid learning: so no doubt they came from the holy Ghost, and the profit
that comes by them must be ascribed to none but the Lord. This therefore that
Paul here speaks must not be taken in contumeliam artiu^, to disgrace the
arts, as if they were repugnant to piety. This Calvin on the first question,
that the Apostle speaks naught in this place against the arts and secular
learning or wisdom of words in the pulpit.

A second question he proposes, whether Paul means there is so perpetual
contrariety and jar between the doctrine of the Gospel and eloquence, that
they cannot stand together, and that the preaching of the Gospel is
contaminated, siquis ad eam ornandam eloquentie color adhibeatur, for the
Apostle says, the cross of Christ is made of none effect, if any wisdom of
words be adjoined. I answer (says he) we must consider to whom Paul here
speak, namely to the Corinthians, whose ears itched with a foolish desire of
magniloquence. Before other therefore were they to be called back to the
humility of the cross, that they might learn to embrace nakedly Christ, and
simply the Gospel without deceit, and therefore came he not to them in the
wisdom of words.

But what (says he) if any now Paulo nitidius disserendo Euangelij doctrinam
eloquentia illustret? by preaching more elegantly then Saint Paul beautifieth
the Gospel with eloquence and wisdom of words? is he therefore to be
refused, as if he contaminated it, or obscured the glory of Christ? I answer
first (says Calvin) Eloquentiam nihil pugnare cum simplicitate Euangelij, that
eloquence is no way against the simplicity of the Gospel, which without
disdain not only yields to it, but subiecteth it self, and like an handmaid
serves and waits on her mistress. For as Austine speaks: He who gave us
Peter a fisherman, gave us also Cyprian a Rhetorician, whereby he signifies
that both are of God: howsoever the one which in dignity was much superior,
was destitute of all grace of speech: the other who sits at his feet,
excelled in eloquence. His conclusion is, This eloquence therefore is not to be
condemned nor abandoned, which aymeth not at this, to hold Christians in the
outward color of words, that it may inebriate their ears with vain
oblectation and delight, but that it may bring us by persuasion to receive the
simplicity of the Gospel: Vt denique tanquam praeconis officio fungatur, ad
comparandam piscatoribus illis and idiot is audientiam: That like a Crier it
may get those Idiots and fishermen audience, qui nihil praeter spiritus
energiam gratiae habent, who have no grace of speech to persuade, but only the
power and efficacy of the spirit. The sum of his answer is, that this place
is no cloak for the rude and illiterate preaching of any, seeing Paul speaks
naught here against the use of good arts in Sermons, as if they were repugnant
to piety. 2. That he spoke but this to tax the itching ears of the Corinths,
who thirsted after naught but eloquence in their preachers: for which cause he
preached to them only in simplicity of words to bring them back from that
humor. 3. That a Minister may lawfully, yea must necessarily nitidius Paulo
disserere, preach more eloquently then Paul, that his eloquence like a crier
or perswader, may allure auditors to the simplicity of the Gospel, and get
audience to those fishermen and idiots, who have no grace of persuading, but
from the efficacy of the spirit. What should I cite the rest, Plato est instar
omnium to these men. Hemingius on this place iumpeth with Caluins exposition,
resolving, that a Preacher may adorn and beautify the Gospel, nitidiori
sermon Paulo, with more enticing speech of man's wisdom, with wisdom of
words, and a more polished style then Saint Paul's. Licet quidem omni
eloquentiae gratia illustrare Euangelium: It is lawful (says he) to
illustrate and garnish the Gospel with all grace of eloquence, so that men be
not made drunk with vain delight of words. And in fine he advises us in what
part of our Sermon we should use it, praestat, it is best to use plainness and
simplicity in teaching, grandiloquence and eloquence in exhorting and
confuting.

Peter Martyr agreeing with both their expositions, gives two good lessons, one
to learned Preachers, that although in preaching the Gospel they be decked
with these good arts, yet they trust not in them. Another to illiterate and
rude speakers: Neque praetextu sermonis impolitioris diuinarum Scripturarum
committere debent Ecclesiastici homines, vt de industria putide loquantur.
Ministers and Ecclesiastical men must not of purpose speak rudely under this
pretense, that the Scriptures style is not so eloquent.

Gualther is of the same judgment on this place, and Aretius in his cited
Problemes answers this place so largely, that I cannot cite him.

The reasons why the Apostles used not, nor needed eloquence, and why for us it
is more necessary, are these out of P. Martyr. First, perfect Rhetoric was
so rare a thing, (as Tully prescribed an Orator, that none could attain,) that
Christ at first publishing of his Gospel chose not so rare, hard and laborious
a means, because he had need of many who could not easily be found, and when
afterward they came, he refused them not, says Chrysostom.

2 It had been suspicious, to have persuaded this new doctrine (as it seemed)
by wisdom of words, enticing speech of Orators, Philosophers, Poets, and
colored eloquence, lest the hearers should report, they were allured by
enticing speech to believe it, and not forced by the spirit: but we knowing it
to be true, and believing it to be of God, want only eloquent preaching it to
persuade us obedience, and to allure us to follow it in our lives, which cannot
be effected without grace of speech, and power from above, as Nequa quam per se
satu valet quod dicitur, (etsi de se sic verius si^ and (...) digmissi^um) vt
humana^ (...) man queat instruere, nisi diuinitus virtus dicenti a^ cesserit,
and dictu gratia afforescat, quae vtique nec si^e Deo his tra^^tur qui ad
aliorum profectum ^oquuntur. Lib 6. contr Celsum
Origin observes.

3 The spirit wherewith they were inspired, was more powerful in them, then it
is in us: Paul spoke in the evidence of the spirit, 1. Cor. 2. and therefore as
Lib. 2 ^e ras. concion.
Erasmus well observes: Quoniam non omnibus, forte etiam nullis ea donorum
vbertas obtingit a spiritu quae Apostolis, nulla fuerit impiet as quod donis
illius diminutum est, supplere disciplinarum adminiculis. Seeing few or none
have that power and gifts of the spirit that the Apostles had, it is not amiss
to supply that defect with eloquence and the arts.

4 God gave them power to work miracles, and when they preached the Lord
wrought with them, and confirmed and persuaded their word with signs that
followed, Mark. 16. 20. God himself bare witness to their preaching both with
signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost
according to his own will, Heb. 2. 4. And therefore needed they not in
eloquence, because their preaching was with power of doing miracles, 1. Cor. 2.
as Theophilact and Chrysostom observe. Which power to persuade seeing we want,
with those other extraordinary gifts, 1. Cor. 12. Maioribus dicendi viribus
opus est, says Lib 4. de doc. Christ. cap 40.
Austine, Et quaecunque valuit ad commouendos animos sunt necessaria.

5 It was meet, rude and illiterate men should first plant the Gospel, a new
and strange doctrine to the Jews, that such weak things confounding the
mighty, and foolish things the wise, it might appear to be the finger of God,
and work of his hands: and therefore was it so marvelous in their eyes, as we
see, Act. 2. 7. Act. 4. 13. But for us, id explodendum est, (says Peter
Comment* in 1. Cor. 2. 6.
Martyr) quod multi falso arbitrantur: They are to be hissed at who falsely
think, that Paul or the Gospel does tollere aut debilit are, either take away
or lessen this wisdom of the world. It is not condemned of the Apostle, but
in that the false Apostles so mingled it with religion, that they left Christ,
troubled the Church with scisme, eique primas darent and summam iudicij de
pietate, and preferred it before the doctrine of the Gospel, making it the
chiefest Judge and Vmpier in matters of faith, which none in this Church does,
I am sure. The sum of his answer is, that although Christ for good reasons
used not then this external eloquence in first planting the Gospel, yet
refuses he it not when it comes, as we see in all ages. For as Homil. 3. in
1. Cor. 1.
Chrysostom well notes on this place which they urge, He who at first needed
not learned men, if afterward he took them to preach, it was quoniam noluit
vllam facere differentiam, because he would not make any difference of either,
and afterward when they came he refused them not.

Secondly, whereas they plead, the impolished and rude style of the Scripture
for a cloak of their homely, if not barbarous speaking; they build upon a
false ground. It is not so naked as they think, nor so incult as their manner
of teaching. It appears, (says Homil. 15. in Genesis 45. and 46.
Origin) Scripturam diuinam, non (vt plurimis videtur) inerudito and agresti
sermon compositam esse, sed secundum disciplinam diuinae eruditionis aptatam.
No, says Lib. 4. de doc. Christ. cap. 6.
Austine, (though he Lib. 3. confess. cap. 5.
confesses, at first he was offended with the simple style of the Scripture)
from his own knowledge and experimental reading: Vbi eos intelligo, non solum
nihil eis sapientius, verumetiam nihil eloquentius mihi videri potest, and
audeo dicere, omnes, qui recte intelligunt quod illi loquuntur; possem quidem
si vacaret, omnes virtutes and ornamenta eloquentiae ostendere in Scripturis.
And in the next Cap. 7. lib 4. de doct. Christ.
Chapter, he shows by many examples, how even in the Apostles writings (which
in the judgment of all men come far short of the Prophets in this point)
eloquence is a perpetual companion of wisdom. For proof whereof, he
refers us to the first Chapter to the Roma^es, ver. 3. 4. 5. to the whole
eighth Chapter, which is a whole chapter of Tropes and Figures: as also to 2.
Corin. 11. 16. to the end. And though we say not (says he) this Apostle
followed the precepts of eloquence, yet deny we not, that eloquence followed
his wisdom as a maid on her mistress. Comes sapientiae, dux eloquentiae,
eloquence was a companion of his wisdom, and his wisdom a guide to his
eloquence: Illam sequens, istam praecedens, and sequentem non r^spuens. No, the
Scripture is generally most eloquent in the structure, in the text and web, and
no less elegant in the style and phrase of words. For the structure of it,
Tract. 4. de Trop. and schem^ sac^. l(...).
Illyricus shows, all figures, tropes, and schemes of Orators and profane
Rhetoricians to be in greater abundance in Scripture, then in any secular
Writer whatsoever. Yea he avouches from his own reading, that he finds it as
eloquent in style, as most elegant Poets and secular Authors that ever wrote,
and does equalize it in eloquence of form or frame and in elegancie of style
with Homer, Pindarus, or any other, as by manifold collation he does exemplify
and show: let any man read his first Tract De stylo sacr. literarum, and trust
his own eyes.

Lib 1. de ra^. stud. Theolog* cap. 9.
Hyperius finds no less, Omnes veneres, lepores, lauticias sermonis, numerosam
compositionem, vocum harmoniam, and vniuersum apparatum, qui ex dicendi
disserendique artibus peti solet, in sacris literis densim confertimque (testem
habeo Ieronymum) licet inuenire: especially in the original tongue wherein
they spoke or wrote. For though these penmen of the divine books, says Lib.
8. Epist. 63. Epist.
Ambrose, wrote not according to art, but grace above art, yet they who first
wrote of art, found it first in them, and took their precepts and rules of
Rhetoric and Oratorie out of them.

Rupertus, by many instances out of it shows, that all kind and parts of
Rhetoric are fully contained in the Sermons of the Prophets and Apostles,
which because he so largely declares, I refer thee unto him, or unto Saint
Austin, lib. 4. de doct. Christiana, where learnedly and largely he proves
this point. Wherefore we plainly see, that although the mistress Theology
like the Kings daughter, be all glorious within, in her matter, in spirit, and
sense: yet is her raiment also of needle work: and the other arts, the virgins
that be her fellows and followers, and have decked her, may bear her company,
and be brought into the kings palace and house of God.

Paulinus indeed, as Epist. ad Paul^^.
Jerome relates, was offended with the simplicity of the Scripture, and quasi
vilitate verborum, and with the baseness of their style. But who so reads
them in their own tongues* shall find them, as most eloquent in the form and
frame of speech, shadowing out things by all rhetorical Tropes, exornations,
parables, allusions, figures, and similies in all places: so no less elegant
and polished in their style. Take but instance in the most elegant Prophet for
Hebrew in the old, and most eloquent Apostle for Greek in the new Testament,
and judge of Hercules by his foot.

Esaias in sermon suo disertus est, says Epist. ad Paul^^ and Eustoch. in
translat. Esas.
Jerome, who translated, expounded, and read him better then any of us do: and
he gives the reason: Quippe vir nobilis and vrbanae eloquentiae, nec habens
quicquam in eloquio rusticitatis admixtum. The sermons of Esaias in his own
idiome and tongue are most eloquent says Praesat. in Esa.
Bullinger, who read him, and preached on every verse in his Prophecy: Neque
ipsius, vel Demosthenis, aut Ciceronis ora^^ones cum ijs conferendae. See chap.
5. 7. how with Solomon ^e sought out pretty and pleasant words, he looked for
Mispa^* and behold Mispach: for Zedecah, and behold Zenakah. These delightful
words he affected, vt mutando literam vnam in his, elegantem structuram
sonumque verborum redderet, says S. Lib. 2. in Esa. 5. 7.
Jerome. But behold him especially chap. 24. describing the wickedness of the
people with a grievous expostulation, how it abounds with figures and tropes,
Anaphoris, homoeotelentis, Antonomasijs, Metaphoris, Gradationibus, and
Co^parationibus patheticis, as Iunius observes: see in what pathetical
eloquence and elega^cy of words, verse. 16. he exclaimeth (...) and deciphering
their ruin, he compares it to an hunting, ver. 17. where is first, fear:
secondly the pit: a snare to catch them as a prey. And mark his words, Pachad,
pachath, pach; on which words Musculus avouches, habet hic vates concinnitatem
quandam vocum, this Prophet has a certain concinnitie of words, which not
easily any can translate; adding, apparet illum stud^^ fuisse concinnandis
vocibus deditum, it appears he was given to the study of elegancie of words;
and he rhetorically runs on these three again, verse 18. 19.

Judge by this place of the rest: and let any man give me a reason why Esaias
should write and speak a more polished and fine style then Amos, who is
imperitus sermon, as Prasat. in Amos.
Jerome notes, but because he was of the blood royal, and brought up at the
Court, where the idiome was more elegant and pure; and Amos a rude and rural
heardman, called from the sheepfold to preach, and God used both their styles
and manner of speaking as naturally they were endued. And why may he not use
his ministry who has a more learned tongue, as his who speaks more incultly?

Come from Esaias the most eloquent Prophet for the Hebrew in the old, to Paul
the most elegant Apostle, for the Greek, in the new Testament. See what
pleasant words he affects, Romans 1. 20. where he calls the Gentiles full
(...), etc. On which words even Piscator could not but confess, Paulum
istorum verborum paronomasia delectatum fuisse, that Paul was even delighted
with this Paronomasie and likeness of words. So again Romans 12. 3. (...). This
elegancie of words we find in S. Paul, whose rude style (as they call it) they
pretend for barbarous rusticitie. Qui socordes and ignaui sunt, praetexunt
Pauli (vt vocant) imperitiam, ne scilicet ab eis requiratur doctrina: they that
are slothful and sluts, pretend the unskillfulness of Paul (as they call it)
namely least learning should be required of them, says Cla^. alt part. tract.
5 de stylo sac. lit.
Illyricus. But indeed as he was more learned in humane learning then they all,
so shall they that search, find, that he was more persuading and eloquent then
they all. He, who presently upon his conversion, confounded so many learned
Jews, Act. 9. He whom the men of Lystra for his eloquence called Mercury, and
would have sacrificed unto him, crying out, Gods are come down to us in the
likeness of men, Act. 14. He, that confuted not only most learned and
eloquent men, but of those even Philosophers, nor those common, but them of
Athens, and of those the Stoickes, who were nati disputationibus, as one
notes, Act. 17. He, that continued his preaching till midnight, and that to so
many auditors, that some were feign to sit in windows, Act. 20. qui fieri
poterat, how could it be (says Illyricus) that he could keep his auditors so
long, qui tam barbare vel inepte diceret vt isti confingunt, that preached so
barbarously and sillily, as these men feign and imagine? For although he
modestly suppose, as the false Apostles objected, that he was rude in speaking,
1. Cor. 11. 6. yet was it but in respect of his weak voice, as after he
confesses, not in respect of his Epistles and style, which was vehement and
strong, 2. Cor. 10. 10. Neque patrocinatur hoc linguarum and artiu^ osoribus,
says Homll. 82. in 2. Cor. 11. 6.
Gualther, though he had not been so. But now even his Epistles witness, says
I^ 1. Cor. 11. 6.
Piscator, that this Apostle was endued with a certain natural or rather
supernatural eloquence, though purposely he abstained a pigmentis illis fucata
rhetorica: therefore Epist. ad Pammach.
Jerome terms him flumen eloquentia Christiana, the river of Christian
eloquence: for else Festus on the bench (says Apolog. aduer. Ruff.
he) would never have said ad imperitum to an unskillful babbler, Thou art mad
Paul, much learning has made thee mad. And hence it was one of the three
wishes of S. Piscat. in 1. Cor. 11. 6.
Austine, vt Paulum in ore vidisset, that he had but once seen and heard Paul
preaching with his mouth.

And because I am fallen into the point of eloquently preaching, let me further
acquaint you with the judgment of the ancient and late writers in this matter.
S. Lib. 4. de doct. Christ. cap. 4.
Austine speaks excellently to every Minister, of this thing: If as a Doctor
he will convince gainesayers (says he) he must use reasons and probation of
truth: but if as a Pastor he exhort with wholesome doctrine, to do that truth
which they know, maioribus dicendi viribus opus est, he must use greater force
of persuasion then this, ibi obsecrationes and imprecationes, concertationes
and coertiones, and quaecunque alia valent ad commouendos animos sunt
necessaria, as I showed before. And whereas (says he Cap. 5.) some do it
bluntly, ilfauoredly, and coldly, others acute, ornate, vehementer, wittily,
eloquently, and vehemently: he that will more profit his auditors, must not
only speak sapienter sed eloquenter, wisely, but eloquently also, because
Sapientia^ sine eloquen^^a paru^ prodesse.
wisdom without eloquence profits little (as out of Lib 1 de Iu^^nt.
Tully he observes) unless he could be inspired with the spirit, and have the
power thereof in his preaching in such measure as had the Apostles, and also
work miracles to confirm and persuade his doctrine the more. And therefore
adds he a definition of right Preachers, Sunt ergo Ecclesiastici viri, etc.
therefore they are right Churchmen and Preachers, Qui diuina eloquia non solum
sapienter sed etiam eloquenter tractauerunt, who handle and teach the
Scriptures not wisely only, but eloquently also; and they profit and do most
good to their people. He spoke by experience, being converted by the eloquence
of Saint Ambrose, as Ambr. ser. 92. de bapt. August. August. lib. 6. Confess.
ca. 13. 14
both do confess.

Quid valeat apud homines saeculi eloquentia and sapientia saecularis, says
Saint Comment au Jon. 3.
Jerome, Demosthenes, Tully, Plato, Xenophon, Theophrastus, Aristotle, and
other Orators and Philosophers do witness, who are counted (as it were) the
Kings of men's minds; and their precepts, not as the precepts of men, but of
God. As the Scriptures style (says Tract. 5. de style sac. li^.
Illyricus) in teaching is often low and mean, and in persuading and preaching
for most part grandis, sublimis aut magniloquus, high, lofty and great: so a
low and humble style is fitter for expounding, especially in the school:
Contra, grandis magis conuenit ostentationi dicentis, oblectationi auditorum,
and commotioni ac persuasioni, praesertim rudioris turbae, ideoque in
concionibus forensibus adhibetur: Ea enim non tam simplici rei veritate, quam
ingenti quadam vi ac impetu orationis impellitur ac protruditur. Contrariwise,
a lofty style is fittest to grace the speaker, to delight the hearer, to move
and persuade especially the rude people in our popular sermons, who are more
led, moved and persuaded with force and eloquence of speech, then with bare and
naked truth of things. And therefore says Lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. cap. 6.
Austine, Figuratae locutiones sacrae scripturae suauius and iucu^dius nos
afficiunt, quam si eadem sententia planis verbis diceretur, because (as In
Rhetorie. Quia vsitata fastidiam, nouitas autem voluptatem affert.
Aristotle notes) usual things bring wearisomnes, and novelty delight.

Erasmus lib. 3. de rat. concion. gives the like advice to every Preacher,
Prorsus id agendum est Ecclesiastae, vt aliqua voluptate detineat auditores,
and moderates it full well, sed danda est opera vt delectatio comitetur
vtilitatem non accersita. This was the practice of the Prophets, of Christ, of
his Apostles in their sermons to the people, of the ancient Fathers in their
homilies, specially Origin, Basil, Nazianzene and Chrysostom; in our times of
modern Preachers; of them all says Tract. 1. de rat. cognosc. script.
Illyricus, and so every Preacher adds he, In populari tractatione ea omnia
operose congerit quae ad mouendos affectus conducere arbitratur: nihil omittit
quod modo ad persuadendum, inculcandumque animis vim habet: neque illa
praeterit quae orationem illustrant, ac diuitem speciosamque reddunt. For what
In Phaedro and Gorgia.
Plato said well of humane, I may as truly of divine Orators, Sine motu
affectuum inania sunt omnia, as the C^cer. lib. 2. de Orat. Qu^ntil. lib. 6.
cap. 3.
schoolemasters of Rhetoric have declared. And this is the end of eloquence,
says Lib. 4. de doctr. Christ. cap. 25.
Austine, vt eloquentia ipsa delectet, non est propter seipsum vsurpandum sed
vt rebus quae vtiliter honesteque dicunt, etc. aliquanto promptius ex ipsa
delectatione elocutionis accedat, vel tenacius adhaereat assensus. To teach
truth in a Sermon is little or nothing, who cannot do it? But to persuade the
will to obey it, or lead the affections and the thoughts captive to Christ,
this is all and some, and the right part of a Preacher, as of humane matters
Vulgiest loqu^ oratoris dicere. Cicer.
Rhetoricians have observed.

Sohnius lib. 2. de verbo Dei, cap. de ornata Ecclesiastica interpretat. Decere
res facilis est and quam quis que tantum non ineptissimae mentu praestare
potest? Conculere autem affectibus audientem, and in quem cunque velu animi
habitu^ transformare, allicere item audiendi vo'uptate and tenere suspensum,
no^ nisi summit, and matori quodum musara^, afflatu instinctu con(...) ingenijs
a^^ Rudolph. Agric. lib. 2. de init^ns. ca. 1.
says, a Preacher may, yea must use eloquence, and decking of his speech, yet
not with any meretricious attire: Neque enim doctrina Christi aspernatur cultum
orationis, etc. neither the Apostle 1. Cor. 1. condemns all garnishing of
speech says he, nor all enticing words, nor all eloquence, sed humanam, and
fucosam, ac loquacem Sophistarum, and fastuosam sapientiam, and draws men
from the simplicity of the cross of Christ; for the Scripture it self,
though it be pure and simple, yet is it learned, and stuffed with figures and
tropes, Itaque ornate exponet concionator, therefore (says he) must a Preacher
handle it eloquently and finely. And the better to do this, he counsels him
to propose to himself for imitation both the ancient Fathers, especially
Basil, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Nazianzene, Austine, with others, and the
recent Preachers who are most elegant in flyle, and to read authors who write
pure and elegant language in that Res optimas verbu pe^limu non tam explicant,
quam implicant, vnde and illi contem(...) ab auditoribus, tit Soh ibid.
tongue wherein he must preach. For conclusion, he utterly condemns them, qui
omnem curam abijciunt puritatis and elegantia, and spoil good matter with
evil words, which makes them to be contemned of their hearers.

Lab 1. Rheton. Eccles. cap. 1. Can 5.
Keckerman, a late writer and man of yesterday indeed, but of some count (I
know) with these men, because they cite him in school and pulpit, when the
ancient Fathers cannot obtain so much at their hands; he says, our invention
in sermons to the Imprim^ admirationem debet pare^^, and (...) abesse
long^u(...) illis quae protrita sunt, and qua cui ^^ etiam plebeto alicus and
ruas ^^ mentem ventre pos^int.
people, must be bent to move the affections, especially it must breed
admiration, and therefore be far from those things which are usual and
common, and which every rude idiot and layman could invent. I wish they
consider and think on this, who say no more on a text then many artisans and
women could do. And he shows the good effect of such preaching. Et certe ipse
sensus and experientia testatur, ingratos esse illos concionatores, qui
affectum aliquem moturi, nimis humilia and frigida eligunt, aut eiusmodi, quae
cum audiunt auditores semper secum cogitant, Eadem and tu potuisses hoc loco
dicere. Is it not a fine manner of teaching? Is it not fine handling of a text
for a scholar that has spent so much time in learning, and so much cost in
study and books, when every Tailer, Cobbler or other artisan can say with
himself, Thou could say so much on this text? He shows the effect (I say)
of such Preachers, vnde fit vt auditoribus vel plane tandem deserantur, vel pro
affectibus somniu^ concilient, either they move the affections of dislike or of
sleep.

I speak not this to condemn plain and simple manner of teaching as utterly
unfruitful; for Goats hair was serviceable to the tabernacle, though not so
much as the gold. I know a simple man in Lib. 1. Eccles. hist. cap. 3 v^de
Sozom lib. 1. cap. 17.
Ruffinus converted a subtle Philospher, whom all the learned Priests could
not convince, as himself Audite ^ eruditi viri, donec verbis mecum res gesta
est verba verbu ^pposus, and quae dicebantur dicendi arie subuerti, vbi vero
pro verbu vertus protessit ex ore dicentis, non potuer unt resistere verba
virtu^^, nec hom^ petuit aduersari Deo.
confessed unto them. But should Saul's armor ever after be refused in war,
because David with a sling and five stones once miraculously overcame Goliath?
Should Rams never after be pushed against walls, and the mighty weapons of
our warfare never used to cast down strong holds, because Rams horns once
miraculously threw down the walls of Jericho?

I know, eloquent Preachers sometime do not profit, when simple and plain
teachers do some good, as Lib. 9. in Romans 2. Ex rebus ipsis saepe compertum
est, nonnullos eloquentes and eruditos viros, non solum in sermon, sed and in
sensibus prae potentes cum multa in Ecclesiu dixerint, and ingentem Litadis
app^^usuni. acceperint, neminem tamen auditorum exhis que dicta sunt,
compunctionem cordu acci^ere, nec proficere ad side^, nec ad^more^ de^
ex^^cordatione eorum quae dicta sunt, incitari: sed suauitate quadum and
delectatione solo au(...) capt^^ disceditur: sa pe autem viros non magne
eloquentiae, nec compositio in sermonis students, verbis simplicioribus and
incompositis maltos infidelium ad fidem conuertere superbos inclinare ad
humilitatem, peccantibus stimulum conuersionis infigere.
Origin observed: but does it therefore follow, the wise and mighty things of
God prevail not more with his people, because now and then he calls weak
and foolish things sometime to confound the wise, and shows his power in
their weakness? Are not the Prophets often and more likely to convert, because
Balaams ass once auerted the Prophet from his evil purpose? Wherefore I may
safely resolve with Austine, he profits his hearers sometime that speaks
plainly and wisely; but he more, who speaks wisely and eloquently to
persuade his better: both may do well, but as the Apostle spoke in another
case, the later (in mine opinion) does better.

Neither speak I this in allowance of them whose tongues sing nothing but
Placentia, and strive to please men, as the Apostle speaks, in whose person
Chrysostom homil. 30 in Act. 14. lamentably complains, Nos slosculos
verborum, and compositione^ and harmoniam curiosius sectamur, vt canamus, non
vt prosimus; vt I am in Eccle. ista queruntur omissaque Apostoloru^
simplicitate and puritate verboru^ quasi ad Athenau^, and ad auditoriae
conuenitur, vt Paulus circu^slantium suscitentur: vt oration Rhetoricae artu
fucata mendacio quasi quaeda^ meretriculae procedat in publicum: non tam
erudita populos, quam famore^ populi quaesitura: and in modum psalterij and
tibia dul^e cane^tis, sensus demulceat audientium ve vere illud prophetae
Ezekielu nostris te^poribus possint aptart, dicente Domino ad cum, and factus
es en quasi vox cithara suaue caue^tis, and been co^posit. c, and audiu^t as
and no^ faciunt.
simus in admiratione, non vt doceamus; vt oblectemus, non vt compungamus; vt
plausu and laudibus obtentis abeamus, non vt moret componamus: No, nothing
less. Nec doctor verbis seruiat, sed verba doctori, says Lib. 4 de Doct.
Christ. cap. 28.
Austine, a Preacher should not seek matter for his words, but words for his
matter. But as Fabius said wisely, Curam verborum, rerum volo esse
solicitudinem, he may and must with Solomon the Preacher seek out, as an
upright writing, so pleasant words for his people, Eccles. 12. 10. as Christ
had not only verbum gratiae, but gratiam verbi in his mouth. He must prefer
matter to words, says that Aug. lib. de catech^ud praepone^da sunt verbis
sente^tia, vt praponitur animus corpori: ex quo sit, vt malle debe aut homines
prudentiores quam discritiores inuoture sermones.
Father, as the soul is regarded before the body; whereupon men should labor
to find out more wise then more learned speeches: care for the one, and carke
for the other,

Verbaque praeuisam rem non inuita sequuntur, says the Hora. art Poet.
Poet, and the words will follow matter, as the shadow accompanies the body.
I hope I need not complain of our Preachers, as S. Proaem. in Gal. 3. ad
Paul. and Eustoch.
Jerome did of some in his days, who were, as Plutarch speaks of the
Nightingale, that had a good voice and a small body, Vox, praeterea nihil. If
any do, I say with the 1. Cor. 4. 20.
Apostle, The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power: as God in the Hos.
6. 6.
law desired mercy and not sacrifice, that is, Ex verbu sequentibus in eodem
verse.
rather then sacrifice. Yea I tell them with Origin, comparatively speaking on
those words, Mat. 23. Woe to you, ye make clean the utter side of the cup,
when within it is foul, Admonemur vt non curam habeamus sermonum vel
narrationum quae foris sunt, sed quae ab intus sunt: non verbis neque
compositionibus eorum ornatis, quia non est regnum Dei in sermon sed in
virtute. Vt puta, qui studet compositu^ proferre sermonem, magis quam salutari
sensu repletum, calix narrationis eius a foris mundatus est, ab intus autem
sordibus vanitatibusque repletus, Paulus erat sermon rudis non scientia. Item
qui pandens verbum aut aliquam legis scripturam, compositionibus eius
exterioribus magis quam interioribus and salutaribus sensibus delectatur,
calicem vel parapsidem diligit a foris mundatum, ab intus autem sordidum. I
wish them, as Epist. ad Rustic. Menach. Luxuria^tes flagellis vineas, falcibus
reprimeba^t, vt eloquetiae torcusarta, non verborum pampi^is sed sensuu^ quasi
vuartum expressionibus redundarent.
Jerome speaks of the learned Grecians, to lop the luxuriant branches, that
their vine may become more fruitful unto others. Only my complaint is with
Ludouicus Li de cause. corrupt Rhetor.
Viues, complaining of this very defect, that whereas Princes at the receipt of
Christian religion permitted that Priests should speak to the people of sacred
and divine things, our sermons have succeeded those ancient orators,
dissimilimo successu, with most unlike success: Nam quanto illis superiores
sumus rebus, tanto in persuadendi sententijs, argumentis, dispositione, action
and partibus omnibus eloquentiae illis sumus inferiores: how much we have cause
to be more material then they, by so much are we inferior to them in using
sentences, reasons, method, action, and all parts of eloquence to persuade,
which is the chiefest part of an Orator both humane and divine. And indeed
seeing as Ep. ad Pauli^. de inst. Monach.
Jerome notes, each imitator proposes to himself the best in every trade to
be followed, as the valiant Romans their Camillos, Fabricios, and either
Scipio: Philosophers, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle: Poets, Homer,
Virgil, Menander and Terence: Historians, Thucydides, Salust, Herodotus and
Liuie: Orators, Lisias, the Gracchi, Demosthenes and Tully: Painters, their
Praxitiles and Apelles, and so in the rest: why should not much more we for
Gods cause and his Churches, propose to our selves (as I showed Sohnius
advises) Basil, Athanasius, Chysostome, Nazianzene, Austine, and the rest of
the ancient Fathers, who were all these, even most stout and valiant
soldiers, yea captains of Christ, most learned and profound Christian
Philosophers, most sweet and divine Poets, most faithful and true historians in
heavenly things, and in their sermons painted out Christ's passion so lively, as
if he had bin now crucified before our eyes, as Paul did before the Galatians?

Neither speak I this to patronize them, whose Corinthianlike itching ears
are so tied to the tongue of golden mouths, that in faction each follows
their affected, with that voice of scisme, 1. Cor. 3. I am Paul's, and I am
Apolloes, and I am Cephas, and I am Christ's; I like this man for utterance, I
this for learning, I this for method, etc. Ezekiel found such itching ears,
chap. 33. 32. Lo (says God) thou art unto them as a pleasant and love song,
of one that has a pleasant voice, and can sing well; for they hear thy words,
but they do them not. Saint Paul foretold them in these latter times, 2. Tim.
4. 3. The time (says he) will come, when they will not suffer wholesome
doctrine: but having their ears itching, shall after their lusts get them an
heap of teachers, and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be
given unto fables. Loco citate.
Chrysostom found such among his auditors, and reproved them, Vos non
quaeritis audire sermonem qui compungere possit, sed qui oblectet, and tinnulo
strepitu, and verborum compositione quasi citharaedos, and cantores audientes:
and when teachers meet with such hearers, they should with S. Paul abstain^ to
come to them with excellency of words, neither should their preaching then
consist in the intising speech of man's wisdom, but in the plain evidence of
the spirit, to purge their bad humor with hunger and mean fare, and give them
a little portion of honey whereon they surfeit. But this is it I say with Saint
Austine, He profits his hearers the most, Qui sapienter and eloquenter diuina
eloquia tractat, who handles a text both wisely and eloquently also: and wise
matter served in in eloquent words, is (as eloquently speaks the wise man)
like apples of gold in dishes of silver. Though Solomon forbid too much eating
of honey, yet was some commanded to be used, and season the sacrifice in the
law. Est veluti quoddam condimentum cibo permixtum, says Lib. 1. Strom.
Clemens Alexandrinus, It is as sauce to the meat, procuring appetite in him
who cannot taste the good word of God, and relish the things of the spirit, 1.
Cor. 2. And unless our speech be thus powdered with salt, it will taste no more
in their ear, then the white of an egg in their mouth, as Job speaks,
seeing the ear tries words as the mouth tastes meat. Entising words (says
Orat. ad nepor.
Basil) and secular wisdom, are like fair leaves that grow by the fruit, and
make it more pleasant and delightsome. Wherefore when we find truth in any
writer sacred or profane, when we go to Ephrata, and find it in the wood, we
may hew timber out of the thick trees, and bring it to an excellent work,
though these men break down all the carved work thereof with axes and
hammers. I say they qui prodesse volunt and delectare, delight that they may
profit, and Omne tulit punctu^ qui miscuit vtile dulci.
mingle both together, in mine opinion do best. This sauce in Saint Ambrose
made Saint Austine, as he Lib. 6. confess. cap. 13.
confesses, taste the good word of God, and better relish the things of the
spirit. I went only to hear his eloquence (says he) and was delighted with
the sweetness of his words, Cap. 14.
Cum eum non satagerem discere quae dicebat, sed tantum quemadmodum dicebat ea
audire, veniebat in animum meum simul cum verbis quae diligebam, res etia^ quas
negligeba^. Et dum cor aperirem ad excipiendum quam diserte diceret, pariter
and intrabat quam vere diceret. This is it, the bait that takes the fish with
the hook of truth in the net of the Gospel. This is it (says Calvin) that
must comparare piscatoribus and idiotis illis audientiam. And surely these
disciples of fishermen, as Saint Epist. ad Marcellam. Crassam illi rusticitatem
solun^ pro sanctitatem habent.
Jerome noted of such who bragged so, and held gross rusticitie for the only
sanctity, as if they were therefore holy because they knew nothing, if they
fish with a bare hook of truth, seeing with the Apostles they have not such
efficacy and power of the spirit, nor work miracles to persuade their plain
doctrine, as those fishermen and fishers of men did, like Peter in his other
kind of fishing, Luke 5. they may labor al night and perchance take nothing.

Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing the Scripture is most eloquent in the
form, in the text and web of the word, and most elegant in the thread and
phrase of words, as by some examples of Esaias and S. Paul, and by many
testimonies of Jerome, Austine, Rupertus, Ambrose, Musculus, Erasmus,
Illyricus, and Hyperius, who read them more thoroughly then the men that say
thus, this pretext cannot patronage their rude manner of teaching, qui tum sibi
videntur Apostolis proximi, si quam spurcissime loquantur, as Schol. in Iero^.
ep. ad Eustoch.
Erasmus speaks of such fishermen rather then fishers of men. I confess
indeed with Lib. 2. de ^at. Stu. Theol^. c. 38.
Hyperius, the holy Ghost, if he list, needed not this artificial polishing of
his truth, but our natural imbecillitie is such, that by no other ordinary
means it can be drawn to embrace it. And though S. Paul came not to the
Corinthes with wisdom of words, because thirsting after eloquence only, and
leaving Christ, he would diet them for their surfeit, and purge them of this
humor, to make them relish better the things of the spirit: yet in the
judgment of Calvin, Gualther, Hemingius, Martyr and Aretius, a Preacher may
and must nitidius Paulo disserere ad comparandam piscatoribus illis and idiotis
audientiam, qui nihil praeter spiritus energiam, gratiae habent. Wherefore let
them, who pluck out the tongue of the learned, as Fuluia, Anthome his wife cut
out the tongue of Tully, and like Heli his sons indeed sluts, slubber up the
sacrifice so, that they cause Gods people loath the oblation of the Lord, let
them hear Comment in 1. Cor. 1. 17.
Pomeranus his censure of their rude teaching. Neque laud digni erunt stupidi
quidam concionatores and ineruditi, qui sic omnia confundunt and inerudite
tractant, vt dicendo multa nihil dicant, docendo multa nihil doceant: mirum
tamen interim quam sibi blandiantur, quam sublimiter de se sentiant,
contemnentes eruditionem. Let them hear Lib. 1. de rat. concio^.
Erasmus, Ad conciones sacras admittuntur interdum etiam assiliunt, quilibet
adolescentes leaves, indocti, quasi nihil sit facilius quam ad populum exponere
diuinam scripturam, and abunde sufficiat perfricuisse faciem, and absters^
pudore linguam voluere: What? says E^asm. in vit. I^r^.
he. An Christi professio pugnat cum eloquentia? quid autem vetat, si Cicero de
suis daemonibus dixit eloquenter, quo minus Christianus item de pietate veraque
religione dicat eloquenter? Shall our boys take such pains, such care and
labor for their triuiall orations to persuade virtue, or prove a theme in
peroration, and shall not we take much more to persuade Christ's cause, and our
people to receive Christ? I will not conceal his censure withal of too much
affectation, Anxia^ eloquentiae affectionem in Ecclesiaste non probo, quae nec
villis Philosophis, nec Senecae, nec vlli graui viro vnquam probate est. No, he
must care for words, and carke and care for his matter, as I said. I end this
point with Cap. 49. in his tract of the ministry.
Greenham to persuade them the more, Eloquence is not simply forbidden, but
when it waits on carnal wisdom: for otherwise joined with the power of the
word, and demonstration or evidence of the spirit, it is effectual.

And these (good Reader) be their objections out of Scripture, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, says S. Peter, or to use his own word,
(...), make them look asquint at learning and good letters.

Their second sort of Objections are these unreasonable reasons.

1. Ob. Paul used it sparingly, but thrice, neither vainly with 2. Their
reasons against it, answered.
ostentation of naming the Poets, nor producing long sentences in a strange
tongue contrary to the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. but in the same wherein he spoke
and wrote, which is no warrant for us to use it often in our Sermons.

1. Resp. That triple cord binds not us to use it no more: but as it was
easily broken by all the ancient Fathers and modern writers, so may it by us.
Why he used it no more, I have showed reasons before, which take no hold on us.
The Greek fathers, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Athanasius, Damascen, Clem.
Alexandrinus, Iustine Martyr: and Latin fathers Jerome, Cyprian, Hil^rie,
Ambrose, Austine and Lactantius filled their books full of it in their
handling and expounding the Scripture, as hereafter shall be showed. And shall
we condemn all these who used it above thrice? Used they it sparingly? No, no,
we may use it more often then Paul did, says Problem. lo^. 150.
Aretius, Nec debet apud nos valere ignauorum hominum obtrectatio, vt in
illorum gratiam tot margaritas in sordibus Philosophiae delitescentes, instar
ignaui gallinacei, negligamus; ventrem aut granulum hordei magis admiremur quam
veritatis and sapientiae ideam. Like Esops Cock, they prefer the barley
corn of their own brain, before the precious gemme that may be found in the
dregs of Philosophy. I wish these would cite their own sayings but thrice, or
more sparingly then they do, then should they preach more often, and talk more
seldom in the pulpit. Though Paul used it but thrice, Ideo assumpsit Paulus
verba etiam de his quae foris sunt, vt sanctificet ea, says Origin, he
therefore used profane authors, that he might sanctify them unto all; and
show up a president, that all truth may lawfully be borrowed from any.

2. For producing it in strange tongues, in Academicall and learned auditories,
most understand it; in mixed, many: and in popular, some; and may we not speak
a long sentence in any which all understand not? then Christ was too blame that
spoke so often in parables, which the people understood not.

The Evangelists may be our presidents and warrant, who, although they wrote
Christ's actions and sayings in Greek which he spoke in Syriak, yet Ioh. 1. 38.
Io. 19 13. Mar. 3. 17. and 5. 4. and 7. 34. Mat. 21. 9. Mark 15. 34. Act. 13.
6. 8. Act. 9. 36. Mat. 12. etc.
often produced names, words, and sentences in Hebrew to the Gentiles, and
especially that his last voice on the cross, Mar. 15. 34. Eli, Eli,
lamasabacthanai, that is, says the Evangelist, (...).

And if we may not cite a sentence without interpretation, which all cannot
understand, then Paul was too blame, who wrote a long Epistle in Greek to the
Romans, whose natural language was Latin* neither all the vulgar (I think)
so fully understood it, though Tully tell us it was much known to the Latins.
The Apostle made a long Sermon in the Hebrew tongue to the Roman governors,
Act. 22. which many of them understood not, especially the rude soldiers, as
we see Math. 27. 46. Mark. 15. 34. who hearing him cry Eli, Eli, had thought he
had called on Elias for help, nay many of the Jews there present understood it
not, if he spoke in pure Hebrew, and not Syriack, as some suppose.

And for the Apostle 1. Cor. 14. he condemns them only whose all or most
speech, reading, or preaching is in a strange tongue, as it was at Corinth, and
now at Rome, as we may see verse. 23. Secondly, he counts it unlawful to cite it
if none understand it, nor we interpret it, verse. 2. as who does so allege it?
Thirdly, it is lawful to speak many sentences without interpretation or
understanding of all, as appears by his comparatiue choice, verse. 19. I had
rather. He counts it better to speak with understanding of others, therefore
is the other lawful and good in time and place, as Calvin notes in verse. 5.
Accidit saepe vt tempestiuus sit alienae linguae vsus, Often it falls out
that the use of a strange tongue is fit and in season. Hence the ancient
Fathers in their writings, and our modern Writers in their popular sermons,
cited sometime many Greek verses together to their people without
interpretation, as hereafter shall be showed. And indeed, to speak truth, we
wrong the Fathers much, when we cite so their golden sayings in our tongue,
that they lose their efficacy and grace of speech, and each of them may reply
to us as Mar^^l.
he did to Fidentine:

Quem recit as meus est, o Fidentine, libellus,
Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
The words that thou repeatest, o Englishman, are mine,

But while thou do them ill repeat, they gin for to be thine. We cannot
express their meaning so fully and finely as they spoke in Greek and Latin
toongs; for, Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae, as the Poet speaks,
Sweeter is the water from the wels head, then the vessels belly. Et quis
contentus sit potare de riuulo quum possit haurire de font? says Sermon 48* de
sepu^t. Dom.
Ambrose. Multo purior manat fontis vnda quam riui says Cont. Helu^d.
Jerome, and optimum vinum in alia atque alia vasa transfusum, suum tandem
natiuum saporem deperdit. And like as, if we would change our walsh speakings
into their sweet sayings, we should turn water into wine: so, since our tongue
attaineth not the propriety of their words, nor expresses fully their
meaning, when we cite their sentences in English only, we often turn wine into
water. Wherefore seeing Christ sanctified these three famous toongs on the
cross, and would have himself gloryed by that royal superscription in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, why are they not sanctified in the Pulpit, and may
there show his glory also? Hodie inueniuntur homines barbari, says Homil. 70.
in 1. Cor. 14.
Gualther, (he saw our day it seems, and was sorry) linguarum and bonarum
artium hosts, qui vt propriam ignorantiam tegere possint, in literarum studia
and scholas perinde inuehuntur, ac si non aliae nocentiores sint verae
religionis hosts, quibus omnibus hoc Pauli votum possumus opponere, vtinam
omnes vos linguis loquamini, would God ye all spoke tongues, and then would ye
certainly allow it in others. But, my brethren, covet to prophecy, and forbid
not to speak tongues.

3. Touching quoting of authors names, if for examples, this be ostentation,
then Paul in citing such a cloud of witnesses, Heb. 11. and quoting their names
for examples, was ambitious and showed too much reading. Then Christ and his
Apostles citing the Prophets names, when they alleged their testimonies, were
ambitious: then the ancient fathers and recent writers, in often citing the
names of Philosophers, Poets and historians, were ambitious. Indeed it is that
heavenly pride and holy ambition, 1. Cor. 12. 31. ambite potiora, ambitiously
follow the best things: and in this (me thinks) I show them a more excellent
way.

2. Why is it more ostentation to say Homer, then a Poet; or Aristotle, then a
Philosopher; or Liuie, then an Historian? Or why more ostentation to allege
their sayings with their names against sin and Satan, then against Papisme,
Atheism, and heresy, in our popular sermons? Or why more ambition in speaking
then in writing? Or why more ambition in us then in some of their brethren, who
quote tot quot and omnes, their names with their sayings in a strange tongue;
and both, when there is no controversy of that for which they cite them? Do
nothing partially.

3. Why not lawful to quote their names, as cite their sayings? unless by
concealing their names, we would make their golden sayings our own, and so
become thieves. Wherein, as I cannot but justly tax some late Latin writers,
who having their best expositions (in sense) from the Fathers, yet conceal
their names. But if they take them tripping in their conceit, note their least
blemishes, as Cham uncovered the nakedness of his father, and made him a
laughing-stocke to his brethren: so may I as condignely censure some of our
English writers, who having whole pages and tracts from the Fathers, suppress
their names, as they killed the heir, that the inheritance may be theirs.
Neither is this mine, but the censure of Lib. 4. de rat. stud. Theol. c. ^9.
Hyperius, and I may set it on the forehead of both, Non pauci, qui nunc
aliquid laud dignum scribendo praestant, patrum plumis se subinde vestiunt,
ornant, superbiunt, quamuis callide dissimulent: Many, who now write any thing
worthy praise, by your leave, deck themselves with the Fathers plumes, and
like Aesops Crow, iet up and down in the feathers of other birds, though they
craftily dissemble it. I may add it of some speakers too, who steal many a
sweet allusion, simily, amplification, application, exposition, and best
things in their Sermons from them, and adopting their sayings, make themselves
putatiue fathers of that brood, which their barrenness (God knows and they
too) could never breed nor beget. Thus reap they that fruit whereon they
bestowed no labor; other men have labored for them, and they are entered on
their labors, without naming or remembrance of their founders and benefactors.
Thus with the Partridge ( Ier. 17. 11.) gather they those young which they
never brought forth. But for all their dissembling concealment, the young
ones brought forth (says Ambrose) hearing the voice of their true mother,
leave the putatiue parent, and go to their own. Thus unthankful are they, qui
dum sua nolunt furta cognosci, ingrati sunt in magistrum, as of such pure
theft, as they count it, or rather Saint thieves, as we may term them, Apolog.
adue. Ruff.
Ierom speaks. These are as close thieves as Patric. Epist. in lib de I^st^.
reip.
Chrysippus, and be branded with such a cole, who took other men's things so
notoriously with professing their names, that when he had stolen almost all
Eurypides Medaea for his Tragedy, his scholars in a taunt called it, Medaeam
Chrysippi, non Eurypidis Tragedia^. But it is a thankful and ingenious mind,
says Prefat. not. hist. ad Vespas. Benignum, vt arbitror, and plenum ingenui
pudoris est fateri per quos profec^ru: obnoxij profecto animi and insoelicis
ingenij est, deprehendi infurto malle, quam mutuum reddere, etc.
Pliny, to confess by whom we profit: and it is the part of an evil mind and
barren brain, that had rather be taken in theft, then acknowledge the author,
and haec quasi merces authori iure optimo pensanda est, ne fures esse videamur,
says Patricius. When Thales Milesius, as that Author relates, had taught
Mandritus a Philosopher of Prienne some excellent skill about the Sun, having
thanked him heartily for it, asked his Author what reward for so great and good
a document he would have: Nothing, o Mandritus says he, but that when thou
vtterest it to other, tibi non asciueris, sed eius rei me potius quam alium
repertorem praedicaueris: That thou arrogate it not to thy self and make it
thine own, but confess thou had it of me, and cite me for thine Author. And
(alas) what other reward have all learned ethnic Philosophers, Poets and
Historians, yea what those indefatigable pains of the Fathers, for their many
learned Volumes, (who wrote more books for Christ's cause, then some of us have
read, then many have in our studies) what reward have they of us, (for even for
these books have they now great reward in heaven) but that we confess what
profit we reap from them, into whose labors we are unthankfully entered? As
thou must not be ashamed to learn, says Epist. 1. ad Greg. neque vero ad
discendum verecundum esse oportet, nec ad docendum malignum, quodab ^lio tute
didisceris, nequaqua clam habendum: cuiusmodi facere mulieres improbae solent,
quae ex alijs ipsae quaesitos liberos viru suis tollendos subijciunt, patrem
mentientes, etc.
Basil to Gregory, so neither in teaching be unthankful and malicious: what
thou have learned of any other, thou must not conceal it, like harlots and
whores who make their husbands believe and others too, those children are
theirs, which other men begot, fathering them amiss. Authorem vero ipsum
prodere grata commemoratione decet, verumque ipsius scientiae parentem: but it
is meet and becomes thee, to confess thine Author with thankful
remembrance, and father thy knowledge on him who begot it, Wherefore as Tully
told his Brutus, Tu quidem a Neuio vel sumpsisti multa si fateris: vel sinegas,
surripuisti: so may I say as truly of each of them and their best things they
bring: If thou confess of whom thou had them, thou have but taken them from
the Fathers: but thou have stolen them, if thou deny and confess not thine
Authors. Why should we think the names of Jerome, Austine or Ambrose a stain
to our Sermons, as if they were those idolaters, ( Psalm. 16.) whereof David
says, I will not make mention, nor take their names within my lips? whose
very names notwithstanding, since the Almighty has himself written in his
book of life, why should not we as did the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles
in their Sermons, cite the names of the faithful for their glory?

When Mary had bestowed on Christ but a box of ointment, he commanded that
wheresoever his Gospel should be preached, this thing that she had done should
be spoken of for a memorial of her name, Mat. 26. and how much them, whose
knowledge for his cause was like ointment powered out, who bestowed such pains
in maintenance of his truth, wrote so many books for profit of his spouse,
and laid down (many of them) their lives for his sake, will he that we
remember their names in preaching his Gospel for a memorial of them? Epist ad
Hell. de Scripturis edisserens libenter Patrum testimonia and nomina in illarum
expositione produceret, voluit quod cuiuis esset simpliciter confiteri: atque
in hunc modum eruditionis gloriam declinando, eruditissimus habebatur. Illud
(aiebat) Tertulliani, istud Cyprians, hoc Lactancij, illud Hilarij est: sic
Minutius Foelix, ita Victorinus, in hunc modum est locutus Arnobius: me etiam
quandoque citaret, etc.
Jerome commands Nepotian, that in handling the Scripture, he willingly
would produce the testimonies of the Fathers, and their names in exposition of
them, and would plainly confess every saying of each one, and by this means,
refusing the glory to be thought learned, was counted most learned. That (said
he) is Tertullians: this, Cyprians: this, Lactantius: that, is Hilaries: so
Minutius Foelix: thus Victorinus: after this manner spoke Arnobius, and me also
eftsoons would he cite. For omission whereof, as I cannot quite acquit our
modern Writers of one part of a learned Salmeron. praefat. comment. in Euang.
Satu mirari non valeo quorundam recentiorum scriptorum confidentiam, ne dicam
audaciam and temeritatem, qu^ vetus ac nonum Testamentum ita enarrare aggressi
sunt, vt (...)qu^ in eorum Commentarijs Basilij vel Athanasij, nusquam Ierom m^
aut Ambrosij, ^^squam Augustini aut Chrysostom, aut denique aliorum antiquorum
Patrum facere mentionem dignentur. Suas tantummodo cogitationes sua inuenta,
aut potius somnia nobis obtundentes.
Papists reproof, who says, In expounding the old and new Testament, they
scant any where deigne in their Commentaries, to name and make mention of
Basil or Athanasius, of Jerome or Ambrose, of Austine or Chrysostom, or
lastly, any of the ancient: so for their theeuish and peevish concealment,
cannot I but admire some modern speakers, who adopt (as I said) the Fathers
sayings, and father them on themselves, suppressing their names. Or if they
afford them this favor for their instructions, (as if their proper names were
odious and loathsome in their mouths) they cite but as the Pharisees did
Christ's name indefinitely, Hic homo, one says, not Ambrose, but one says, as
if we were afraid of their names: So little honor afford some sons the
names of their fathers. And if indeed we would say what some of us think in our
hearts, the voice should be, aetas parentum peior auis, the fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. Yea Justinius Martyr,
Ierom. Catalo. script. Eccl.
qui pro religione Christi plurimu^ laborauit, Idem lib. 17 in Esa. 64.
vir Apostolicus and diligentissimus: who, as he was next the Apostles times,
next them took greatest pains for Christ's truth, and Epiph. lib. 3. cont.
haeres. 46.
sealed it with his blood, he is too full of Philosophy for our Sermons, he
shall but just be as Iustine the Historian.

Irenaeus, whom Lib. aduer. Valent.
Tertullian called omnium doctrinarum curiosissimum explanatorem, the most
diligent and curious searcher of all learning, he shall be but an Ironie in our
Sermons. Clemens Alexandrinus (to set them in senioritie) whose volumes
Catalog. cod.
Jerome says, are full of learning and eloquence humane and divine: who^
Aduers. Iuli.
Cyrill so often called, that learned man endued with all kind of knowledge,
whose books of Stromes Lib. 6. hist. Eccl cap. 12.
Eusebius says, are stuffed with all sort of most profitable learning, he
shall be of no more reckoning with us, then last Pope Clement of Rome.

Tertullian, who^ Lib. 5. Instit. cap. 1.
Lactantius calls skillful in all kind of learning of whom Ierom. catal.
Cyprian when he asked his notarie for a book to read, would say, Da
Tertullianum, da magistrum, Give me Tertullian, give me my master, and would
not let a day pass without reading some part of his work, yea used ad verbum
his very examples and sentences often in his writings; he shall be but as
Tertullus the Orator.

Origin, whom Ibid.
Jerome called a man immortalis ingenij and secularium litterarum doctissimum,
of immortal wit, and most learned in all secular knowledge: whose knowledge of
the Scriptures, he Idem Apolog, aduers. Ruff.
professes he wondered at, and though his name distasted to some, yet Idem
prooem. in quaest in Genesis
Origenis scientiam cum inuidia nominis optaret, he is too ancient and
original, and we wonder as much at his name in a Sermon, as ever did Jerome at
his knowledge of the Scriptures. Cyprian, who was counted Nazianzen. Orat. in
Cypria.
the great name of Carthage and of all the world, whose name was famous in all
churches both Heretics and Christians, whose name and works Nazianzene
professes he reverenced more then he did all other Martyrs, and for his
eloquence surpassed other men so far, as other men do brute beasts. Cyprian,
whom Epist. ad Paul. de instit. Monac.
Jerome terms sweet, like a most pure fountain: whom Lib. 2. de doct.
Christ. cap. 40.
Austine, a most sweet Doctor, and most blessed Martyr, Lib. 2. de bon.
perseueran. c. 19.
a most glorious Martyr, and most bright Doctor: whom as Lib. 6. de Bap. c^nt.
Donatist. cap. 2.
he witnesses, Inter raros and pauces excellentissimae gratiae viros numerat
pia maeter Ecclesia, who was counted of the Cyprian. Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 10.
martyrum ad Cyprian.
Martyrs of Christ Jesus, omnibus in tractatu mayor, in sermon facundior, in
consilio sapientior, in patientia simplicior, in operibus largior, in
abstinentia sanctior, in obsequio humilior, and in actu bono innocentior, and
was generally called Tuba Dei canens, the shrill trumpet of God: he shall be a
well without water, this glorious Martyr shall not have the glory to witness
any truth in our Sermons, this trumpet of God gives an uncertain sound in our
ears, and Cyprianus shall have a letter changed in his name, and be called
Caprianus, as of some such it Erasm. Epist. Praefix. Ambro.
once was, one that for gold brought but Goats hair to the building of the
tabernacle. Caelius, Firmianus, Lactantius whom Catalog. scri. Eccl.
Jerome styles in diuinis Scripturis studiosissimum, whose volume De ira Dei,
Lib. 2 in Ephesians. 4
he commended so highly for eloquence and learning, that Epist ad Paul. de
instit. monach.
elsewhere he calls him flunium Tullianae eloquentiae, he smells too much of
Tully, Caelius is not heavenly enough for our pure ones, nor Firmianus firm in
the faith, nor Lactantius affoordeth any milk sincere enough for these babes.

Athanaesius, whom good Athan apolog. 2. epist Constant. ad pop. Alexan.
Constantine named, Adorandae legit in interpretem: whom Orat ad Hero. Phil.
vide ^rat. eius fu^eb. in Athanas.
Nazianzene, Sanctissimum orbis oculu^, and was counted the light of the Church
of Alexandria, as Immut. dial. 1.
Theodoret reports: this interpreter must be silent in the Church, this eye
plucked out of our sermons, and this light covered under a bushel in our
studies, and not be set on a candlestick, to give light to all in Gods house.

Basilius Magnus, who suitable to his name was the great strength of the people,
which name was penes omnes, in every man's mouth says Orat fun^b. in laud.
Basil. magn.
Nazianzene, whom Lib. 4. hist. Eccl. cap. 19.
Theodoret called, the light of the whole world; who^ Epist. 14. vide Greg.
Nyss. orat. in laud. Basil. mag.
Nazianzene, the eye of the world, Magnificam Dei vocem ac tubam, regiumque
dicendi splendorem: his strength seems but weakness in our eyes, this eye is
darkness in our body, this trumpet of God sounds harsh in our ears, his silver
we count dross, Basil is but brasill in our account, or but like Basilides
the gnosticke.

Hilarie, whom in his writings Epi. ad. Paulin.
Jerome found, Graeciae floribus adornatum, and Apol. adu. Ruff
called that most eloquent man the trumpet of God against the Arians, and
Epist. aduersus Lucifer.
Deucalion of the world: his flowers smell not sweet in our nostrils, this
trumpet of God gives such an uncertain sound in our ears, that we cannot
prepare our selves unto battle: we cry out with the Prophet in a worse
meaning, Woe is me, I have heard the sound of the trumpet: and when we are bid
take heed to the sound of the trumpet, we answer like them, Ier. 6. 17, But we
will not take heed. What shall I say, some think of the rest?

Cyrillus, whom Lib. 2. hist. Eccl. cap. 26.
Theodoret termed, Promptissimum defensorem Apostolicorum dogmatum, the most
ready defender of the Apostolical truth, he shall be but Chaerilus the
paltrie Poet. Epiphanius, the appearance and revelation of truth, but Epiphanes
the Platonicke. Gregorius, surnamed by an excellency, the Divine, but
Gregarius a common fellow. Ambrosius, whom his scholar Lib. 6. confess. cap. 13.
Austine termed the Bishop known to the best throughout the world, who suitable
to his name, as Epist praefix. Ambros.
Erasmus notes, flowing with heavenly Ambrosia, is worthy to be Ambrosius,
that is, immortal with God and men, he shall be forgotten, and his name clean
put out of our sermons. Jerome, such a map of all kind of learning, that
whatsoever gifts were singular in any several men, were in him alone most
excellent, that he excelled al men in that wherein they excelled all, as Epist.
nuncap. praefix. 1. tom Ier.
Erasmus avouches: his diversity of tongues is but a confusion of tongues for
the building of Babel, his wit without wisdom, his invention without
judgment in our esteem, and the tongue of the learned shall want an hearer of
his infinite learning. Chrysostom, cui aurei oris cognomen tributum, says
Epist. praefix. Chrysostom.
Erasmus, interpreting his name, for as his name was, so was he; whose Sermons
to the common people, how singular they were (says Lib. 6. hist. eccl. cap. 4
Socrates) I need not declare, seeing every one may read and reap great fruit
and profit therefro^: of who^ his Sozo^. li. 8. hist. Eccles cap. 2.
master and predecessor Libanius witnessed at his death, that he was ad
dicendum ac persuadendum potens, and inter sui temporis oratores excellens: his
gold is too light, and in the balance of their brain is found wanting yea
laid upon the weights is altogether lighter then vanity it self. What lastly
shall I say that we think of father Austine, the perfection of all these?

Aurelius Augustinus, then which writer the world has naught vel magis aureum
vel augustius, says Epist. praefix. tom. 1. August.
Erasmus, that the very names seem not in vain, but by Gods providence to be
given to the man (though we think, quid hoc scriptore vel magis aeneum and
angustius) whom Pauli. ad Aug. epist. 31 ^om. 2.
Paulinus called the salt of the earth, a candle worthily set on the candlestick
of the Church, his mouth a conduit-pipe of living water, a vein of that
eternal fountain, and Epist. 36.
trumpet of the Lord: this salt is unsavory, and meet for naught but to be cast
out of our sermons, and be trodden under feet of men, this candle to be covered
under a bushel in our studies, this conduit-pipe to be stopped, this fountain
to be damned and dammed up. He was worthily termed, the hammer of heretics,
whose word was like an hammer that breaks the stones, as Jeremy speaks.
But though this heavenly smith abode by his anvill, and did his diligence to
labor the iron, that the vapor of the fire dried his flesh, and he fought
with the heat of the furnace, though the noise of the hammer was ever in his
ears, and his eyes looked still upon the things that he made, though he set
his mind to make up his works, and watched to polish it perfectly, as speaks
Eccl. 38. 28. 29
Syracides: yet must he now keep silence in the Church, and the hammer not be
heard in building the temple. They are ashamed to name them in sermons, whose
names were so famous throughout the whole world, whereas modernes, the sons
of these fathers, they proclaim with great glory. Epist. praefix. Hilaerio.
Erasmus saw it in his days, and complained, Video quosdam (says he) prae
nouis libellis qui nunc vndiquaque prouolant, veteres authors fastidire: in
tantum, vt and Originem and Ieronymum velut sexagenarios, quod est in
prouerbio, de ponte deturbandos existiment. Ego vero vt non arbitror
aspernandum siquid horum temporum ingenia vel excogitarint, vel instaurarint,
ita mentis est improbae vetustati non suum defer honorem: ingratae vero etiam
eos reijcere, quorum industriae tantum debet orbis Christianus. Quid enim nunc
possemus in sacris literis, nisi Origenis, Tertulliani, Chrysostomi, Ieronymi,
Hilarij, Augustini monumentis adiuti? If these men that condemn the naming of
Ambrose and Austine, would not also name Calvin and Beza, their partial
dealing were less. But if they dare name a Father, it is low down, as that
Horat. epist.
hypocrite named Valerna in the temple, Labra mouens metuens audiri, they dare
not speak out least all hear it. But Calvin and Beza, on whom they think, as
on Elisaeus Eliah his spirit is doubled, they proclaim with courage and
contention of voice, Jane pater, clare: clare cum dixit Apollo: whereas rather
they should contrariwise cite them, as did those two: or if they dare name
Fathers, it is but bare Ambrose and Austine, whom the Church counted Saints,
and put Saint before their names, when master Calvin and master Beza they will
be sure to sound out; what partial men are these? Alas, they might at least
honor the fathers as much as their sons, and call them master Ambrose and
master Austine. I speak not this to disgrace those men of yesterday, whom in
many places I often counted true searchers of the sense and holy land of Canaan.
Neither yet would I have any to prefer those recent writers to the learned
ancient Fathers, as Vide Piscat. prafat. in Genesis
some too partial, indiscreetly have done, as if the gleanings of Ephraim were
better then the vintage of Abiezer: and what have these done in comparison of
them? but only to show the factious spirt of singularity of some sectaries,
who in stead of the Fathers have children, whom they make Princes in all lands.
Neither is my censure the observation of learned Lib. de sac. scr. quast. 12.
cap. 2.
Zanchius himself, who having showed that the proud contempt in some of
learned men and interpreters to be one cause of not understanding the
scriptures aright, taxes those sharply with faction Qui nimium addicti sunt
suis interpretibus, who are pinned to the sleeue of their own interpreters;
whereof as the Papists are guilty (says he) who are pinned to the Monks and
Doctors, Thomas, Aegidius, Scotus, and such like: so, sunt plerique etiam inter
nostros, there are not a few (by your leave) even among us Protestants also,
quibus religio est ab interpretationibus suoru^ praeceptorum vel minimum
deflectere: and he shows the effect and profit of such sectarisme, Ita fit, vt
and ipsi sponte se priuent vera scripture intelligentia: and dum suos
praeceptores in omnibus, and per omnia volunt tueri, turbas excitant in
Ecclesia. Res est perspicua vel me tacente. True Zanchius, it is so plain
here, that one may run and read it in this land. For my poor part and
little reading in the Fathers, when I found such store of heavenly learning, of
divine meditations, sound expositions, patheticall amplifications, and godly
admonitions, I resolved in my self with Epist. pr^fix. tom. 1. August. and lib.
1. de rat. concion*
Erasmus who had read them all more then many of us: In Athanasio suspicimus
seriam ac sedulam docendi perspicuitatem. In Basilio praeter subtilitatem,
exosculamur piam ac mitem suauiloquentiam. In Chrysostomo, sp^nte profluentem
orationis copiam amplectimur. In Cypriano spiritum veneramur martyrio dignum.
In Hilario, grandi materiae parem grandiloquentiam atque cothurnum admiramur.
In Ambrosio dulces quosdam aculeos. In Ieronymo diuitem scripturarum penum
optimo iure laudamus. In Gregorio puram nulloque fuco picturatam sanctimoniam
agnoscimus. And in Austine, as in a map, al these we admire. Thus thought that
learned man of these Fathers, but Erasmus was deceived, and for this will they
count and write him but Eras-mus. And though late writers from them give us often
the true sense and meaning of Scripture; yet in my simple iugdement, profound
Austine for questions, learned Jerome for expositions, patheticall Chrysostom
for amplifications, honey Bernard for meditations, pithie Cyprian for
persuasions, sweet Ambrose for allusions, which they call delusions; eloquent
Nazianzene for moving the affections; in stead of their children, I still
judged these Fathers were made by the holy Ghost, Princes in all lands. And
though in respect of informing the understanding, there may seem some
collation, yet for leading and conforming the affection, and reforming the will
(I speak before the Lord and his Saints) I think there is no comparison. Lege
eos, and inuenies nos, comparatione eorum, imperitissimos, says Jerem Epist,
ad Roman.
one: Do but read them, good brother, (for such commonly never read them, if
they did, it were impossible they should dislike them) and thou shall find
many of us unworthy to carry their books, which made me (I confess) resolve
with that excellent Ierom. Epist. ad M(...)
Father, Meum propositum est, antiquos legere, probare singula, retinere quae
bona sunt, and a fide Ecclesiae non recedere. Wherein, as I freely profess
with Brentius, Patres vt multum amo, ita canitiem eorum reuerenter veneror, ac
sentio eos plurimum vtilitatis in Ecclesiam confer: so can I not but with
Expl^n. in Psalm. 1. 1.
Bucer proclaim against these Antipaters, Inhumanum est, nedum indignum filijs
Dei, vere pios, vereque doctrinae sacrae studiosos, ac non parum de Ecclesia
Christi suis scriptis meritos, temere adeo in ordinem cogere, adeoque omnem
illis authoritatem derogare: id quod plerique sibi, nescio quo spiritu,
turbulento hoc nostro seculo nimium quam licenter permiserunt. Thou said that
truly Bucer, they do it nescio quo spiritu, it is from the spirit. He adds,
Hic candor, hoc consensus studium quum omnibus debeatur, this favor of naming
them, whereas it is due debt to all authors, Praecipue debetur ijs, quos multis
iam seculi^, and sapientiae, and sanctimoniae nominibus totus fere orbis
suspexit and veneratus est. When I have said never so much for them, I cannot
give them more due commendation above late writers, then learned Lib. 4. de
ra^. stud. Theol. ca. 9.
Hyperius does in a whole chapter, who had read and compared both so thoroughly.
I will set down his own words in Latin, because in this question I speak to
the learned. Vehementer demiror quorundam male feriatorum ingenia ac iudicia
(and so may all wisemen) qui praestantissima remedia ad cuitandum omne
incommodum et si porrigi cernant, aegre tamen ferunt vllos in sanctorum patrum
lectionem incumbere, (witness the dustie deskes where they stand, whereas the
boords of late writers are worn bright, and the books black with reading)
non aliter improbant, damnant, repudiant, abijciunt veterum scripta vniuersa,
quam si nihil in ijs extaret dignum cognitione, and de Christo nihil vnquam
docuissent veritati sacrae scripturae consentaneum. Atqui satis superque
constat, multos ex sanctis illis patribus vitae sanctimonia conspicuos,
plerosque etiam miraculis claros extitisse: ^dhaec, propter confessionem
nominis Christi dira perpessos: nonnullos etiam sanguine suo and morte fortiter
tolerata, consignasse confessionis suae and sanae doctrinae Euangelicae
certitudinem. Constat insuper, quomodo Deus dignatus sit quosdam illoru^
mirabilt virtute spiritus ^^ gratia in docendo celebres in Ecclesia reddere:
and quomodo donis his^e tantum valuerint, vt in assere^da veritate, in
redarguendis confutandi^que tam Philosophorum quam haereticorum erroribus, in
exhortation^m grauitate, in acrimonia and seueritate conuictionum, in
consolationum dulcedine, Caeteros omne longo interuallo post se relinquant and
quorumvis hominu^ conscientijs, supra qua^ dici queat, prosint. Co^st^t
praeterea, quantopere sua doctrina and pietate Ecclesias promouerim,
stabiliuerint, and quomodo integras optimeque ordinatas posteris reliquerint,
(integras and optime ordinatas? Yea Hype* ius? No, we have found a more holy
and pure policy caelitus delapsam). Quinetiam in hunc vsque diem experimur, nos
illorum sanctissimis lucubratio^bus mirifice adiuuari: Omnem conseruandarum
Ecclesiarum artem and prudentiam ex ijsdem addiscamus necesse est (not
necessary neither, if we find better at Geneua). Denique non pauci qui nunc
aliquid laud dignum scribendo praestant, illorum plumis se subinde vestiunt,
ornant, superbiunt, quamuis callide dissimulent. Haec* gitur quando ita se
habent, cquide^ Inuidos and Maledicos obtrectatores istos indignos arbitror,
aduersos quos plurimis verbis pro ve^dica^da sanctorum patrum dignitate a
calumnijs dimicem and propugnem. Quod si tales mores ac vitae puritas, par ite^
doctrina in istis elucerent, si tot in dicendo scribendoque labores exhaustos,
si tantum ardorem ad illustrandam Christi gloria^ confirmandasque Ecclesias, si
tantum animi r^bur in sustinendis pro veritate periculis conspiceremus in
superciliosis and delicatis istis Aristarchis seu censoribus, quanta haec omnia
fuisse in priscis illis patribus nouimus, fuerunt autem exce^entissimae: tunc
sane nos aliquo pacto aurem ipsis accomodaremus. Nurc vero quando nihil prorsus
ei^smodi deprehendi in cis potest, quamlibet scrupulose omni ex pa^te
circumspectes, nos audire eos nolumus, multo minus respondebimus eorum
c^uillationibus. Thus far Hyperius for the Fathers. Read this Antipaters,
and be ashamed.

I know no reason in the world, why they should either mislike or postpose most
holy men, Confestors, Martyrs, and miracle-workers, the pillars of the Church,
the burning lamps of good life, and lights of great knowledge, but either
because they are too learned, as Festus said of Paul; or else because they were
reverent Fathers of Gods Church: and it may be, that one herb puts death in
the pot, and if the name of Bishop go by their ears, it turns the whole pot
of pottage. I will end this with the Wise man's advice, Eccl. 3. 2. Hear your
fathers judgment, o children, and do thereafter that ye may be safe: for the
Lord will have the fathers honored of the children, and has confirmed the
authority of the mother over the children. Let me add with Syracides, cap.
44. 1 Let us now commend the famous men, and our fathers of whom we are
begotten. The Lord has gotten great glory by them, and that through his great
power from the beginning: they have borne rule in their kingdoms, and were
renowned for their power, and were wise in counsel, and declared Prophesies.
They governed the people by counsel, and by the knowledge of learning meet for
the people, in whose doctrine were wise sentences. All these were men honored
in their generations, and were well reported of in their times. There are of
them that have left a name behind them, so that their praise shall be spoken
of: their s^ed shall remain for ever, and their praise shall never be taken
away: their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for evermore. The
people speak of their wisdom, and the congregation talk of their praise,
though malice swell at betters, pride disdain at superiors, humorists rage,
scismatickes cut off these conduitpipes of living water, and that impura
puritas, as Nazianzene calls it, storm, and sons, as our Savior foretold,
rise against the fathers and cause their name to die: though their tongue
bleare and their pen blot the names of the fathers; which blessed Fliahs are
now taken up in heaven, and have left us their cloaks behind them: yet let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my right hand also forget her poor
cunning, when either refuses to proclaim from my heart, The fathers, the
fathers, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof. So much (indeed too
much) be said to their first unreasonable reason, of abandoning the Fathers
sayings or names from our Sermons.

2. Ob. It hinders one from often preaching, ergo.

1. Resp. It hinders no artists (as Preachers should be) who were brought up
at the feet of Gamaliels in the Colleges of the Prophets, and therefore have
this handmaid at a call, with the Apostle, to wait on her mistress. And they
that want this knife of secular learning, how can they divide the word aright
to Gods people? Such run before they be sent, as the Prophet complains, and
Lib. 2. de rat. concion. ad conci. sacrat interdum assiliunt qualibet
adolescentes, lenes indocti, etc.
Erasmus, as I said, observed in his days. Such would be Doctors of the law,
and yet understand not what they speak, nor whereof they affirm. A Minister
2. Tim. 2.
must be apt to divide the word aright, therefore a Logician: Tit 1.
apt to argue and convince the gainesayers, therefore a Rhetorician: 1. Tim 3.
apt to teach, therefore furnished with all kind of learning; do all things by
order, therefore methodicall: and he that comes without these, is like the bad
Orator in Lib. 2. de Ora.
Tully, who thinking he had moved his auditors to pity whereof he declaimed,
asked Catulus after his Oration, Number egregie misericordiam mouisset, Whether he
had not maruellously moved pity: Yes truly, great pity, (quoth he) for I
think there were none so stony hearted and blockish, but they pitied thee in
thy speech. Such may sooner move pity then piety in their people. God will
one day say to such dispensers of his meat to his family, as he said to
Shebnah the steward of his house, Esa. 22. Quid tu hic? What do thou here? Or
as Jerome with others out of the Hebrew translate it, Quidtu, quasiquis, hic?
What do thou here, in templo Dei indigne ministrando? as Lyra. Indignus tali
habitatione, as Aquinas. Aut quasi quis hic ac si esses alicuius valoris, as
Hugo glosseth. Such a quasi quis should not sit in Moses chair, whereof the 2.
Cor. 2. 16.
Apostle asked, quis, who is sufficient for these things? though now they
resolve the question quis into quisquis, who is not sufficient for these
things? Where shall I lay the fault of such queasie and quasi-ones? Is it
Rebeccah their mother, who by commendatorie letters puts them in the apparel
of Christ their elder brother, that our ancient Isaaks know them neither by
voice nor by hand, and so steal they a blessing from dim sights, that know
not whom they bless? Wheresoever it be, a Minister without knowledge of the
Arts cannot be apt to teach, as Lib. de rat. Stud. Theolog. cap. 4.
Hyperius proves at large: and if such have them at a call, how hinder they
his often preaching?

2. It hindered not the ancient Fathers, nor our late best Homilists, who
preached, preached I say oftener then many of these do. I will show them anon,
that if they used it more often then they do, they should preach more and talk
less in the pulpit then some do. Jesus went about all cities and towns
teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel, says the Evangelist,
Mat. 9. 35. On which words Musculus thus taxes talking Ministers: Non dicit,
loquens, sed praedicans: exigit enim non simpliciter narrantem aut loquentem,
sed praedicantem. Quemadmodum non satis est ad praedicandi Euangelij munus
exequendum simpliciter ad populum dicere quae scripta sunt, sed opus est vt
totis viribus ista gratia depraedicentur. Licet enim vera dicat qui ea dicit,
quae in Euangelicis scriptis leguntur, non tamen mox dici potest Euangelij
praedicator, nisi praedicantis etiam referat conditionem and iudicium. He adds
his censure of such talkers: Proinde parum apti sunt ad praedicandum
Euangelium, qui tantum hoc curant, vt ad horam dicant ad populum vtcumque: he
gives no less censure Loc. com. cap. de ossic. minist. Habent ^sticertos dies
per septimanam quibus concionentur, recte hoc quide^, and o Illud vero
probandum non est, quod ex horum numero admod^ mu^ts, nec ex animo sed
perfunctorie a^ frigide dicunt, etc. nec verbum Deipertinenter and vtiliter
secantes ad aeds ficationem auditorum accommo lant: sed admodum sese (...)cium
ad^mplesse putant, si vicunque ad horam dixerint.
elsewhere of their profiting the people. If Musculus had heard some of our
talkers, he would have reported of some place: Loquitur, non praedicat i^i^. To
what end learn we in seven years the arts? To what purpose Libraries, and
stored studies? to what end tongues? nay to what end studying twenty years in
the University, if a Preacher must say no more on a text, then an artisan, a
tailer, a shoemaker, and a trades man can, with a testimony and an example
from an Index? If this be to preach, then every silly layman that can read,
may serve the turn, and ad quid perditio haec? What needed such pains and cost
in the Universities? Is it not excellent, when every idiot that hears us, may
say with himself: Eadem and tu ex hoc loco possis dicere, as out of Keckerman
I noted? No, it hinders no artists from preaching, who have it at command,
and helps them to divide Gods word aright from often preaching. How often would
they preach? the best and most famous Preachers in this land have ingeniously
confessed, that they cannot preach above twice aweeke, they could speak indeed
six times, but they are charged to preach the word, 2. Tim. 4. 2.

3. Ob. It has no promise of blessing, ergo.

1. Resp. Every good gift coming down from the Father of lights has a
promise of blessing, 1. Cor. 12. 7. when it is used to his glory. Truth
overcomes all things, (says 1. Esdr. 3. 12.
Esdras) truth is greater and stronger then all. All the earth calls for
truth and the heaven blesses it, 1. Esdras 4. 6. And indeed as rivers in their
channels, though they taste of the earth, and relish of the mudde wherein they
run, yet coming into the sea, resume their ancient saltness: so truth in
the heathens, though it taste of their paganism when they use it to worldly
respects, yet returning to the authors service from whence it first came,
receives its old vigor, and may serve as salt to season the nations withal.

2 It had a blessing in Paul, who confuteth Philosophers and Atheists thereby,
Act. 17. 1. Cor. 15. It had a blessing in the Fathers, who confounded
Heretics and Apostates therewith, and so may we Papists, Turks, Heretics,
Atheists Epicures, Scismatickes, Puritans, Anabaptists, and Brownists out of
natural reason. Ser. 92. de bap. August.
Ambrose professes, he converted Austine by the help hereof. It lead the
heathen to the knowledge of the Godhead and divine matters, Romans 1. 19. It made
them morally just, wise and virtuous, and taught them to do the things of the
law, Romans 2. 14. 15. and how much more may it Christians, when it is directed
by the word, and made powerful by the spirit of sanctification?

This their second Objection, from reasons. Their third is, the authority ^
Argument from Father^ and others.
of all Writers.

1. Ob. The ancient Fathers and recent Homilists used it not in their Sermons:
therefore they thought it unlawful, or at least not expedient.

Resp. They all allow it: and whereas most the ancient were busied in
disputation with Heretics, yet even those, who only preached to their people,
used it often and much in Sermons popular, and that when no controversy was in
hand but the doctrine of faith and good manners, as anon shall be showed at
large. And surely the obiector of this reason, read never (God knows and he
too) the ancient and modern thorough (me thinks) but took it by hearsay
from the hu^sters hand.

2. Ob. Yea but Chrysostom excuses himself to the people, and makes an
Apology for using secular learning in sermons: ergo he thought it either
utterly unlawful, or much inconvenient to be used.

Resp. I might here answer with Apollog. adue. Russ.
Jerome, Sed ipsa loca nomina, nec hoc mihi sufficient nisi eadem dicta ad
verbum protuleris, the obiector might have noted him, where, if he had it not
from others report?

Indeed I find Chrysostom (orat. 2. aduersus Iudaeos) excuses himself to
the people by Paul's example, that in his sermon speaking of Christ, he cited
Ethnicke Philosophers, as Pythagoras, Plato, Tyaneus, Socrates and Diagoras.
Which if he did in respect of Jews, he might justly, who rejected heathens
learning and witness, as I showed before. If in respect of his people and
auditors, he might justly, because speaking of Christ he brought something from
Philosophers, who never heard nor dreamed of the Messiah. Howsoever he there
apologizeth his alleging of it then, he often after (as hereafter I will show)
cited it to his people. And in the next sermon contra concubinarios, he
alleges the fable of Tantalus in the Poets to his auditors for no point of
controversy at all, and very often uses it in his popular sermons without all
apology when no controversy was in hand. This was but a guess of some who had
not read the father throughout.

3. Ob. Yea but Jerome in his Epistle to Eustochia, reprooueth her for reading
profane authors with the Scripture; saying, What communion has light with
darkness? what concord Christ with Beliall? what Horace with the Psalter?
Virgill with the Evangelists? Tully with the Apostles? Is not a brother
scandalized, if he see thee sit at table in the idols temple? And although to
the pure all things be pure, and nothing to be refused if it be received with
thanksgiving of them that know the truth; yet ought we not to drink together
the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils. And to dissuade her from this,
tells her a story how he was in a vision cited before Gods tribunal, and beaten
for spending so much time in reading Tully, Plautus, and such like: and was
told, Ciceronianus es no^ Christianus, thou art a Ciceronian Jerome, and not a
Christian. At which word he promised to read profane authors no more, and
kept his vow for the space of fifteen years, as we Ierom. prooem. in Gal. 3.
ad Paul. and Eustoch.
read in his writings. ergo.

I answer with Probl. loc. 150.
Aretius, Jerome prescribes to Eustochia, Qualis debeat esse lectio Monialis
Nonnae, what a virgin consecrate to Christ should chiefly read. Not Horace as
the Psalter, nor Virgil as the Evangelists, nor Tully as the Apostles Epistles.
Not these more or so much as Eustochia did. He reprooueth this in women (as he
might in all Christians) specially consecrated virgins and Nuns given to
devotion: but in his Epistle unto Romanus, he allows men to read and use
them with moderation, especially Ministers, who must be apt to teach, apt to
convince, and able to divide Gods word aright to his people.

2. For his story that he told her, if it was true, he was justly to be
blamed, because (as he confesses to Ruffinus) he read them with such delight
that he disdained the Scriptures: and therefore defines no man should read
heathens more or so much as profane authors; which no Christian will deny.

3. Whereas many (says Schol. in Epist. Iero^ ad Eustoch.
Erasmus) believing this fable, dare not meddle with secular learning, least
with Jerome they be beaten, they are deceived with a dream. For Jerome
himself in his Apology to Ruffinus (who charged him with breach of this
promise and perjury for reading them after it) tells him that it was but a
mere illusion of Satan, and fantastical dream (as there he confesses he had
many such) and not to believed. I promised (says he) when I was asleep and
not mine own man. D^ futur* sp^^sio est, ^ pr^t^rit^ me^ viae (...) ^ Apolog
adu^ Ruff.
I vowed never to read them for further knowledge, but to remember what before
I had read in those authors.

And whereas he told Eustochium, that he had not read Tully, Virgil, nor any
profane writer for 15. years, it was not because of his dreamie promise and
sleepie vow, but because he had sore eyes, much sickness, and infirmity of
his whole body: as Trooe^. ^^ Gal 3.
there he confesses, and tells Ruffinus, who accused him for reading them
when he mended, that being acquainted with them from a boy, he could not
utterly forsake them: adding, Si literas didicisses, oleret testa ingenioli tui
quo semel fuerat imbuta: thou read truly, and therefore art so learned, and
blamest me for reading him, vt solus inter ecclesiasticos tractatores
eloquentiae flumine glori^ris.

Wherefore seeing neither Scripture rightly understood, nor any reasons truly
examined, nor any precept or practice of ancient Fathers or late Writers,
disallow secular learning in popular Sermons, as at large I have showed: it is
not unlawful to be used in the pulpit at any time, as some from this do
pretend. The consideration whereof, made me bold to use that whereof I saw no
prohibition, either from Gods word, reason, or man's judgment. And therefore as
the Oppian lib. ^.
Lacedaemonian women with child, laid fair pictures before them, whereon
looking often and earnestly, their reflexe might make them conceive as fair
children: so did I in conceiving this Brotherly Reconcilement, lay the
beautiful works of the Fathers, the fair images and pictures of their minds
before mine eyes, that this child might be like and resemble them, at least in
some little member of the body. The lawful use whereof, both ecclesiastical
and profane Authors in the pulpit, though it has been sufficiently proved by
a D. K. lect. 40. on Jonas.
famous Preacher and Doctor of our Church: yet, since it is now called into
question again, not only in Athens, but even in the pulpit, give me leave
(for apology of mine own practice) to gleane after that labourer in Gods
harvest, and show first by Scriptures, secondly, by reason, thirdly, by the
ancient Fathers and late Writers, that humanity is lawful in popular
Sermons, when no controversy is in hand.

For the first. That learning which the Scriptures forbid not to be used in
popular Sermons, may be lawfully used therein, 1. Cor. 6. 12. All things
indifferent are lawful: but the Scriptures forbid it not, as in examination of
the places alleged is showed, ergo.

2 That learning which God himself preached and revealed to the people for the
knowledge of himself, is lawful in popular Sermons, if Gods practice may be a
pattern to Preachers: but secular learning God preached and revealed to the
people for knowledge of himself, Romans 1. 19. vide Martyr. and Gualt. in id.
ergo.

3 That learning or knowledge which taught people to do the things of the law,
is lawful in popular Sermons, I mean still, when no controversy is in hand:
but secular learning and knowledge taught people to do the things of the law,
Romans 2. 14. ergo, etc. Compare their decrees with Gods law, and see how near
they came to it by their natural knowledge, whereby they were a law unto
themselves.

Touching worshipping of one God in the first commandment of the former Table,
this knowledge taught them so much, as their books witness. See Tully lib. 1. de
Legibus, lib. 2. de not. De^r. and Lib 1. cont. Julian.
Cyrill brings the doctrine of Pythagoras to prove this point.

In the second Commandment the Law forbids images of God. The Persians did
so also, as Strabo reports; and in their war against the Grecians burnt the
images of their gods, not in contempt of religion (as some Greek writers
enuiously accuse them) but because (says Homil. 1^. in Romans 2.
Gualther) they desired to set up the worship of the high God, and purge it
from idolatry; the like storieth Tacitus of the old Germains; and Numa the
second king of Rome counted it impiety, says Plutarch, to represent the
living God by the form of a man, or figure of any living creature. And though
some of them when they knew God, glorified him not as God, but became vain in
their imaginations, and turned the glory of the incorruptible God into the
similitude of an image of a corruptible man, and of birds, of four footed
beasts, and creeping things, Romans 1. 23. This was not Gods fault, says
Gualther, who plainly revealed this knowledge and his will unto them, but their
own foolish heart, which turn the truth of God to a lie.

For the third precept, forbidding to take Gods name in vain, many of them by
this their knowledge detested Exorcismes wherein it was profaned, and
Theophrastus in Plutarke checked Pericles for this thing. As for perjury,
wherein his name was abused, they punished it severely, as examples in their
stories do witness.

For the fourth precept, of keeping his Sabbath, they ordained laws for the
like, though abusing their knowledge, they misused it with multitude of
ceremonies and ridiculous rites.

Touching the second table in general, their precept of charity was, Do to
others as ye would be done to, which our Savior says is the Law and the
Prophets.

For the first precept, of honoring our parents, Homer bad the same, and gave
the same motive, That thou may live long upon earth. And Solon (as Tully
reports) made no law against parricides, because he thought none would be so
unnatural and ungodly, as to kill his parents.

For the second, Thou shall not kill, their revealed law of natural knowledge
taught them this abundantly, prohibiting homicide by their public laws, as
their books witness. And such was their severity against it, that from the
building of the City, the space of 620. years none was killed by any private
hand within the walls, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus reports.

For the third, Thou shall not commit adultery, their laws were severe
against it, and punishments of it grievous. The Egyptians laws punished it
with a thousand stripes in the man, and cut off the nose of the woman, to
deter others from the like, Diod. Sicul. lib. 2. de reb. antiq. cap. 2. Cael.
Rhod. lib. 21. cap. 45. Solons law permitted, that a man might kill the
adulterer when he found him in the act. The Athenians mulct it with a mullet,
vide Cael. Rhod. lib. 27. cap. 4. Plato with death, lib. 9. de legibus. The
Lemnij so contemned the goddess Venus, that none would sacrifice unto her,
only because they thought she had committed adultery with Mars, Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 2. cap. 14.

The Leprei led the men three days through the City, contemning them all
their life after, and made the women stand up in the market place to be a
spectacle of shame eleven days, Cael. Rhod. lib. 21. cap. 48. and Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 4. cap. 1.

The Cretans mulct it largely, and excluding adulterers from all office and
dignity, crowned it with ignominy. Aelian. var. hist. lib. 12. and Cael. lib.
21. cap. 45.

The Arabians punished it with death, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 1. and
Parthians no sin more severely. The Pisidians made them be both led together
on an Ass thorough the City for certain days, Stob. ser. 42. The Thracians
punished it grievously. Among the old Germans adulteram excisis naribus
maritus s Alex. lib. 4. cap. 1. and Tacit.
expellit, say stories, and lashed her thorough the town. The barbarous Goths
(as Procopius relates) made it capital. The Romans made them do public
penance in a long robe, Cael. lib. 21. cap. 48. and made it lawful to kill
their wives for that fault, whereof Valerius shows many examples, lib. 6. cap.
1. But of all most famous is the law of Zaleucus, who when his own son was
accused of adultery before him, and adjudged to lose both his eyes for the
fault, would not hear the whole Cities entreaty for the one eye, but pulled
out one of his own, and another of his sons to satisfy the law, Val. Max.
lib. 6. cap. 4. and Volater. lib. 20. And thus by this revealed knowledge were
the Gentiles a law to themselves.

For the fourth precept, Thou shall not steal: Solon by his law punished theft
double. Draco by his ordained, that he qui stercorandi causa stercus bubulum
abstulisset, aut olera, who had but stolen a little ordure or dung should die
for it, Alex. lib. 6. cap. 10. ex Gel. lib. 11. cap. 18.

The Scythians punished no fault sorer. The Indians judged it the greatest. The
Atrians stoned it. The Phrygians if one stole but an instrument of husbandry,
made it death, Stob. ser. 42. Alex. lib. 3. cap. 5. and the laws of the twelve
Tables in Rome, punished night-theft with death, Gel. lib. 11. cap. 18. Alex.
lib. 6. cap. 10.

For the fifth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness, the Egyptians
punished lying with death, Diod. Sicul. lib. 2. cap. 2. the Persians and
Indians imposed perpetual silence on him who had thrice lied, Alex. ib. For
perjury, the Indians cut off the toes and fingers, yea the outward members of
the perjured, Alex. lib. 5. cap. 10. And for false accusation see how king
Assuerus hanged Haman, Esth. 7. 8. and the Pisidians threw them headlong from a
rock, Alex. lib. 6. cap. 10.

For the sixth and last, Thou shall not covet, the books of Philosophers,
Poets, and Historians are full de fraenandis affectibus, to speak nothing of
their laws. Did this Ethnicke knowledge and learning teach and persuade them
to do the things of the law, and can it not help to inform our
understandings, reform our minds, and conform our wills also? Yes doubtless,
being made powerful by the word of the spirit, and fruitful by the spirit of
grace, may it help to breed holiness in us, that made them so wise, so
prudent, so just, so sober, so temperate, so continent, that without law by
this natural knowledge they did the things of the law: seeing, as Peter Martyr
notes, if we t Comment an Romans 2.
look on the manners, life and conversation of Cato, Socrates, Aristides, and
such heathens, we shall find, they go beyond the Jews, and exceed many
Christians. Wrought it so much good in them, who had not the spirit of grace,
and can it work nothing in us, who have the spirit of sanctification?

4 That learning, the abuse whereof Saint Paul condemns in popular Sermons,
may be lawfully used therein: but Col. 2. 8. Paul condemns the abuse of
Philosophy, and the deceit of secular learning, Ergo.

Our modern interpreters expound this place of the abuse, when it (...), as
the Apostle speaks, does beguile with paralogismes and vain deceit, through
the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of men, and not after Christ:
As, that the world is eternal was a paralogisme of Aristotle; that the souls
go into new bodies was a paralogisme of Plato and Pythagoras; that pleasure is
the chiefest good, a paragolisme of Epicurus: So in Divinity, difference of
meats, a paralogisme of the Jews and Papists, and such like. Otherwise when
it does not beguile, and brings such paralogismes, the Apostle allows it:
therefore Paul spoke warily, says Austia^, adding it of Philosophy, after the
elements of the world, and not after Christ, and vain deceit, says
Theophylact, least he should deter us from hearing Philosophy. Seeing then he
bids the Colossians beware in their Preachers of Philosophy, which is
(...), beguiling with vain deceit, and not after Christ: he allows that
which agrees with the analogy of faith to be heard of the people at Colosse.
This place uses Lib. 3. hist. Eccles. cap. 14.
Socrates for a reason to prove this point in hand.

5. Saint Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. commands us to try all things, and keep that
which is good. And in this precept Socrates before cited, thinks the Apostle
commands Preachers to search for learning in all books for their people,
that we be exquisiti numularij quo omnia exploremus: and it is evident (says
he) that the Doctors of the Church from their youth to their last old age in
Gentilium disciplinis se exercuisse, idque partim diserti sermonis and mentis
exercendae causa, partim vt eos ipsos scriptores doctrinae, qua tradenda errore
lapsi sunt, penitus conuincerent. They tried all secular writers, and for their
use took out of them that which was good. So Probl. loc. 150.
Aretius understands this place of the Apostles precept, commanding
Preachers to read and try any secular authors, and take out of them that
which is good. Vt apum more per omne scriptorum genus volitemus, ac quicquid
boni apud singulos deprehenderimus, in vsum nostrum transferamus. One (says
he) will teach us method; another, purer speech; a third, examples of virtues.
This author, history: that piety for our people. And there is no book (as
Pliny notes) so bad, out of which some good may not be learned. Our Savior
in his sermons bad the people try brute beasts, and learn of them that which
is good: and why may not we bid our people try Poets, Philosophers,
Historians, and learn of them that which is good? Esai bad the people try Ox
and Ass, and learn of them that which is good: and why not much more of wise
and prudent men? Jeremy, the Swallow, Turtle and Crane: and why not we much
more Plato, Aristotle and Xenophon? Solomon the Ant, and why not Aristides?
Jeremy Dragons, and why not heathens? Our Savior ravens, lillies, and fowls
of the air; and why not Poets, Philosophers and Historians? He taught the
people from vintners, husbandmen, builders, pipers, sowers, merchants, fishers,
dough-kneaders, weather-wise and wizards, butchers and what not; and why not we
from any that which is good? He said to his people, Learn of the Lillies of
the field, learn of the fowls of the heaven; and why may not we say, of
Tully, of Plato, and such like? Wherefore if they be bid try all things in any
authors, and keep that which is good; let them look to it who try none, nor
take ought at all from strange authors. Paul says, Try all, and keep that
which is good. As Christ said to Peter, Arise Peter, take and eat: but they
answer, Not so Lord, for no unclean thing has ever entered into our mouths.

6. Seeing secular learning is not forbid by the word, we should not withhold
it from the people, who desire to hear heathens and infidels witness Gods
truth: and this after Paul's example, 1. Corinthians. 9. who became all to all to
win the more. And this place Lib. 5. Strom.
Clemens Alexandrinus urges for this point in hand. Saint Paul became all
things to al men, that by all means he might save some: that is, changed all
shapes in things indifferent (says Calvin) as the matter required, and put on
diverse persons of men for the more profit of his hearers. To the Jews he
became as a Jew, not only in manners, when for them Acts 16 3.
he circumcised Timothy, Acts 21. 26.
purified himself, Acts 18. 18.
shore his head in Cenchrea, and observed some legal rites, of which he
discharged the Gentiles, Acts 15. but in his doctrine also, when disputing with
the Jews he used the testimony of the Prophets and not of the Apostles (as
Enarrat. in Tit. 1. 12.
Theophylact observes) that he might win the Jews. To the Gentiles that
were without law, he became as a Gentile, as if he had bin without law, in
preaching to Philosophers, not from Scripture but from Philosophy and Poets,
when he took the inscription and epigramme of their altar for his text,
whereon he made his sermon, as Theophylact, Jerome, Chrysostom, Ambrose, P.
Martyr and Gualther expound this place, that he might thus win them without
law, that were indeed without law. Solent enim omnes ex proprijs and cognitis
argumentis conuinci, says Ib. in Tit. 1. 12.
Theophylact: Id ipsum facit and Deus, cum singulos hisce ex rebus trahit ad
sui cognitionem quibus insueuerunt magis and credunt. As himself taught Balaam
by the mouth of his Ass, Numb. 22. and by his foolish beast whereon he rode
forbad the foolishness of that Prophet. Saul by the witch he confuted, whom he
believed, 1. Sam. 28. The soothsayers by the Oxen that carried the Arc, 1. Sam.
6. He called the wise men of the East by a star, Mat. 2. because they were
given to Astronomy and starre-gazing, as Musculus observes: and why not we
then by Astronomy, who are given to that most? He drew fishermen unto him by a
draught of fish, Luke 5. and why should not fishers of men bait their hook
with stories of fishes and draughts, to catch fishermen alike? Unto the
Capernaits that followed him for bread, he preached of heavenly bread, and gave
them food from heaven, John 6. Unto the Samaritane that came to draw water at
Iaakobs well, he discoursed of other water, and opening the fountain of David,
gave her water of life, John 4. Et hoc exemplo Doctores Euangelij monentur,
says In Math. 4.
Musculus, by this example are we admonished to become all to all, that by all
means we may save some, and win the more. Thus, as Calvin spoke of his
Apostle Paul, Omnes formas mutauit and diuersas hominum personas indui^. To
Marie in the garden he appeared like a gardener: and why should not we to
planters and grafters appear from Pliny, Dioscorides and herbalists, with the
nature of trees and plants, as the Scripture does? To those two travelers Luke
24. he appeared like a traveler: and why should not we speak unto travelers
of peregrinations, iourneyes by sea and land out of stories? To strong Iaakob
he appeared like a wrastler, Genesis 32. 24. 25. and so should we to soldiers
with stories of battle and wars, as often does the Scripture. Thus appeared he
to his people in preaching with similitudes, parables, allegories, stories, and
what not. Thus his Apostle was made all to all, to win the more, that is,
says Piscator, Omnium ingenijs se acco^modauit: and so should we in sermons
frame our selves to all men's knowledge and nature: to husbandmen with stories
of husbandry, from Columella: to Philosophers, with axioms of Astronomy, from
Aristotle: to Physicians, with aphorisms of medicine, from Galen and
Hippocrates: to Lawyers with maxims of law, from Justinian: and to Atheists,
with natural reason and testimonies from heathen, and kill Goliath with his
own sword.

Christ proved the resurrection to the Sadduces, not by Job 19. which is the
most pregnant and plain place, but only out of the five books of Moses,
Math. 22. which alone they allowed. So did Paul the Philosophers at Athens by
the inscription of their altar, Acts 17. The Atheists at Corinth, not by
Scripture which they refused, but became as one without law to them that were
without law, Conciones suas illorum captui and moribus accommodauit, and
omissis scripturae testimonijs, argumentis est vsus, and Poetarum quoque
authoritate pugnauit, says Homil* 47. in 1. Cor. 9.
Gualther ou this place I urge. By whose practice, as they are checked, who
bring naught but scripture against Iudaisme, Paganism, Atheism, as Ierom.
Epist. ad Roman.
Cyprian is sharply taxed in Lactantius, because against Demetrius he brought
testimonies of Prophets and Apostles, which he counted fabulous, and not of
Philosophers and Poets, whose authority he could not refuse: so are they much
to blame, who become not all to all, all true writers to all hearers, that by
all means they may save some, and win the more. Some desire in such a
doctrine Gods testimony alone, become as a Jew to the Jews: some, heathens
testimony to witness that truth, become as a Gentile without law to them that
are without law, become all, Philosophers, Poets, Historians, in truth, that by
all means we may save some. Sunt enim etiam animae propria habentes nutrimenta
(says Lib. 1. Stro^.
Clemens Alexandrinus) and aliae quidem augentur per agnitionem and scientiam,
aliae vero per Graecam pascuntur Philosophiam, cuius, qu^madmodum nucum, non
est quiduis esculentum. Every soul has its own proper food and feeding, some
are fed and nourished by the scriptures alone, others stomach will have it
sawced with secular learning, else they will not taste our receipt, nor rel^sh
the things of the spirit. Neque vero verebuntur nostri etc. says he, vt ijs
qu^ sunt pulcherrima ex Philosophia, and ijs quae praecedunt disciplinis, he
brings this place of the Apostle for his reason, non enim solum oropter
Hebraeos and eos qui sunt sub lege, par est fieri Iud^um; sed etiam propter
Graecos Graecum vt omnes lucrifaciamus. Let us therefore (says he) as the
Apostle did, peaching Christ admonish every man, and teach every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

7. Preachers are commanded to study, to show themselves approved worke-men
that need not be ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright, 2. Tim. 2. 15. But
the word of truth we cannot cut and divide aright to our people without the
knife of secular learning: Therefore is it lawful, yea necessary in our
sermons. The proposition being clear, I prove the assumption, 1. by the
judgment of ancient and late writers: 2. by the practice of them both: 3. by
many instances of scripture. For the first, Saint Lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. cap.
28.
Austine shows plainly, that history is needful, and plurimu^ nos adiuuat ad
sanctos libros intelligendos, and shows for want of this, many have erred in
expounding the scriptures. S. Prooem. in Dan. ad Pammach. Multiplex Gracorum
historia necessaria est.
Jerome avouches that for the opening of Daniels Prophecy, many stories of
secular writers are necessary, as of Suctorius Callimachus, Diodorus,
Hieronymus, Polybius, Possidonius, Claudius, Theon, and Andronicus surnamed
Alipius, Josephus and those he cites, chiefly our Liuy, Pompeius Trogus and
Iustine, who explane all the story of the last vision, and describe the wars
of Syria and Egypt, that is, of Seleu^us and Antiochus, and the P^olomies,
after Alexander even to Augustus Caesar. And if at any time I be compelled
(says he) to use secular learning, it is not my will so much as great
necessity that inforceth me, that I may prove those things which the Prophets
foretold so many ages before, tam Graecorum quam Latinorum and aliarum Gentium
literis contineri, are contained in the writings of Greek and Latin authors.

Yea Ora. 2. de conser. in Eccl. pur. put. De^ verb^. Adminicula v^ ^o art^um
d^ce^di, ac pr^^^puarum Ph^losophiae par^ium, maxim Ethices and Physices
cognitto.
Zanchius himself confesses, that Preachers must come to handle the word
necessarijs instructi adminiculis, furnished with these necessary helps, if
they will profit their hearers, and do any thing worthy praise. These helps
are the arts, and the chiefest parts of Philosophy, especially the knowledge
of moral and natural Philosophy. Absque his enim non modo plurimas
scripturarum sententias non intelligent, sed and multas grauissimas
disputationes de prouidentia Dei, de peccato, de libero arbitrio, de lege Dei,
de virtutibus etc. non assequentur; sine illis vero, ne quidem quae assecuti
fuerint, commode tradere alijs poterunt. Mark him, neither can they understand
and open the scripture without the help of secular learning, nor deliver the
meaning they have to the people fitly without it. For we know (says he, citing
this very place I urge) that the Apostle requires in a Preacher skill to cut
and divide the word aright. And lastly, there condemns he them who are (...),
quod hominum genus raro Ecclesiae profuit, teachers from their own brain,
which sort of men seldom have profited the Church.

As he resolved in that Preface, so in his Zanch. qu^st 12. de sa^ scrip* reg.
8.
book alleging that place before urged, 1. Thessal. 5. Try all things, and
keep that which is good: to prove that we must read interpreters for getting
the sense, he adds, that to attain the true meaning of scripture, we must
sift it and try it consultis lexicis and libris de Tropis scripturarum siquid
occurrat in verbis: consultis vero historijs and aliarum artium libris siquid
talium rerum scitu necessariarum occurrat. And Regula 9. Quoru^ cogniti^
petenda sit ex Grammaticu vel Dialectics, vel historijs, vel Mathemat^cis, vel
alijs artibus, etc.
after avouches, that we must take care that we understand the signification
of words, the force and proprieties of speeches, and any other things, the
knowledge whereof must be fetched from Gra^marians, or Logicians, or Historians,
or Mathematicians, or other arts, illa ex ijs libris cognoscantur: let the
knowledge of those things be fetched from such books and authors.

A Preacher must open his text as well by profane as sacred writers, says
Prafat. in minor. Prophet.
Gualther, applying those things in either to these times for our instruction
and comfort, Et haec est illa verbi Dei secatio quam Paulus suo Timotheo, and
in illo ministris omnibus commendat: and this (says he) is that cutting of
Gods word aright, which Paul commends to his Timothy, and in him to all
Ministers of the word.

Who can understand the phrases of Scripture without Grammar, says Comment. in
Col. 2. 8.
Hemingius? Who the parts of longer speech who the order of disputations; who
the force and connection of their arguments without Logic? Does not Paul
require in a Preacher, that he be apt to teach and divide Gods word aright?
which that he cannot do without Logic, Rhetoric, nor without secular
learning expound it, who sees not? Many things (says he) are said in the
Prophets, the Psalms and Apostolical writings, Quae sine reru^ naturalium
doctrina intelligi nequeunt, which cannot be understood, much less opened to
the people without the doctrine and learning of natural things.

Whatsoever things are written of the site of places, and of the natures of
beasts, trees, stones, herbs, or other like bodies in profane authors, that
the knowledge of them helps to open the dark places of the Scripture, we
have taught before says Saint Lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. cap. 29. quaecunque de
locorum situ naturisque animalium, lignorum, lapidu^, herbaru^, ahor^ ve
corporu^ scripta sunt, eoru^ cognitione^ valere ad aenigmata script^^raru^
soluendae docuimus.
Austine: and cap. 16. he shows, that for expounding the Scripture aright, the
knowledge of beasts, of herbs, of stones, and such like is necessary, and must
be found out. And where are these natures better to be found, then in Pliny,
Aristotle, Dioscorides, Gesner, Poets, Philosophers and Historians? Certum est
(says Proble. loc. 150. de lect. Ethnic.
Aretius) it is certain, that difficult places and hard knots of the scripture
vsitata phrasi and sententia ab Ethnicis petita expediri, are opened by a like
phrase and sentence in profane authors. And though many places in Scripture be
plain and easy, yet who sees not, that because of seeming antilogies,
whereof there be not a Vide Indicem loc. pug. praefix. tom 1. August. and Al^ha
mar.
few in the Scripture, of ambiguitie in speech and words, of imperfect clauses,
of preposterous speeches and anticipations, of idiotismes in both tongues, of
manifold allusions to things of all sorts, of tropicall and figurative
speeches, whereof I spoke before; and lastly of the difficulty, and obscurity of
Scripture, whereof Illyricus has given no t Tract. 1. de rat. cognos. script.
less then one and fifty reasons, though matters most necessary to salvation
be in some place or other plain, yet can it not be understood without this
help. Read that writer, how he Ibid. and tract 6. de necessit. cognit.
shows, in every book of holy writ some thing is alluded to, which without
it we cannot expound and divide aright to our people.

But of all other Hyperius lib. 1. de ration. stud. Theolog. cap. 4. Quodartium
scientia sit Theologo necessaria, is learned and large in this point. Where he
avouches, that the knowledge of the arts does no less mightily conduce to
understand, then to open and expound to others the high mysteries of the
Scripture. Neither will we hear them qui obganniunt, who bark and baule
against us, that the skill of understanding and expounding the Scriptures, is
so to be expected of the holy Ghost, that we need not use these good helps.
Though all knowledge of divine things come from God, yet is it exacted of us to
learn the arts, the tongues, and other secular learning with many watchings,
and use them when the matter requires, in expounding the Scripture: Quid
verbis opus est? euincit experientia, etc. What need words? experience proves,
that the causes, beginnings, progress, ends, circumstances, and what soever is
of moment, are in obscure places more perspicuously explaned of them who use
the arts, then of those that want the^ or use the^ not at al. And afterward he
shows at large, that Grammar for propriety of words and phrases: Logic for
defintions, divisions, demonstrations, argumentations, avoiding sophismes, and
distinguishing ambig^ities: Rhetoric, to teach, delight, persuade, and move
the affection: Arithmeticke for calculation of times, years, and supputations:
Geometry, for sites and situations of places, countries, and regions:
Physiologie, for scanning causes and their effects, for searching natures and
qualities of man, his soul, her faculties: of plants, stones, beasts, birds,
herbs, trees, Palms, Cedars, Olive tree, Fig tree, and Vine, mentioned often
in Scripture: diseases, as leprosy, dropsy, flux of blood, and fevers:
Astronomy, for the celestial motions, for the Sun, Moon, Stars, for
Meteors, rain, wind, rainbow, thunders, hail, tempest, earthquakes, and the
first and latter rain in Canaan: Ethicke, for manners and good life: for
definitions of virtues or vices; for helps and hindrances of both: History,
for knowledge of men, their manners, kingdoms, and regencie of the Monarchies:
Poetry, under whose dark fables much excellent morality for life and good
manners, like a kernel within the shell is contained. Without these arts (says
he) a Preacher cannot understand the Scriptures aright: Neque Prophetarum
vaeticinia and conciones plane percipiet, neither open them for himself, nor
divide them to other aright. And therefore Theodoret on this place, divide
aright, compares a Preacher to a plowman, who uses not one, but many
instruments, as helps for tilling the ground. Indeed solo vomere terra
proscinditur: sed vt hoc fieri possit, caetera etiam aratri membra sunt
necessaria, says Lib. 16. de ciuit. Dei cap. 2.
Austine: The culter and share is the principal tool that cleaves the
ground, the word of God alone is sharp to divide between the marrow and bone,
and plow up the fallow ground of our hearts: yet as caetera aratri membra sunt
necessaria, as the other tools are necessary in the plow, so Aratus, we see
Saint Paul was feign to use as an help for his tillage. If this simily like
not, a B. Jewel ser. 6. in Ios 6. of destroying Jericho.
larned Bishop and Jewel of our Church uses another, We say eloquence and
other liberal arts are to be likened to that part of the Carpenters wimble,
which turns about, goes round, and by little and little draws in the iron
or steele-bit. The wooden handle enters not into the wood, but wreatheth in
the piercer: so do these arts, if they be rightly used, further the
understanding of the word of God. This use Lactantius seemed to seek, when
Lib. 3. Instit. cap 1. Vellem mihi dari eloquentiam, vel quia magis credant
homines ornatae veritati, vel vt ipsi suis armis vincantur
he said, I would I had the gift of eloquence or learning, either because men
might give better credit to the truth, when it is beautifully adorned, or that
they might be overcome with their own weapons. And surely they who do not thus
maintain learning in preaching, but would banish the use of liberal arts from
the pulpit, restore (as much as in them lies) ignorant Jericho again Ibid.
says Bishop Jewel. And I may with Ibid.
him boldly auerre, This ignorant Jericho has many friends in our days, who
by all means draw men from knowledge, and seeking for learning in books which
carry fruitful instruction: but good letters and study to increase
knowledge, are not to be neglected. Such as presume of Gods spirit over boldly,
that without their endeavor to use the wholesome means which he has left unto
his Church, they shall and do by special inspiration understand his will, do
tempt God. Thus we see that Preachers in the judgment of ancient Fathers, and
late writers, cannot open the Scriptures nor divide the word aright without
secular learning.

2 This appears by the practice of all ecclesiastical expounders, who cannot
give use of the true sense of Scripture, nor divide it aright without this
knife of secular learning. How often are our modern interpreters (to speak
nothing of the ancient) Gualther, Peter Martyr, Musculus, yea Calvin, and most
of all Iunius and Beza, feign to consult with Poets, Philosophers, and
Historians for the use and acception of words, for propriety of phrase, for
understanding of stories and hard places in the Scriptures? Are we better able
then they to explane them without it? and may we not cite it as they do,
without ostentation of learning? Indeed some have practiced and said they bring
no profane author, but when they find him cited in Calvin or Beza, because (I
think) it is then hallowed, as Paul sanctified Menander and the Poets: but
what is this else, says Aretius, then to be led by Commenters only, and see
with other men's eyes? If Calvin or Beza bring the sense of a word from a Poet,
and we take it from him, why is it not as lawful to cite it as Beza? or rather
to drink the fountain then the brook?

3 As Lib. 1. de rat. stud. Theolog. cap. 11. Obs. 8.
Hyperius avouches, that diverse matters of all kind are handled in Scripture,
which without secular Writers we cannot understand, nor open their meaning to
our people: so shows he diverse instances and examples thereof, as Esa. 15.
Joel 2. to explane their custom how the Jews testified grief of mind by
shauing their heads and beards, by putting on sackcloth and renting their
garments, operaepretium est, it is needful to show from profane Writers the
like custom of Ethnicke nations, who took it of them as most ancient, as the
Graecians, Milesians, Carthaginians, Persians, Egyptians, Assyrians, Romans,
and many other, as Alex. lib. 3. genial. dier. cap. 7. shows at large, how
Arch^laus king of Macedon in token of sorrow, shaued his head at the death of
Eurypides, and Achilles d Homer. Iliad. lib. 5.
at the funeral of Patroclus. We tell them ( Deuteronomy. 11. 10.) that Egypt has no
rain for extremity of heat, and though Scripture there tells us it is watered
with labor. ( vid. Esa. 23. 3.) yet how can we assure them the means of the
whole lands fertility, but by showing out of Lib. 5. not. hist. cap. 9 and li.
18 cap 18.
Pliny, Lib. 3 cap. 9.
Pomponius Mela, Cap. 41.
Solinus, Lib. 2 de excid. Ierus. cap. 9.
Egesippus, etc. that it is by the ouerflow of Nilus, which we read not in
Scripture? Will they not marvel, and say like Nicodemus, How can these things
be? unless we thus expound and explane it? So Mat. 9. 23. they will marvel
what minstrels did at a funeral. They will not, if we show them how antiquity
by music (as In vet. musie. Pro^m.
Boethius shows) moved their friends to lament: yet moderately, and therefore
ordained Stat. lib. 6. Theb.
tibiam, a pipe at the death of youth, (as it was now at the death of Iairus
daughter) and Virgil. lib. 11. Pers. Satyr. 3.
tubam a trumpet at the death of old folk. How can we open fully this place
without the help of these Poets? Shall we say, It was an ancient custom?
Suppose an hearer say of us truly, what Aristotle of Moses falsely for Genesis,
Hic home multa dicit, sed nihil probat, Sir. I believe you not, unless you
show me more then your own bare word. So Luke 7. they will marvel how Mary
could with tears wash Christ's feet sitting at supper, and wipe them with her
hair. Went he barefoot? no, from Plin. iun. lib. 8. Epist. 7. Horat. lib. 2
ser. vnde Martial. lib. 5. Deposui soleas, etc. E^ Terent. Heaut Accurrunt
seru^, soleas detrahunt, video al^o^ festinare, lectos strucre, cunam parare.
antiquity I must show how in eating they leaned on a bed, and put off their
shoes lest they should defile it. So Luke 15. of the blood of those
Galilaeans, Act. 5. of Theudas and Judas of Galile, this cannot be fully
explaned, without Joseph. lib. 18. antiq. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap 3. and lib. 2.
cap. 11.
them who have written of them at large. Ioh. 8. 25. when the Jews asked our
Savior, Who art thou? and he answered: (...): what stir do Interpreters
keep on this place? how doubtful, hard, and uncertain is it at first look?
whereas if we show the use and phrase of the Greek tongue, which uses (...)
from (...), primitus, first, or before, as Lib. 7. polit. cap. 11. ad fin.
Aristotle uses the word, it is easy. The Jews of old searched, and to this
day spend their wits, to make Gods promise true of their eternal possessing
the holy land, though they be cast out, and are driven to many shifts: but see
how briefly Austine explanes it from a like phrase in Horace:

Seruiet aeternum, qui paruo nesciet vti. To be short, many stories of the
kings of Babylon, the Medes, Persians, and Macedonians, occur in Scripture,
which without profane stories we cannot explane. The people are bid learn of
the Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, Ier 8. often mention of trees, as the palm
tree, like which the righteous is promised to flourish, and spread abroad like
a Cedar in Libanus. Of the Olive tree, whereunto we Gentiles are compared Romans
11. Of the Vine, whereto all Christians John 15. Often also are infinite
elegant similitudes drawn from natural things, In his omnibus locis (says
Hyperius) opus est eos authors consulas, qui de quadrupedibus, serpentibus,
auibus, arboribus, herbis, alijsque rebus simplicibus ex professo disputarunt.
And seeing Salomons Philosophy wherein he wrote of all plants, from the Cedar
to the Hyssope on the wall, is perished, what better helps of explanation then
Plinies natural history, then Aristotle's story of beasts, then Columella for
rural matters, then Leuinus Lemnius de herbis biblicis, for declaring the
nature of herbs in the Bible, then Cardan and Aelians diverse stories, or
Gesner, for the quality, natures, feature, etc. of all beasts, fishes, and
serpents in those his large volumes? I may find a beginning, but no end in
examples of these things. But who sees not by these few, that without this
knife we cannot cut and divide the word aright? We read 1. King. 5. that king
Solomon having plenty enough of timber and trees in mount Lebanon, yet wanting
so skillful Carpenters in Jury, as were the Sidonians, he hired Wrights of
Hiram an heathen, to cut down and hew timber for building of the temple. Mark
Peter Martyr on this place, that he says the Sidonians and men of Tirus were
cunning in hewing timber, which he does not attribute to the Hebrews, Nos
commonefacit Quod Hebr^^^ non tribuit.
pijs hominibus licere, artibus Ethnicorum vti si eis opus habuerint, habuit
quidem Solomon in ditione sua materiem, quandoquidem; Lebanos mons Hebraeorum
fuit, sed peritos artifices non habuit. Praeterea conuenit vt mysteriu^ no^
praetereamus, verum spect^mus non sola Hebraeorum opera, sed etiam Ethnicorum
templum Dei aedificari. Though Christ our Solomon have timber enough in mount
Lebanon, matter in Scripture sufficient for building us up in faith, yet needs
he the Sidonians, and skillful Carpenters of Tire to cut down this timber, to
hew timber out of the thick trees, and bring it to an excellent work: that
is, to divide and cut it aright for building of his temple. And whereas some
that are thought Stewards of Gods house, think to cut it without a knife, and
divide to every one their portion without this dividing aright: Complures illud
vndique lacerant atque discerpunt, says Homil. 5. in 2. Tim. 2.
Chrysostom on this very place I urge, many of them tear it and pull it in
pieces; or as Calvin here speaks of each sort of them: Alij mutilant, alij
discerpunt, alij contorquent, alij disrumpunt, alij in cortice haerentes non
perueniu^t ad ipsam animam. Some mangle it, others tear it, some wrest it,
others come never to the kernel and sense for want of breaking the shell, the
rest pull it asunder, and for want of this knife tear it with their teeth. I
end this reason with Lib. 2. de rat. concion
Erasmus, His disciplinis, etc. By these arts and secular learning soberly
delivered and fitly applied, is got a certain dexterity of wit, both to judge
of the right sense, and also fitly to deliver it. And the more plenteous grace
of the spirit coming upon that skill got by man's industry, non dissoluit sed
absoluit, non adimit sed adiuuat: but rather having got excellent gifts of
nature, does by them more excellently declare his efficacy and power, as the
cunning craftsman more curiously shows his best art and skill on an excellent
subject: Ita nostram industriam adeo non aspernatur spiritus ille caelestis, vt
exigat etiam, nec indignatur sua dona nostro vicissim studio adiuuari, tantum
absit impia nostri fiducia. I speak to the learned, judge ye what he says.
These be the places of Scripture expounded both by ancient and modern; which
still (I judged) allowed as lawful, if not commanded as necessary, humanity
in all Sermons.

Next this first proof of Scripture, shall secondly be reasons.

That doctrine which is taken out of the sacred Scriptures, is First reason.
lawful in all Sermons. But most doctrine of heathen Writers, that is true, is
taken out of the sacred Scriptures, Therefore most doctrine of heathen Writers
that is true, is lawful in all Sermons. The proposition is clear, for do they
not cite the Apocrypha, when he has a sentence taken out of canonical
Scripture? Approve we not and allege in all written books, that truth which
the Authors took out of it? Think not these men their own sayings worthy to
be used in all popular Sermons, when in sense it is taken out, or agrees in
substance with that pattern of truth? For the assumption, Apolog 2. pro Christ.
Iustine Martyr, who lived so near the Apostles, affirms, al things that
both Philosophers and Poets have delivered of the immortality of the soul, or
of torments after death, or of the knowledge and conte^platio^ of divine
things, or such like decrees, argumenta a Prophetis mutuati and intelligere
potuerunt and commemorarunt, They borrowed them all of the Prophets, and had
them but at second hand from the Scriptures. Itaque in omnibus and apud omnes
veritatis semina videntur esse: Magnus cons^^su^ (...) Christian^ cum
Philo^^ph^ and Poe^s.
and therefore he shows at large in that second Apology, that there is great
harmony and agreement between Christian doctrine and Philosophers and Poets,
whence he claimed it thus Apolog 1.
before: That whatsoever excellent things were said of all Philosophers, Poets,
and Historiographers, nostra sunt, Christianorum, they are ours who are
Christians* Apolog. aduers Genesis Quis (...). quis sophistaruns qui non (...) de
Prophetari^, font potauerit ^ Inde igitur Philosoph^ sitim ingenij sui
rigauerunt, etc.
Tertullian says no less: Which of the Poets, which of the Philosophers is
he, who has not drunk of the fountain of the Prophets? Thence the
Philosophers watered and quenched the thirst of their wit, vt quae de nostris
habent ea nos comparent illis. And having showed how many things they have like
the Scriptures, asks, Vnde haec (oro vos) Philosophis aut Poetis tam
consimilia? non nisi de nostris sanamentis, vt de prioribus. Those things
(says L^b. 2 de Abrah. cap. 10.
Ambrose) which the Scriptures speak in plain and simple words, does
Aristotle and the Peripatetickes sing of and extol magno quodam cothurno, with
excellency of speech, and wisdom of words. Lib. 2. ad S^^plic. Epist. 7.
Again, let Poets and the Philosophers acknowledge, that whatsoever excellent
things they have spoken, they have them from ours, that is, the Scriptures. And
Lib. de bon. mort. cap. 10.
again, I have used the words of Esdras, (says he) Vt cognoscant Gentiles ea
quae in Philosophiae libris mirantur translata de nostris, that the heathens
may know, that those things they admire in the books of Philosophers, are
taken from the Scriptures. De literis nostris (says Lib. 2. de doc. Christ.
cap. 2^. vid. lib. 18. de ciuit Dei cap. ^4
Austine) habuerunt omnia quaecunque bona and vera dixerunt: All their sayings
that are good and true, they had them from the Scriptures. This Lib. 1. and 10.
contra Julian.
Cyrill, Homil. 65. ^^ Johan.
Chrysostom, Lib. 1. Gra^. Fabul.
Theodoret, Oratan Basil.
Nazianzene, with many mo affirm and confirm; and therefore Clemens
Alexandrinus in his books of Stromes handling this point, Lib. 5. Strom.
calls them thieves, for stealing that truth out of Scriptures which they
withheld in unrighteousness, and was none of their own: yea spends the whole
sixth book almost in detecting this theeuerie of Poets, Philosophers, and
Ethnicke Historians. They witness our truth in many things: Plato has much of
the destruction of the world, for many think he had read Moses, whence he is
termed Moses Atticus, the Atticke or Grecian Moses. Homer of the pains of
hell, and honoring our parents. Tully of Gods providence, and rewards of
virtue. Whence Lib. 1. in Da. cap. 1. verse. 1.
Jerome doubted not to tell thee, That thou may find some of the vessels of
Gods house in the books of Philosophers. And surely if every man that found
his neighbors ox going astray, was commanded by the law to bring him home to
his master that owed him: much more (me thinks) are we bound to bring home
these vessels into the house of God, and carry home all their truth, as stray
goods from the temple of the Lord. In many points they witness our truth. And
though Christ and his Apostles refused testimony of the devils, because it was
needless, since their miracles did sufficiently witness their doctrine, as In
Tit. 1. 12.
Theophylact observes: yet these failing in us, we have need to call both
Apostles and Philosophers, Prophet^ and Poets, as Moses did both heaven and
earth to witness his truth. And though the testimony of God be greater, yet
may we receive the witness of men: as Demetrius had good report not only of
the truth it self, but of all men. Wherefore when we dare appeal to enemies,
and say with our Savior, Yea let even these speak, this is glory for it, as
it was for him.

2 Truth is still truth wheresoever we find it, and may be cited 2. Reason.
of whom soever it be spoken, says Aretius. S. Paul gives a reason, Tit. 1.
13. why he alleged the Poet, hoc testimonium verum est, this testimony is
true. Since all truth is from God, says Commen^. in Tit. 1. 12.
Calvin, if any thing be truly said of the wicked heathens, it ought not to be
refused, because it came from God: and seeing all things belong to him, why is
it not lawful to apply and use any saying to his glory, which may fitly be
bestowed to that use? And Comment. in 1. Cor. 15. 33
again, seeing all truth is from God, there is no doubt quin Dominus in os
posuerit, etiam impijs quaecunque veram and salutarem doctrinam continent: But
the Lord put into the mouth even of the wicked, whatsoever things contain true
and wholesome doctrine. In 1. Cor. 15. 33.
Peter Martyr witnesses this truth, we may borrow it of the heathens, seeing
by who^soeuer truth is spoken, it is of the holy Ghost: and when we take it out
of their books, non aliena rapimus, sed nostra ab iniustis possessoribus nobis
vendicamus. There is but one truth among all (says Lib. 2. de lib. arb. cap.
12.
Austine) and this one truth of whomsoever it be spoken, must be received, as
he shows lib. 13. confess. cap. 31. But that Father lib. 2. de Doctr. Christ.
cap. 18. is excellent in this point, as in all. If profane writers have said
any thing well, it is not to be refused for their superstition, if we can take
any thing from them profitable for understanding the scriptures. For then ought
we not to learn letters, because Mercury (as they say) was their inuentor: or
because they dedicated temples to Justice and Virtue; and because those things
which are to be borne in our hearts, they rather would adore and worship in
stones, therefore we should fly justice and virtue. Imo vero quisquis bonus
verusque Christianus est, Domini sui esse intelligat, vbicumque inuenerit
veritatem. And surely then in Saint Austins judgment, they are not good and
true Christians that refuse Gods truth when they find it in heathens. Quicquid
verum est, Christi vox est (says Jo Psalm. 1. 1.
Bucer) eam vndicunque sonuerit audiamus: and indeed every Christian
whenever he hears truth out of Philosophers, Poets or Historians, will know
his voice, yea follow it, and say with his spouse, Vox dilecti mei est, It is
the voice of my beloved that knocks, Cant. 5. 2. If wicked Saul, if
treacherous Judas and son of perdition, yea if a foolish Ass speak truth
unto Balaam, he must receive it: and if a Raven bring Eliah meat, he must not
refuse it, because it came from the Lord. And indeed, whether we search in the
Prophets or Poets, in the Apostles or Philosophers, in Moses or Aristotle,
there is but one truth, diversely apparelled. If Peter confess, and the devils
profess of Christ, Thou art the Son of God, it is not a truth in the one, and
a lie in the other: but though the persons be contrary, the motives diverse, and
ends different in either, the substance of the confession in both is the same.
Only (as that learned man excellently notes out of Lib. 18. noct. attic cap.
3. Sic bona sente^tia mansit turpis author mutatus est.
Gellius, the difference between them is this, That as in Lacedaemon sometimes
when in a weighty consultation, an eloquent but an evil man had set down a
good decree, which they could not amend, they caused it to be pronounced by one
of honest name and conversation, and then received the good sentence as
autenticke: so truth spoken by Aratus, Menander, or Callimachus, is not more
true in the mouth of Saint Paul, but only has gotten (as out of Origin I
noted) a more sanctified author. Neither refused the Apostle the saying Paulus
significa^^^^ Origin.
of Callimachus, though he was a most lying Poet in the rest, but alleged it
when he saw it to be true. After whose example, and with the like reason, may
every Preacher cite truth from lying Poets, and every hearer receive it as
sanctified from the spirit the author of all truth, when they know hoc
testimonium verum est, this testimony and saying is true. It is true of all
whosoever speak his truth, The voice of Christ and part of his law, as Martin
Bucer calls it, He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me. Nec refert, quod ad nos attinet, quis eam nobis indicet, says
Probl. loc. 150. and 151.
Aretius disputing this point in hand. For as a godly matrone under mean and
base apparel is worthy of honor and reverence: so truth (says he) spoken by
the words of an heathen Poet, Philosopher or Historian, is to be embraced, not
because they spoke it, but because it is truth, because this testimony is
true. So I approve, what Homer said of honoring our parents, not because he
said it, but because God first so appointed. So likes it me, that Plato said,
the soul is immortal, not for Plato, but because it agrees with Gods
ordination. Nec deterior aestimari debet veritas propter Ethnicos scriptores,
who like Parots spoke truth, which they knew not what it meant, like Balaams
Ass, uttered verity which they understood not, and like Caiphas knew not what
they proclaimed.

3. They think it profitable and good to season those 3. Reason.
young vessels, their children, with this licour, both for knowledge and
manners, whereof they cannot choose but taste all their life long, as the Quo
semel est imbuta recen^, seruabit odorem Testa diu. Horat.
Poet speaks, and Si literas didicisses ^lcret testa ingeniol^ tui, qu^ semel
fuerat im^^ta Apolog. adversus Ruff.
Jerome told Ruffinus. And if it bred this profit in them, why not much more
in old folk? If it nourished not their understandings and minds, why rather
set we not them to suck the two breasts of the Testaments alone?

4. Why spend we seven years in attaining secular learning, and that in the
Universities, with much cost of Founders and benefactors, with great pains of
our own, why so many famous Libraries, why Preachers studies stored with
profane authors, if there be no use of it for a Preacher? Quo mihi diuitiae,
si non conceditur vti? What needed this lost? this might have bin sold for
much, and given to the poor. Why in Christian Universities is not rather read
and expounded Moses Genesis, then Aristotle's Phisicks? Salomons Proverbs, then
Aristotle's Ethics? Moses, then Plato? David, then Tully? Solomon, then Seneca?
as R^m. spec(...) in Eccl. 12 14.
one spoke more according to zeal then knowledge. And what is this else, but
with Lucinus to count learning and good letters the plague of commonwealths;
and wish that all profane authors (like those books of curious arts) might be
burned in the market place? Indeed some would count it (as he did when he saw
the books of usurers burnt) the brightest and purest fire that ever they saw.

5. The enemies of Gods truth in devilish policy have forbidden 5. Reason.
Christians the use of secular learning, because they saw it much helped
Christ's cause and religion, which they persecuted: for when Julian the Apostate
saw learned Apollinarius, eloquent Basil, Gregory, and many other then
learned men, confute them out of their own writers, he inhibited that
Christians children should be trained up any more in secular learning, or read
Poets, Philosophers, or other profane authors, as Gregory the Great, Lib. 3
hist. Eccles. cap. 14.
Socrates and Sozomen relate. And Sozomen gives this reason of his diabolical
subtlety, Hinc solum vetuit, t Lib. 5. cap. 17.
ne Christiani Gentilium disciplinis instruerentur, quoniam magnam ad
persuadendum facultatem posse parari censebat. For this cause only he forbad
that Christians should be instructed in the arts and learning of the heathens,
because he perceived that much skill to persuade the truth might be gotten from
their books; and therefore he prohibited it by law, that he might corrupt
religion with Barbarism, says Aretius: Ideo iudicare debemus, vel hoc nomine
vtendos esse, eo ipso quod hostis Christiani nominis id prohibuit, says that
author. And surely they that forbid Christians the use of it in the pulpit, do
no less in will, then Julian did in deed: and although they be not hosts
Christiani nominis, yet are they hosts Christianae rei, whose simplicity of
knowledge the devil has cunningly abused with blind and intemperate zeal.
Thus much for my second proof, which is reason.

The third general proof shall be the authority and judgment 3. Proof, the
authority of al ancient and Ecclesiastical late-writers.
of all ancient and Ecclesiastical late-writers for the use of secular
learning in the pulpit; whose authorities, though I have dispersed in
expounding those places and reasons I alleged, yet will I now muster them all
together, as one army roial, and a great cloud of witnesses for this truth.

First, Iustine Martyr (to take them in order from the Apostles 1. Justin Martyr
times) his judgment we heard before, apol. 2. whatsoever excellent things or
of divine matters, Philosophers or Poets have said, they had them from the
Prophets. And finding great harmony between both, and the seeds of truth in
them al, he avouches: Apol. 1. what things were excellently said of all
Philosophers, Poets and Historiographers, nostra sunt Christianorum, they are
ours that are Christians.

2. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 1. Stromat. says, The souls of 2. Clem. Alexan.
men have each their own proper and peculiar nourishments, and some are fed by
divine knowledge, others by Ethnic Philosophy, whereof every thing is not (as
of nuts) to be eaten. Neither need our Divines fear to use those things that
are most excellent in Philosophy and other arts: for it is not meet only to
be a Jew to the Jews, and them that are under the law, but even a Gentile also
to the Gentiles, that we may win all, admonishing and teaching every man in
all knowledge, that we may present every man perfect in Christ. And this
secular learning (says he) est veluti condimentum cibo permixtum, not so much
delighting, as procuring a good appetite in the mind, to relish better the
things of the spirit. Philosophy truly was necessary before Christ's coming
for the Gentiles unto righteousness and justice, but now it is profitable for
the worship of God, and piety in them who collect faith by demonstration. For
God is the cause and author of all good things, of some things indeed
principally, as of the old and new Testament; and of other things by
consequence, as of Philosophy. And perchance it was principally given to the
Gentiles before the vocation, as the law was to the Jews, that it might be
their schoolmaster to bring them to Christ; Praeparat ergo Philosophia, ei
viam muniens qui a Christo perficitur. Lastly he produces that simily and
type, Genesis 16. As Sarai (Abraham's wife) when she was barren her self, gave
Abraham Hagar the Egyptian handmaide to bear him some children: so Gods Church
allows secular learning to bear sons unto God, when the Scripture is not
so pregnant.

3. Origin lib. 1. contra Celsum, plainly and peremptorily auerreth, 3 Orige^.
Gentilium doctrina Christi fidem confirmat, the learning of the heathens
confirms the faith of Christ, and therefore to be used in sermons. And homil.
14. in Genes. 26. he compares the Scripture to Isaac, and it to Abimelech, who
coming from Gerar with his friends unto Isaac, he said unto them, Wherefore
come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have put me away from you? And they
answered, We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee, and we thought thus,
Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even between us and thee, and let us make
a covenant with thee. This Abimelech (as I see) has not always peace with
Isaac, but sometimes he dissenteth, sometimes he asks peace: so secular
learning with Gods law, neque in dissensione potest esse, neque semper in pace,
for Philosophy neither in all things is contrary to Gods law, nor in all
things consonant thereunto. But when it makes a covenant of peace and agreement
with scripture, it must be entertained and bid to its table, as Isaac did
Abimelech: thus Origin.

4. Tertullian lib. 1. de patient. he says, Disciplinae seculi vanae 4.
Tertullian.
ad laudem and gloriam Dei promouent, aut nunquid potius iniuria cum diuina res
in secularibus rebus volutatur? Secular learning, which some hold so fabulous
and vain, promoteth the praise and glory of God; or is it rather an injury to
it when divine matters are handled therein?

5. Cyprian lib. 4. epist. 2. when the Apostle (says he) bids 5. Cyprian.
take heed least any deceive you with Philosophy and vain deceit, Vitanda
sunt quae non de Dei clementia veniunt, sed de Philosophiae durioris
presumptione descendunt.

6. Damascen lib. 4. de Orthod. fid. cap. 14. his judgment is, 6. Damascen.
Si ab ijs qui foris sunt decerpere quippiam vtile valuerimus, non aspernabile
est, If we can take any profitable thing from profane writers, it is not to be
abhorred. Let us become approved Goldsmiths, keeping the lawful and pure
gold, but refuting and refusing the adulterine. Sumamus sermones optimos, Deos
a^tem ridiculos, and fabulas alienas canibus proijciamus, Let us take their
best sayings, but their ridiculous gods and strange fables let us cast to the
dogs.

7. Epiphanius in ancorat. shows, that the very fables of the 7. Epiphanius.
Poets prove the resurrection, and having declared it in many, adds withal,
Et multa de his dici possunt ad confirmandam fidem nostram, atque ipsos
redarguendos. And is not that which confirms our faith needful in popular
sermons?

8. Theodoret lib. 1. de fid. is excellent in this point, At least 8. Theodoret.
(says he, speaking to the heathens) believe your own Philosophers, ye
friends, who by a certain previous tradition prepared and taught you to
entertain our religion. For they seem to be like those birds, which they call
singing birds, that imitate man's voice, and understand not the meaning of those
words they utter: and in like manner when they speak of divine and heavenly
matters, they were ignorant of the truth of those things they delivered. This
dew of heavenly knowledge fell on the Prophets and Apostles, like rain upon
good ground that brought forth much fruit; but on them, like rain upon d^sart
and savage places, that with briars and thorns often brings forth things that
may be eaten. And (as I think) they deserve some pardon, seeing they were not
guided by the light of the Prophets and Apostles, but had only the direction
of nature. Therefore they, who are endued with judgment and discretion, know
to take from them what may serve their turn, and let the rest alone; as they
that gather Roses, let the prickles alone. And as Bees not only light upon
sweet, but also bitter flowers, when they suck out only sweetness, and
abhor bitterness, so making a most sweet honey of contrary qualities, sweet
and sower, bitter and pleasant: so we following their example, Evestris illis
amarulentis pratis, compose pleasant and profitable honey for our selves. And
as Apothecaries confect wholesome medicines of venomous beasts, as Serpents and
Vipers, refusing somethings and taking othersome, drive away many diseases by
their virtue: Ita and nos vestrorum Poetarum, Historicorum, Philosophorumque
monumenta versantes, alia ex ijs vt noxia and pestifera declinamus, alia vero
sparsim nostrae inserentes doctrinae, auxiliarem ac s^lutarem curationem
afferimus. What can be said for pregnant for this point?

9. Socrates lib. 3. hist. Eccles. cap. 14. answering the objections 9.
Socrates*
of them that refuse it, pronounces, Doctrina Gentilium neque a Christo, neque
ab cius Apostolis, vel approbatur vt inspirata diuinitus, vel vt periculosa
prorsus reijcitur. And this I think (says he) was done not without the
providence of God, for many Philosophers among the Gentiles resisted the false
opinions of Epicures and Atheists, and by their books have brought no small
profit to the favorers of true godliness and piety, though they knew not of
the Messiah. Again, both Christ and his Apostle command us vt exquisiti
numularij, we try all things, keeping that which is good; and take heed that
none deceive us by vain Philosophy which is not after Christ, which we cannot
do, nisi hostium arma possideamus, unless we take from them the weapons of our
enemies, as did Saint Paul and such other of the Church that succeeded. He
adds this short Epiphonema as a reason of all, Nam honestum, quocunque fuerit
loco, est veritatis proprium, truth is still truth, and like it self
wheresoever we find it, in Prophets or Poets, Apostles or Philosophers.

10. Lactantius in his third book of divine Institutions, 10. Lactantius.
though a professed enemy to Philosophers, confesses of Philosophy, that it
agrees with Scripture in many things, where we may embrace it, though often it
is corrupted with lies, where we leave it.

11. Nazianzene monod. in Basil exceeds all these in this 11. Nazianzene*
point: I think (says he) it is granted of all that are wise, that al
learning and knowledge first is in the kind and nature of good things, not
only that Christian learning, which hunteth not so much after wisdom of
words, as the sense and meaning of things: but also that which is among the
infidels, or which some Christians hate, as separate from God, judging amiss.
For if they despise it for this cause, because some have taken harm thereby,
and fallen into errors: by the same reason they should hate the heaven and the
earth, and all things contained therein, seeing many have made them their gods,
and abused these to idolatry. In like manner the fire and other elements, yea
meat it self shall be eschued of all men as evil things, because some
abusing them, have gotten their death and destruction thereby. But, as we may
reap good even of evil things* when of Vipers flesh we make Triacle, a
singular and sovereign medicine for all diseases: Sic ex Graecis doctrinis,
etc. so out of secular writers may we take whatsoever makes for the knowledge
of natural things, and framing of our manners. Non enim ex eorum dogmatis ad
Dei cultum parum proficimus, for by their lessons and sayings are we not a
little furthered to worship and serve God. No knowledge therefore or learning
is to be refused, since al science whatsoever is in the nature and kind of good
things, Quin potius ipsam spernentes, and rusticos, and plane ignauo^
existimare debemus: but we must rather count them rude and slothful that
despise it, Qui omnes pariter ignaros esse vellent, vt ipsarum ignorantia in
communilatens, minime deprehendi, aut ab alijs taxari valeat, who would gladly
have all men as ignorant as themselves, that their own ignorance lying hid in
the common heap might not be espied or perceived, and taxed of other men. Thus
speaks eloquent Gregory Nazianzene, and this very same whole saying he has
(almost ad verbum) in his funeral oration on Saint Basil.

12. That Basil the Great in a large treatise to his nephews 12 Basil.
of this very argument and question, Quomodo ex Gentilium doctrinis proficiant,
(to whom Calvin for probation of this point Comment. in 1. (...). 15. 3^. and
in Tit. 1. 12.
twice refers us) counsels them wisely, that they indeed fasten not
their opinions (as it were the ankers of their ships) on profane authors, but
pick out of them those things that are profitable, leaving the rest. To
everlasting life he doubts not, but the sacred volumes by hidden mysteries
sufficiently instruct them; yet for their age they could hardly attain the
deep meanings thereof: for help whereof, he advises them to look in other
books that dissent not altogether from the scriptures, as in shadows and
glasses to help the eyes and sight of their mind in better understanding the
other; following their example, who first exercising in fence-schooles, learn
how to stand and strike before they come to the lifts. And seeing (says he) ye
undergo the greatest combat, and need all helps and preparations thereunto,
Poetu and Oratoribus, and omnibus hominibus vtendum, vnde futura sit aeliqua
vtilitas quae ad anunae aedificatione faciat, Ye must use Poets, Orators, and
all authors, from whom any profit may be got, which makes for edification of
the soul. For as Fullers lay some ground-colour before they die purple, and
bring on the last and best tincture: so must we first be grounded in these
profane Writers before we can open the Scriptures. Wherefore if there be any
agreement between the Scriptures and heathen Authors, vobis illorum valde
conferet notitia, the knowledge of them will much help you in understanding
the other. He adds, For as unto trees laden with fruit, folia nihilominus
ramis coniuncta quendam ferunt ornatum, the leaves nevertheless add some
ornament and grace: so that excellent truth and fruit of the spirit, non ab re
exteriore sapientia circundatur, sicut folijs quibusdam fructum aspectum non
intempestiuum praebentibus, i^ is not unfitly apparelled with this outward
wisdom of the world, as with leaves, making the fruit show more pleasant and
delightsome. And thus (says he) is it shown, that profane learning is not
altogether unprofitable to the soul of man. After, he wishes them not to take
their choice at randon and esteem all alike, but as in gathering and plucking
Roses, we avoid the prickles: so in their sayings taking the good, we must
leave that which is naught. Or follow the Bees, who neither fall on every
flower, nor take all of that whereon they light, but that only which they
need: so we neither use all authors (for obscene, railing and wanton Poets he
leaves to the stage) nor all things which any say, but those only that show us
the sayings and doings of good men, and to follow them in both, he advises.
Thus far S. Basil. Wherefore if in his judgment secular learning must
accompany Theology, to beautify it, as leaves on the trees do garnish the
fruit, this mistress, he means, should not come abroad without her waiting
maid behind her. Else, why should Calvin for use of it in Sermons, twice
refer us to this treatise of S. Basil?

13 Jerome, as he was the rende-vouz of all Authors, so like 13 Jerome.
that Centurion and Captain, had he them at command for his purpose: Ierom.
Ehist. ad Magnum Orat. Romans
who being asked of the great Orator Romanus, why he used secular learning in
Divinity, answers thus and apologizeth himself: Thou would never have
asked this (says he) Romanus, if thou had read the holy Scriptures and their
interpreters: for who can be ignorant that in Moses and the Prophets some
things are taken out of the books of the Gentiles? Paeule himself used it
thrice, for he had learned of David to wrest the sword out of his enemies hand,
and cut off the head of Goliath with his own blade. He had read in
Deuteronomie, cap. 21. that the captiue-womans head must be shaven, her locks
lopped, her nails pared, and then be taken home for his wife. What marvel is
it therefore, if I also desire secular knowledge for its comeliness of speech,
for its beautiful parts, and cutting away whatsoever of her is dead, as
idolatry, pleasure, error and lust, make of a captive handmaide an Israelitish
woman, and mixtos purissimo corpori vernaculos ex ea genero Domino Sabbath? O
sea took him a wife of fornications, Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, and she
bare him a son whom she called Izreel, that is, the seed of God. And in the
end of that Epistle (as if he had been exercised with the objection of our
times, whether it be lawful when no controversy is in hand) he tells him,
he would not have him mistake his meaning: Contra Gentes hoc esse licitum, in
alijs disputationibus dissimulandum, that it is only lawful in disputations
against the Gentiles or adversaries, and in other discourses to be lef^: for
almost all the books of the ancient, (except those who with Epicurus and his
followers never learned them) Eruditionis doctrinaeque plenissimi sunt, are
stuffed full of secular learning. Wherefore he desires him to admonish
Calphurnius, Ne vescentium dentibus edentulus inuideat, and oculos caprarum
talpa contemnat: That he enuic not them that can eat, because he himself
wants teeth, nor contemn the eyes of goats, and them that can see well,
because he himself is a Want. And this allusion of the captive woman, he Tom.
3. Epist. ad Damas. and Epist. ad Pammach.
often cites for this purpose, as do also some Hug^ in Tit. 1. 12. and Kimedon^.
lib. 2. cap. 3. de author. scrip.
modernes. If thou see (says he in his Epistle unto Pammach.) among the
enemies a comely captive woman, that is, secular learning, and art taken with
her beauty, shave her head, cut away illecebras crinium, and the ornaments of
words with her dead nails, wash her in the soap of the Prophets, put off her
garments wherein she was taken, and resting with her, say, Her left hand is
under mine head, and her right hand does embrace me: Et mul^os tibi foetus
captiua dabit, ac de Moabitide efficictur Israelit^s, and this captive shall
bear thee many children, and of a Moabitish become an Israelitish woman. But
that Father Lib. 13. in Ezec. 44. 22. on those words: The Priest shall take a
widow for his wife, that is, the widow of a Priest, he speaks by way of
allegorical allusion excellently to this purpose: The Priest is allowed to
take not only a virgin of the house of Israel, says he, who is brought up in
the house of God, in the law and the Prophets, that is, the wisdom of the
Scripture, of which wife we read Pro. 4. 6. but the Priest must take a widow,
who has been the wife of another Priest, namely, knowledge and learning, quam
alius Dei cultor inuenerit, which another strange worshipper of God found out
and first married. Neque enim noua tantum contenti debemus esse doctrina, sed
and veterem excolere, and nostro iungere comitatui, si tamen sacro cultu fuerit
erudita. Thus far Saint Jerome for the use of secular learning in the pulpit.

14. S. Austine lib. 2. de doct. Christ. cap. 18. is as peremptory 14 Austine,
in this point. If profane Writers, says he, have said any thing well, it is
not to be refused for their superstition: for then should we refuse to learn
letters, because they say Mercury first found them; and fly justice and
virtue, because the heathens built temples to them, and worshipped them in
stones which they should have carried in their hearts. Imo vero quisquis bonus
verusque Christianus est, Domini esse intel^igat vbicunque inuenerit veritatem:
Nay rather let every one who is a good and true Christian know, that it belongs
to his Lord, and is Gods, wheresoever he finds truth. And chap. 40. of that
book, he is as learned as large in this point. Philosophi autem, etc. If the
Philosophers, so called, especially the Platonickes have by chance spoken any
thing that is true and consonant to our faith, non solum formidanda non sunt,
sed ab eis tanquam iniustis possessoribus in nostrum vsum vendicanda: Not only
we should not be afraid to use them, but we must bereave them thereof, as
unjust owners, and apply it to our own use. For as the Egyptians had not only
idols and heavy burdens, which the people of Israel fled and detested, but
vessels also and ornaments of gold, and silver, and raiment, which that people
going out of Egypt privily challenged to themselves for a better use, not by
their own authority, but by Gods commandment, the Egyptians ignorantly
lending that which they knew not to use aright. So all the learning of the
Gentiles has not only fained and superstitious figments and heavy burdens of
needless labor, which each of us, going out of the society of heathens by
Christ's direction, must abhor and detest, but also contains liberal
sciences more serviceable to the truth, and some most profitable precepts of
manners, and some things also true of the worship of the true God are found in
them; which, as it were their gold and silver, not which themselves found out,
but dug from certain mines of Gods providence, universally infused into the
minds of all men, and which they wickedly abused to idolatry, a Christian
being separated in mind from their wretched society, debet ab eis auferre ad
vsum iustum praedicandi Euangelij, he ought to take it from them for the right
use of preaching the Gospel. And he afterward numbreth the Christian
Israelites that went out of Egypt laden with these spoils. For what else
(says he) did many good faithful men of our religion? Do we not see with how
much gold, and silver and raiment, Cyprian, that most sweet Doctor, and most
blessed Martyr went laden out of Egypt? with how much Lactantius? with how much
Victorinus, Optatus and Hilarie? To say nothing of them now alive, with how
much innumerable Greek Writers? To all which the idolatrous Gentiles would
never have lent their profitable knowledge and learning, especially in those
times, when throwing off Christ's yoke they persecuted Christians, if they had
suspected it would have been converted to the use of Gods true worship, whereby
the vain worship of their idols was extinguished: but they gave their gold and
silver to Gods people going out of Egypt, not knowing how those things they
gave, might be restored to the service of Christ. For conclusion he fully
resolves, Illud in Exod^ factum, fine dubio figuratum est vt hoc praesignaret,
that that wise policy of Israel in robbing the Egyptians, did undoubtedly
praefigure this our spoiling of the Gentiles. Thus far Austine. And this is
the judgment of the ancient Fathers, those reverend Bishops of Gods Church,
constant Martyrs of Christ Jesus, profound Doctors of the Gospel, bright
stars of all learning, and burning lamps of the sanctuary, for the use of
secular learning in the pulpit. But (alas) why spend I my strength in vain and
for naught? Their answer is still this, Nos non curamus quid dicunt patres.
Puritanes, or rather Pruritanes, have those prurientes aures, itching ears, 2.
Tim. 4. 3. and after their own lusts have got them an heap of teachers to
whose verdit only they stand or fall, vt illis religio sit, ab
interpretationibus suorum praeceptorum vel minimum deflectere, as Zanchius I
said noted in this Church. They think, the Fathers have eaten sour grapes,
aetas parentum is peior quis, and therefore censure them in the words but not
with the spirit of Job. ^2. ^.
Elihu: Great men are not always wise, neither do aged always understand
judgment: therefore I say, Hear me, I will show you mine opinion. Each nouice
can now teach his seniors and Senators wisdom, and pronounce from Psalm. 119.
^9.
David's lips but not his spirit, I have more understanding then all my
teachers, I understand more then the ancient: for my part I thought it best to
rely on the Fathers judgment, when Gods word and the analogy of faith is not
repugnant, and thought still with my self, Elihu his modest submission befitted
green heads, Job. 32. 6. I said, I am young in years and ye are ancient:
therefore I doubted, and was afraid to show you mine opinion: for I said, The
days shall speak, and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom. But since
in stead of the Fathers they have children whom they make Princes in all lands,
as I have said, men of yesterday shall speak and show their opinion.

15 Martine Bucer, enarrat* in Mat. 11. vlt. he also witnesses Bucer.
this truth: For Prophecy in all ages among the heathen (says he) both by
dreams, by wonders, and by a certain instinct and heavenly inspiration, it is
good to read Tullies books of Divination. And he there adds the reason: for
nothing is to be neglected which plainly appears to be the gift of God. And
he that doubts so many excellent books of profane Writers, wherein such
knowledge of heavenly things and works of God are not the excellent gifts of
God, without doubt he has little regard of Gods providence, without whose
singular blessing it could not come to pass, that these books preserved in so
many ages, and through so many chances, should come to our hands. Again,
Enarrat. in Mat. 4. 18. on those words, They were fishers, he checketh them
sharply who under this pretense condemn learning and show of Gods gifts in
Divinity. Let none (says Bucer) under pretext of this text contemn them, vt
sunt quidam, quia adeo cruditionem, ali^que Dei dona spernunt, vt ipsi interim
sua inscitia ac ruditate plus fid^nt atque superbiant, quam alij sua eruditione
aut ingenij dexteritate: as there are some, who so malepartly despise learning
and other gifts of God, that mean while they trust and take more pride in
their ignorance and rudeness, then other in their learning and dexterity of
wit. Thou shall find also some at this day, who stiffely pretend this example
of the Lord for a cloak of their slothfulness and idleness: and when they
are reproved, for their idleness in handling the word, that they apply not the
Scriptures, neglect to learn tongues, that better they may handle the word;
they have always in their mouth: God called not many wise after the flesh.
Whom we must answer: Neither called he many evil beasts and slow bellies, qui
sanctam eruditionem adeo contemnunt, and operatione spiritus tanta oscitantia
fidurt: Who so much contemn sanctified learning, and in their great idleness
trust too much on the spirits ext^mporall suggestion. The sum of all is this,
the gifts of God, learning, skill in the tongues, and painfulnesse in handling
the Scripture, are to be sought after and highly esteemed. Again, many Plu^^nt
rursus ^u. ^^^die, etc.
drones at this day thrust themselves into the ministry, fitter for any thing
else, who not only that they may cloak their slothfulness, but even
Spiritus titulo impi^ venditent, palam e suggestu audent damnare and
impurissimo e^e prosci^^er^.
impiously boast of the spirit, dare stoutly condemn and with a most impure
mouth, rail on the study of the tongs and diligent decking of the Scripture,
openly in the pulpit.

Again, Enarrat. in Mat. 13. 52. Every Scribe (says he) taught to the kingdom
of God, must bring old and new things not only from the old and new Testament,
but affatim qu^libet, any truth from any Writer: as the master of the family
brings to his guests ^
all kind of meats and dainties, that they may want nothing: whose liberality
he must follow, plenteously teaching all things, whereby the mind is sed and
delighted. Again, Explanat* in Psalm. 1. 6. Though God (says he) for our
souls has given us the Scriptures, yet for repressing of fleshly affections,
for framing of our life to Gods glory and good of others, multa alia praeclare
scripta impartijt, he has given us many other excellent writings. For all
truth (as Austine truly writes) is from the holy Ghost: wherefore, whatsoever,
truth and goodness is any where commanded, legis Dei nomine iure censebitur,
it may lawfully be called the law of God: for what things soever any way
pertain to true godliness and sound righteousness, vniuersa quidem, at non
singula, sacris literis explicata sunt, they are in general laid down, but
not particularly explaned in the Scriptures. For the Gentiles therefore the
Lord both before and after he made them partakers of the Scriptures, gave many
things of excellent and admirable wisdom to be written of Poets,
Philosophers, Historians, and Lawmakers, whereby he expounded that eternal
and boundless force of his law, and called mankind to a good and godly life:
Quare and ingrati Deo sunt and sibi ipsis salutaria monita inuident, etc.
Wherefore they are both unthankful to God, and deprive themselves of wholesome
admonitions, that disdain to read and gather out most things, as well of
heathens as the holy Scriptures, while they may. For it was not without the
special and notable blessing of God, that so many notable things, which have
so excellent means of making a good life, should both be written of Poets,
Historians, and Philosophers, and also be preserved for us. If any thing in the
works of mechanical arts smell of a more excellent wit, Gods merciful
bounty, who gave that wit, we justly admire; and those things which of virtues
of religion, of all good and right living most Philosophers and Poets by an
inimitable dexterity and elegancie Immita(...) dexter^tate atque (...).
have written, shall we not admire, kiss, and as Gods singular blessings
highly to be reverenced, embraced and accepted with both arms? Non faciemus
quicunque Deum rite veneramur, Christi vox est quicquid verum est, quicquid
recti aliquid praecipit, eam vndecunque sonuerit exaudiamus atque sequamur: We
will not do this wrong to the gifts of God, so many of us as worship and fear
God aright, it is Christ's voice, whatsoever is truth, whatsoever commands
any right thing, by whomsoever he spoke it, let us hear and follow it.
Therefore under the name of Gods law, both in place before all, will we first
count the holy Scriptures, which contain the law, that is, absolute doctrine
of God every way perfect, which we grant to none other Writers: and in this
also, without choice, will we adore and reverence all things. The next place in
our account shall the writings and monuments of them have, who of purpose give
precepts of Christ's religion and innocence of life, although nothing of
theirs, without judgment and diligent collation with Gods commandments, we
will embrace. In the last place will we not disdain to read and use all kind
of profane Writers, when time and place shall require. For if Pliny said
truly, that there is no book so bad, out of which some fruit may not be
gathered, and they bring no fruit, unless they be the words of God: Certe Dei
verba contempserit, qui vel Ethnicorum scripta in totum repudiet: Certainly he
contemns the words of God, who wholly refuses the writings of the heathen.
Thus Bucer. And let them look to it, whether they despise not part of Gods
law, and contemn his words, who disdain to use his truth in heathens, when
they preach to his people.

I cannot yet leave Bucer, he is so excellent in this point: for Enarrat. in
Ioh. 4. 38. on that: Other men have labored, and ye are entered into their
labors, he understands by these former laborers, not only the Prophets
among the Jews, but also the Philosophers among the Gentiles, who taught them
good Per ^es quos di cit la^crasse intelligo, quicunque doce^dis hom^nibus
operam suam impenderunt, aeque Ethnicos, atque Iudees.
life: For they wrote many books of religion, of duties, of the bounds of good
things and evil, etc. which they had got of the Jews, and so prepared the
Gentiles for the Gospel, as the law was the Jews schoolemaister unto Christ.
But let it not offend any man, (says he) that I think the labor of
Philosophers furthered the Gospel, for all truth is of God, and certainly much
truth is read in the writings of Philosophers and Poets: and how little soever
it be which they delivered of the truth, ad Deum certe animos hominum
attraxerunt, eoque and Euangelio illos pr^pararunt: they drew without doubt
men's minds unto God, and therefore prepared them for the Gospel. For he is
the God not only of the Jews, but of the Gentiles also, in whose hearts he
wrote the work of his law, whence came those excellent doctrines of virtues,
whereof we read so many in their writings. Sed quid opus verbis? but what need
many words? They who acknowledge not even in Tully wonderful knowledge of
Solidae p^tatis, etc.
God and sound piety, without doubt he knows not what God is, and piety. I^
it now therefore appear, that by the labor of Philosophers, some knowledge of
God and true righteousness was brought into the world, who will deny eorum
laborem Euangelio seruijsse? that their labor was not serviceable and helped
the Gospel? Thus much Bucer.

16. Melancthon de leg^nat. is of the same mind, where having 16. Melancthon.
largely showed the law of nature to consent with the written law of God, he
says, We should highly esteem of the true exposition thereof, of
demonstrations, and consonant sentences, whether in Philosophers or law-giuers,
detesting the contrary. And that author de sac. concion. brandeth those who
refuse them, It is wicked and Impium est, and^.
impious so to contemn the studies of humane learning, as most do: we should
rather give God thanks for that blessing, because the reading of Gentile
writers helps us to teach Gods word with greater Foelicius and clarius.
dexterity and plainness. And for ornament of speech, diligenter venanda
nobis sunt ea tum ex Oratoribus, tum ex Poeticis Latinis, we must diligently
seek after those things as well in Orators and Latin Poets, Neminem igitur
Theologum pudeat, etc.
with whom all manner of right speaking is buried. Let no Divine therefore be
ashamed, sometime to carry in his hands, either some oration of Tully, or the
Poetry of Virgil; for he that will speak diligently, shall straight perceive
that there is far more use of such learning, then the common sort of Divines
of Quam vulgus Theologorum nostri seculi intelligat.
our age understand. And though ( lib. de rat. descend. Theolog.) he forbid us
to confound Philosophy with Christ's doctrine unfitly, yet there wishes he
Divines not to neglect Philosophy, because Ego tamen optarim Theologos no
negligere Philosopinam. quia nonnulls vitupera^t alias arts, cum non n^rint;
qui si nossent, plura facerent. 17. Musculus.
some have dispraised other arts when they knew them not, who if they knew
them, would esteem them more highly.

17. Musculus (comment. in 1. Cor. 15. 32.) on Paul's citing of the Poet
Menander says no less. Hence we are to learn (says he) quam conueniat
ministro Christi, how fit and convenient it is for the minister of Christ, that
from whencesoeuer it be, he be furnished not with sacred only, but also
profane writings, that he may apply himself to them, whom either he should
mend, or edify to true godliness. And though he dislike them that cite either
Poets, Historians or Philosophers often for no other cause but ostentation of
learning; yet resolves he, possunt in religionis causa Gentilium scripta
citari, only in controversies? as now is the questions. No, in the cause of
religion for confirming principles of our faith, for manners, either to
command good, or reprove that which is bad.

18. Illyricus in Tit. 1. 12. on the Apostles allegation of that Poet 18.
Illyricus.
says as much: Hence it appears that it is lawful sometime by occasion to
use in Christian doctrine sayings of the Gentiles; but so, that they be not
mistresses, but waiting-maides to the truth, nor be counted for oracles. And
who ever desired the latter, or required more then the former? But Clau. alt.
part. tract. 1. de rat. cognosc. script. he is more plain and pregnant for the
decisio^ of this point in question. In populari tractatione etc. In popular
sermons (says he) a Preacher must bring many examples from scripture, and
excellent sentences; punishments moreover and rewards he proposes, sometimes
he heapeth similies from daily actions, afterward he produces sundry
comprobations, and also firmamenta suasoria, any helps to persuade; now and
then from the arts, Nonnunqua^ quaedam argute dicta a Philosophis aut alijs
magni nominis hominibus veluti emblemata intermiscet: sometime mixeth he
certain witty sayings of Philosophers and other learned men of great note as
emblemes. Neither omitteth he those Quae orationem ill^strant, ac diuitem
speciosantque readunt.
things which garnish his sermon, and make it rich and beautiful. Lastly, he
painfully heapeth up all those things which he thinks will move their
affection. To be short, he omitteth nothing that has any force to persuade.
And examples of such preaching we see first in the Prophets, Christ's and the
Apostles popular sermons: secondly in the Homilies, that is, familiar sermons
of Origin, Basil, Nazianzene, Chrysostom: and lastly in men of our times, as
Luther and many like, in whose sermons many things are fitted to the learned,
most things to the ignorant, and omnia vniuersis, says Illyricus.

19. Peter Martyr in 1. Corint. 15. 33. witnesses this truth. 19 Martyr.
Non veretur Apostolus etc. the Apostle is not afraid to borrow Qum^am a
qu^cunque (...)tut, a spiritu p^^cio est.
truth of the heathens, for of whomsoever it be spoken, it is from the holy
Ghost. And when we take it out of their books, we rob not others of their
own, but claim our own of these unjust possessors. Hence are we taught that
the books of heathen men are not wholly to be refused, but truth which is read
in them diligently to be heard, so that time for the scriptures be not spent in
these writers.

20. Erasmus, as he was a mirror of much learning, and conversant 20. Era(...).
in the Fathers; so in his Scholia and notes on them often shows he his
judgment, and indeed a judgment against antipaters and enemies of learning.
In his schole on Ieromes Epistle to Eustochium, he displayeth their
selfe-pleasing conceit, Sibi placet quod nihil attigerint bonorum authorum: nos
pueri, etc. they please themselves that they never read any profane author.
When I was a boy (says he) I hissed in a certain book the Qui praetext^
religionis po(...) ores literas, quia (...)certunt insectantur.
foolish superstition of these men, who under pretense of religion condemn and
declaime against good letters, because they have not learned them. But in his
second book of a Preacher, he wishes them (if they will turn their speaking
into preaching) to use Demosthenes and Tully for the force of speech, Aristotle
for judgment and knowledge, Plato for similies, Liuie for eloquence, Virgil
for descriptions, Tacitus for wit, Seneca for shaming of vice, and chiefly
Plutarchs Morals, cuius libri digni sunt qui ad verbum ediscantur, whose books
are worthy to be had without book, whereout Basil and Chrysostom seem to
have taken so many things. And to what end should a Preacher read them, if he
may not use them as a Preacher?

21. Hyperius, whom I cited so often, lib. 1. de rat. stud. Theol. cap. 4. 21.
Hypar^^.
proving this theme of that chapter, Quod artium scientia sit Theologo
necessaria, adds, that humane Philosophy is the gift of God, and that we
need it to help the imbecilitie of our understanding, and that by its help we
may expound one to another the conceits of our mind, therefore is Philosophy
and secular learning like an handmaid to Theology, no otherwise then as Agar
was allowed 2 Lib de Cherub. and ^p* de congres. quae. erudit great.
to godly Abraham, but the right and soueraignetie of a mistrisse we give to
Theology: which for Sarah (as a Philosopher compares it) we ought to
acknowledge. Only I say, let not Agar despise her mistress, because she brings
forth when Sarah is barren in bearing. And lib. 2. cap. 38. he proves all the
arts with their secular knowledge to be the hand-maides of Divinity to attend
their Lady Theology. And therefore (me thinks) no disgrace to the Kings
daughter, when the virgins that be her fellows bear her company, and be
brought into the Kings palace, seeing wisdom sends out these her maids to
call in guests to the heavenly banquet, Prou. 4. as Thomas applies it. And he
concludes, that Divines must t^sse Philosophers, chiefly Plato, Aristotle,
Tully, a quo nimirum quae been per hos sunt prodita ad nostrum vsum nostraeque
religionis ornamentum, quoad ^ius fieri queat conuertere assuescant. Siquidem
laus erit non modica (vt site August.) spoliare Aegyptios vestibus, auro,
argento, atque ad ornatum tabernaculi Domini ea confer, quibus illi ad luxum
and fastum nec non ad fana falsorum deorum fucanda indigne abusi sunt. Thus
far Hyperius.

22. Hemingius comment. in Tit. 1. 12. on Paul's citing of the 22. Hemingius.
Poet, says as much, if not more: Here first it is to be noted (sath he) that
their perverse opinion is to be reproved, who think it wickedness to bring
sentences from profane writers in expounding the scripture. He says not, in
controversy only, but in opening and explaning the text. Secondly, says he,
we are admonished of the right use of Ethnicke writers, to wit, that they serve
and wait on the scripture as an handmaide on Tanq^^ a^c^lia sua R^g in^.
her Q^eene. For as the Egyptians spoils served to adorn the tabernacle of
God; so arts and true sayings of Philosophers ought to serve the Church of God.
And for proof hereof, he refers us to his comment on Col. 2. 8. where he
pronounces, perpera^ faciu^t qui hoc loco abutuntur, etc. they do amiss who
abuse this place to condemn all Philosophy, which in truth is the excellent
gift of God. There is indeed but one soule-sauing doctrine brought from heaven,
which contains all the treasures of wisdom and wholesome knowledge. But as
in times past the people of Israel for building of the tabernacle used the
riches of Egypt: so let us know, that all true Philosophy is to be used,
though not as building, yet as serviceable to the Church, as after in every
part and all arts he shows it at large.

23 Gualther homil. 5. in 1. Cor. 1. Let none think (says 23 Gualth^^.
he) that we condemn the study of good arts and secular learning, or would
have all them cast out of the ecclesiastical ministry, quos ^ruditio and
eloquentiae vis commendant, whom secular learning and force of eloquence
commends. For we know this is most required in the Ministers of the word,
that they be endued with the skill of teaching, which to be much helped by the
study of arts, none but a mad man will deny. And we know he who at first sent
Apostles, rude and ignorant of the arts, to preach the Gospel, afterward
called more out of the schools of Rhetoricians and Philosophers, who bestowed
excellent pains in propagating Christ's kingdom, and defending the faith, as
were Cyprian, Iustine Martyr, Lactantius, Austine, Jerome, and many other. And
this we say, that God of himself needs not our learning, doctrine and
eloquence: but if he has given these to any man, let him so use them, that
first place be given to the Gospel, and that all arts with their secular
knowledge serve it.

24 Aretius Problem. loc. 150. having defined, that the 24 Aretius.
use of all prophaue Writers is lawful in Divinity, in next place he puts
this very question in hand, Erudtio mundana number in Ministro Euangelij ferri
debeat, and proves it at large.

What shall I say more? Even Piscator obseruat. in Tit. 1. 12. 25 Piscator.
(though he prescribe a mean for citing it in Sermons) from Paul's example yet
confesses: Non dedecere Doctorem Ecclesiae aut illicitum esse, That it is not
unseemly or unlawful for a Preacher sometime to cite out of profane Authors,
sentences quae ad propositum faciunt, if they be for his purpose: he says not,
in controversy alone, but if they make for his purpose and matter in hand.

26 Zepperus lib. 2. cap. 6. de concion. in his question, Quomodo 26 Zepperus.
and quatenus Ethnica produci queant, though he somewhat disallow it, si tamen
Christianis and populo Dei, etc: If notwithstanding (says he) the Preacher is
sharply and grievously to exprobrate gross ignorance, brutish stupiditie,
ingratitude, impiety and malice to his people, he may allege sometimes
examples out of heathens, who have written such things of God, of his
knowledge, presence, works, government, the souls immortality, rewards of
virtue, and tell them stories of brute beasts, and heathen folk, to make
Christians ashamed, as Jerome said to Paula, Erubesce Ethnicae comparatione
superaris, melior est ancilla diaboli quam mea. So a Preacher (says he)
vpbraiding covetous men, may shame them being Christians with the example of
Crates the Thebane: exprobrate acception of persons and injustice to
Magistrates, by the example of Zaleucus, that by their example, (as the Apostle
did the Jews by the Gentiles Romans 11.) we may try if by any means we may
provoke them to follow these, and ^aue some of them. This is the judgment of
all these ancient and late Writers, for the use of secular learning in Sermons.

And as they allow this mistress still maids to attend her, so 4 Proof, the
practice of all ecclesiastical Writers.
have they not let her come abroad in their books without these handmaides to
wait on her. Almost all the books of all the ancient, says Epist. ad Romans
Jerome, not of controversy alone, but others also are stuffed with secular
learning of Philosophers, Poets and Historians, vt nescias quid in illis primum
admirari debeas, eruditionem seculi, an scientiam Scripturarum. Cyprian,
Lactantius, Victorinus, Optatus, Hilarious and infinite many more, are laden
(says Lib. 2. de doct. Christ's. cap. 40.
Austine) with this gold and silver, and other spoils of the Egyptians. Moses
was learned in all knowledge of the Egyptians, Joseph and Daniell in the
knowledge of the Caldeans and Babylonians, Solomon in all natural Philosophy,
whereof he made so many books. The Greek Divines, as Iustine Martyr,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Athanasius, Damascene, Clemens Alexandrinus, (as I
showed before) stuffed their Divinity exercises full of it: and the Latin
teachers, Jerome, Austine, Lactantius, Cyprian, Hilarie, Ambrose, sometimes in
exhortation, sometimes in consolation, though most often in disputation: Nec
debet apud nos valere ignauorum hominum obtrectatio, says Aretius, that
because of their private opinion and spirit of singularity we should neglect
(like Aesops cock) so many pearls lying hid in the heaps of Philosophy, and
prefer a barley corn of our own brain before that gemme of wisdom and
truth. Chrysostom (whose apology and practice has been urged for this) how
often cites he secular learning in his popular Sermons, when no controversy was
in hand? To go over his works, Homil. de natiuit. Dom. he alleges history
twice, Homil. 66. ad pop. Antioch. history once, Homil. 9. in Mat. history
once, Homil. 34. in Mat. on these words: He that continues to the end, etc. he
produces heathen examples, of Plato, Pythagoras, Stoicke Philosophers,
Cynickes, Dion, Aristippus, Diogenes; and of Gentile Captains, as Themistocles,
Pericles, and Xerxes, for illustration. Homil. 4. in Mat. history once, Homil.
12. in Mat. history once, Homil. 1. in Mat. history twice: Sermon. cont.
concub. he brings the fable of Tantalus to the people: Homil. 4. de laud.
Pauli, Plato, Pythagoras, Armenius, Socrates, and such Philosophers for
exemplification. And Homil. 32. in 1. Cor. 12. he gives all Preachers this
warrant: Ex suis multa Doctor affert, congruant modo Scripturae: A Preacher may
bring many things of his own, so that they agree with the Scripture. What
shall I say more of his practice hereof, then Erasmus (who had read him better
then we have or can) witnesses of his Sermons, Erasm. in vit. Chrysostom.
praefix. Chrysostom.
saying: Omnes humanas disciplinas cogit seruire Christianae pietati, sic
admiscens, quasi vinum generosum aqua modica diluas. Nusquam est aquae vel
color, vel sapor, sed tamen sentis vinum esse suauius: For 2. Match. 15. 40.
as it may sometime seem less pleasant to drink wine alone, and then again
water, and as wine tempered with water, is pleasant and delights the taste: so
the setting out of the matter thus by secular learning, makes it relish better
in our ears. Neither is this instar cauponum (as the 2. Cor. 4.
Apostle calls the^) like Vinteners or Victuallers to adulterate this wine,
and mingle it with water, as the Lord himself complained of the Jews,
according to Ieromes translation, Caupones tui miscent vino aquam: for he
taxes them as Christ did the Pharisees, Mat. 15. for mingling men's precepts
with Gods pure law in matters of faith and religion, and I will add with
Jerome on that place, Omnisque Doctor, etc. and every teacher or writer either,
that seeks more to please then profit his hearers or readers, vinum aqua
miscet, he mingleth yea turns wine into water.

Lib. 3 de fid. cap. 1.
Ambrose also being once checked (as it seems) for using Poets in Divinity,
apologizeth himself by the example of S. Paul, who learned it of the Prophets
that have often relation to poetical stories, as he shows, and therefore uses
Poets in his popular Sermons.

Luther Tom. 1. in his popular Sermons on the commandments brings often
Fathers, schoolmen, Lawyers, Poets, History, Philosophy, yea Aesops fables
to his people when no controversy was in hand. See but one Sermon for all, on
the sixth precept he cites Fathers, as Austine, Jerome, Bernard, long sentences
with their names, yea whole verses out of Horace, Iuuenal, and Ovid, naming
them thick, when no question was controuersed, and often produces long Greek
sentences to his people which he does not expound.

John Hus also that blessed Martyr in his Sermons, (though indeed they were ad
Clerum) uses Fathers often with their names, and Sermon. in Iaco. 2. he cites
diverse Poets with their names, and produces many verses together, when no
controversy was in hand.

Gualther in his large and many Homilies, which were his popular Sermons,
brings verses out of Poets, examples out of stories, axioms from
Philosophers, and sentences from Fathers not a few, when no controversy with
Papists is in hand.

Bullinger as precise in the manner of teaching as might be, uses in his
Homilies to the people, both Greek and Latin Fathers, old and new Historians,
Geographers, Poets Greek and Latin, Philosophers of all sorts, often and in
abundance, when no controversy is in hand.

Lauater in his Sermons to the people of Tigurie does the like. See but Homil.
6. in Ios. one for all, where he brings Fathers, Historians, and Poets to
illustrate and open a point. What shall I say more? The best and most famous
Preachers of our Church have done and yet do the like, even brought examples of
temperance, humility, justice, patience, contentation, chastity, and all
virtues, from heathen men, to provoke Christians to follow them for shame.

And if neither places of Scripture, expounded by ancient and modern writers,
nor reasons can prevail with men of reason, nor the authority of all
Ecclesiastical writers, nor their practice persuade Puritanes private spirit to
do as they did; yet might (me thinks) the practice of God himself persuade
them, who cited the heathens constancy to provoke the Jews to persevere, Ier.
2. 10. Go ye to the Isles of Chittim and behold; send unto Kedar and take
diligent heed, and see whether there be such things: has any nation changed
their gods as my people? So did the Prophets: Esai provoked the unthankful
Jews to gratitude by the example of the Ox and the Ass. Jeremy the secure
Jews to opportunity by the examples of the Swallow, Turtle and Crane. Solomon
the slothful to labor, by the example of the Emmet. Our Savior did the
like, when he commended the Centurions faith, Math. 8. to tax the perfidious
and unbelieving Jews: by the Ninevites example he urged the negligent Jews to
repentance. By the Lepers return invited he them to thankfulness: by that
journey of the Queen of the South: that reading of the Eunuch: that alms of
Cornelius: and that hospitalititie of the widow of Sarepta, labored he to
provoke the Jews for shame to follow them. And though some may object these
were cited from the old Testament, yet alleged he not in the new all the
heathens, when he pricked forward his hearers with this spur, Nonne and
Ethnici hoc faciunt? Math. 5. His Apostle did the like, Romans 2. 27. This is the
practice of God himself and his Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, of the
ancient and recent homilists in their popular sermons, and (as he said) aut
hoc satis testium est, aut nihil est. Now there is one objection against all,
which was put against me when I urged this practice of all writers, and it was
verbatim this, But M. Calvin uses not humanity in sermons. Wonder (dear
Christian) and now mark if these be not the men whom Zanchius (as I said
before) marked in this Church, Sunt plerique etiam inter nostros, quibus
religio est ab interpretationibus suorum praeceptoru^ vel minimum deflectere,
ita fit vt and ipsi sponte se priuent vera scripturae intelligentia, and dum
suos praeceptores in omnibus and per omnia volunt tueri, turbas excitant in
Ecclesia; Res est perspicua vel me tacente. And indeed if Calvin had worn cap
with surplisse, and used humanity in sermons, I think neither that
controversy about ceremonies, nor this about the manner of preaching against
the ancient Fathers and late writers had been maintained. Calvin was learned
indeed, and a light of the Church: but when thus they pin themselves to his
sleeue, and do sacrifice unto him as the men of Lystra would have done to Saint
Paul, saying, Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men, they abuse him
Acts 14.
with his learning, and if he were now alive, could tear his clothes hereat,
and cry out with the Apostle, Men and brethren why do ye these things? we are
men, subject to like passions that ye be. But though Calvin as a Doctor, weekly
reading and writing very much, as we see by his Tomes, could not as a Pastor
preach so exactly, but of little meditation to his people: yet his judgment
is, that secular learning may lawfully be used in Sermons; for comment. in 1.
Cor. 15. 33. he is peremptory in this point, saying, Paulus vtitur testimonio
Poetae Menandri, quemadmodum vndique mutuari nobis licet, quicquid a Deo est
profectum. Quum autem omnis veritas a Deo sit, non dubium quin Dominus in os
posuerit etiam impijs quaecunque veram and salutarem doctrinam continent, sed
huius argumenti tractationem peti malo ex oratione Basilij ad iuuenes. Saint
Paul (says Calvin) uses the testimony of the Poet Menander, as in like manner
it is lawful for us to borrow from any whatsoever came from God. And seeing
all truth is from God, there is no doubt but the Lord put into the mouth even
of the wicked, whatsoever things contain true and wholesome doctrine. But the
handling of this matter I would rather to be taken out of Basils oration to his
nephews. Who could have said more matter in fewer words for the use of secular
learning in sermons? And least any should think he thought so but once, and
afterward changed his opinion, he secondeth it again, comment. in Tit. 1. 12.
where speaking of Paul's citing Epimenides the Poet, he strongly concludes,
Colligimus ex hoc loco, Superstitiosos esse qui ex profanis scriptoribus nihil
mutuari audent. Nam quum omnis veritas a Deo sit, si quid site and vere ab
impijs dictum est, non debet repudiari, quia a Deo est profectu^. Deinde quu^
omnia Dei sint, cur fas non esset in eius gloriam applicare quicquid in eum
vsum apt conferri potest? sed de hac re legatur Basilij oration ad iuuenes. We
gather from this place (says Calvin) that they are superstitious who dare
borow nothing of profane writers. For seeing all truth is of God, if any thing
be well and truly spoken of the wicked, it ought not to be refused because it
came from God. Again, seeing al things belong to God, why should it not be
lawful to use and apply to his glory whatsoever may fitly be bestowed to that
use? but for this point read Basils oration to his nephews. Caluins judgment
(we plainly see) is, that Preachers may cite any truth from all heathen
authors though never so wicked. His reason is, because it came to them from
God, who put into their mouth things containing true and wholesome doctrine. If
true, then to be used in controversy: if wholesome in exhortation. And for
reproof of our Puritanes, he calls them superstitious men, that stand too
much on points, who dare not use it, nay that it ought not to be refused, since
it came from God, and belongs unto him, but must be used to his glory.
Wherefore (to conclude all) seeing the scripture forbids not secular learning
in popular sermons, as in examination of their objected places I have showed;
seeing God himself preached it to the people for the knowledge of himself,
Romans 1. 19. seeing the knowledge thereof taught the people to do the things of
the law, Romans 2. 14. Seeing the Apostle forbids only the vain deceit of it to
the people. Col. 2. 8. Seeing Saint Paul charge us to try all things in any
author, and keep that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Seeing Preachers in things
not forbidden must be all to all, to Jews in the law as Jews, to Gentiles
without law as Gentiles, that they may win the mo, and by all means save
some, 1. Cor. 9. Seeing they must divide the word aright to their people, 2.
Tim. 2. which without this knife they cannot do, but pull it asunder and tear
it with their teeth; Seeing the heathens doctrine which is true, is taken out
of the scriptures: since truth remains still truth wheresoever we find it.
Seeing we think it fit to season our children and new vessels for their
knowledge and good manners. Seeing for the use of it, we study it many years,
furnish our studies with profane authors, stay in the Universities, and
frequent libraries. Seeing lastly the ancient Fathers and precisest
late-writers have thought and judged it lawful, and much used it themselves
when they preached to their people: at least, seeing Calvin thinks so, this
might persuade the^, if they were not of a private spirit, that secular learning
(yea much of it) is not only not unlawful, but also necessary in popular
sermons. Rob the Egyptians of this gold, silver and raiment, borrow these
jewels of the heathens, but make not a calfe thereof to worship and adore, and
leave the word of God. If there be any such as Sed dicam innum quod tame^
verissimum esse comperi, esse permulcos sic prosanu addictos literu, vt
ineruditu^, vt infa^^s, vt sordidum videatur vbicunque Christianae professionu
vocabula viderent. Romuli, Ca^^ill^, Fabricij, Julij (...) delectantur ad
Christi, ad Pauli, Bart(...) vocabula nauseant. Erasmus in vita Ierom. praefix.
Ier^^.
Erasmus complains of, who delight more to hear the names of Poets the^
Apostles, of Philosophers then Prophets in sermons, I tell them with Hugo,
coment. in Tit. 1. 12. secular learning must ancillari Theologiae, non
principari: errant qui sequuntur Philosophos, non Theologos; and magis
innituntur vanitati quam vtilitati. No, his word only is the glass, by
looking whereinto we are transformed into his image, as by the spirit of the
Lord, 2. Cor. 3. And therefore in spoiling these heathens, the Lord advises us
as Joshua did the people in sacking of Jericho, Ios. 6. 19. The city Jericho,
that is, heathenisme shall be an execrable thing, both it and all idolatries
that are therein unto the Lord: only Rahab the harlot, only heathen learning
and truth shall live, she and all that are with her in the house, for she hid
the messengers that we sent. Notwithstanding be ye ware of taking the execrable
thing, least ye make your selves execrable. But all silver and gold, and
vessels of brass, and iron thereof shall be consecrate unto the Lord, and shall
come into the Lords treasury. And for the use of it quoad gradum, let not the
sauce be more then the meat, nor too much water mixed with your wine, that is
cauponari verbum. No, no, as Declam. pop. ^^8. prac^p.
Luther spoke of too much citing of miracles and true legends in sermons: so
neither would I that arts and heathen sayings sic depredicentur vt inde veniat
vsus omittendi Euangelium. Sunt enim non principalis pars sermonis habendae,
sed tantummodo interspergendae Euangelio, vbi ad propositum faciant, and non de
integre sermon tractandae. If Melpomene be painted so big, that there is
left no room for the other Muses; or if strangers take up all the Inn, that
there is not place enough for Christ and his Apostles, I dislike both the
painter and the host.

No, let Christ have the highest place and best room in thy sermon: and me
thinks he says of it, as he once said of an Inn, Make ready an upper chamber
for me, for there it is where I will sup with mine Apostles. The consideration
whereof, as it moved me in this discourse to apologize the use of secular
learning in Sermons: so moved it me in this of Brotherly Reconcilement, to call
on the hand-maide to wait (as I said) on her mistress.

FINIS.
Faults escaped, thus amended.
Page 6. lin. 26. read cede. p. 11. l. 6. contumelia. p. 11. l. 28. hac. p.
19. l. 16. differunt. p. 27. l. 20. his. p. 28. l. 22. p. 46. l. 7. very. p.
32. l. 32. and p 34 l. 10. least. p. 35. l. 16. acescit. p 35. l. 21. dragons.
p. 35. l. 36. imitemur. p. 39. l. 1. verse. 24. p. 41. l. 4. fibram. p. and l.
ibid. serperet. page 42. l. 10. (...). p. 51. l. 31. even calm. p. 52. l. 34.
dicentes p. 59. l. 25 that as. p. 59. l. 26. (...). p. 59. l. 31. humorist. p.
62. l. 4. breach. p. 62. l. 23. his foe a soppe. p. 64 l. 34. tantos. l. ibid.
tondente. p. 65. l. 20. occidente. p. 72. l. 24. nor only. p. 74. l. 13.
(...). p. 74. l. 20. exhibit. p. 75 l. 22. them p 75. l. 35 him p. 77. l 17.
are the food. p. 77. l. 19 do their effects. p. 78. l. 23. permissiue. p. 79.
l. 5. excerpere. p. 81. l. 29. in your hands. p. 86 l. 16. not judicial. p.
88. l. 28. for this Isaac, p. 9^. l. 18. circle. p. 108. l 31. whiteness. p.
108. l 35. wax. p. 111. l. 19. Iss^char. p. 49 marg. lit. o. collimando. p.
50. in * (...). p. 84. marg. lit. a. ne confid. p. 127. l. 27. artetati. p. 124
l. 37 exterrita. p. 126. l. 25. make thee strive. p. 142. l. 23. though. p.
143. l. 13. (...). p. 145. l. 16 abit. p. 208. l. 34. (...). p. 223. l. 3.
(...). p. 239 l. 27 whifler. p. 252. l. 23 (...). p. 289. l. 17. without
professing. p. 290. l. 35. commends. p. 291. l. 29. exploratorem p. 296. l.
5. is my censure but the obseru. p. 313. l 33. vt^ijs. p. 278. marg. lit. z.
concutere. p. 280. m^rg^lit g. Plausus. p. 320. l. 21. for p. 249 l. 16 vt ab
audit. p. 236. l. 7. at adventure. p. 249. l. 17. pateris. p. 232. l. 29.
Caldeans. p. 243. l. 24. quam.


