The first examinacio^ of Anne Askewe latelye martired in Smythfelde, by the
Romyshe popes vpholders, with the Elucydacyon of Johan Bale.

Psame. cxvi. The veryte of the Lord endures for ever.

Anne Askewe stood fast by this veryte of God to the end.

Favor is disceytfull, and bewtye is a vain thing. But a woman that fears
the Lord, is worthy to be praised. She opens her mouth to wisdom, and in
her language is the law of grace.

Proverb. xxxi. Johan Bale to the Christen readers.
Among other most syngular offices (dylygent reader) which the lord has
appointed to be done in the ernest sprete of Helyas, by the forero^ners of his
lattre aperaunce, this is one very special to be noted. They shall turn the
hearts of their ancient elders into the children. Mala. iiii. And the
unbelievers of their time, to the wisdom of those ryghteouse fathers, as ded
Johan Baptyste before his first coming. Luce. i. That is (say the Bedas cap.
lxviii. de temporum ratione) the faith and fervent zele of the prophets and
Apostles shall they plant in their hearts, Bedes prophecy.
which shall in those days live and be among men conuersaunt, and than will
break fourth (says he as a very true prophet) such horrible persecucyon, as
will first of all take from the world, those mighty helyases by triumphaunt
martyrdom, to the terryfyenge of other in the same faith of whom some shall
become through that occasion, 2. sorts.
most gloryouse martyrs unto Christ also, and some very wicked Apostataes
forsaking his lively doctrine. For by the said Bedas testymony in the beginning
of the same chaptre, two most certain signs shall we tha^ have that the
lattre judgment day is at hand. The return of Isreal's remnaunt unto their
lord God, 2. signs.
and the horrible persecucion of Antichrist.

Confer with this treated scripture and former prophecye of that virtuous man
Bedas, the worlds alteracyon now, with the terrible turmoilynges of our time.
And as in a most clear myrrour, ye shall well perceive them at this present,
to be in most quick workynge. And as concerning the Israelytes or Jews,
Israelytes.
I have both seane and known of them in Germanye, most faithful Christen
beleuers. Neither is it in the prophecye (Osee. iii.) that they should at that
day be all converted, no more than they were at Johan Baptystes preaching.
Luce. i. For as Esaye reports, though the posteryte of Jacob be as the sea
sand (innumerable) yet shall but a remnaunte of them convert than unto their
lord God. Esaie x. And though the Lord has syfted that house of Israel
(as bruised corn in a syffe) among all other nacyons, Amos. ix. Yet shall not
that remnaunt of theirs peryshe, but at that day be saved, preachers,
through the only electyon of grace, Romano. xi. Now concerning the before
said foreronners, in this most wonderful change of the world before the latter
end thereof. I think within this realm of England, besides other nations
abroad, the sprete of Helyas was not all a sleep in good Wyllam Tydall,
Robarte Barnes, Tyndale. Barnes,
and such other more, whom Antychristes vyolence has sent hens in fire to
heaven, as Helyas went before in the fyrye charet. iiii. Regum. ii.

These turned the hearts of the fathers into the children, such time as they
took from a great nombre of our nacyon, by their Godly preachynges, and
wrytynges, the corrupted believe of the pope and his mastery workers (which were
no fathers, but cruel robbers and destroyers. Ioa^. x.) reducynge the^ again to
the true faith of Abraham and Peter. Gene. xv. and Math. xvi. The pure believe
in Christ's birthe and passion, which Adam and Noe sucked out of the first
promise of God, The fathers.
Jacob and Moses out of the second, David and the prophets, out of the
third, and so fourth the Apostles and fathers out of the other scriptures,
so firmelye planted they in the consciences of many, that no cruel kind of
death could auerte the^ from it. As we have for example their constaunt
discyples, and now strong witnesses of Jesus Christ, Martyrs.
Johan Lassels and Anne Askewe, with their other. ii. companions, very
glorious martyrs before God, what though they be not so before the wrong
judging eyes of the world whom the bloudye remnaunte of Antechrist put unto
most cruel death in Smythfelde at London, in the year of our lord.
M.D.XLVI. in Iulye.

If they be only (as was Johan Baptyst) great before the Lord by the holy
scriptures allowaunce, which are strongelye adourned with the graces of his
sprete, as faith, force, understanding wisdom, pacyence, love, long
sufferaunce and such life. I dare boldelye afferme these iiii. mighty
witnesses also to be the same, so well as ye martirs of the primatyue or
Apostles church. Christen martyrs.
For so strongelye had these those virtues as they, and so boldelye objected
their bodies to the death for the undefiled Christen believe, against the
malygnau^t Synagoge of Satan, as ever ded they for no tyranny admyttynge any
create or Bread.
corruptyble substance for their eternal living god. If their blind babyes to
prove them unlike, do object against me, the miracles showed at their deaths
more than at these, as that unfaithful generacyon is ever desyerous of
wonders. Math. xii. I would but know of the^, what miracles were showed when
Ioha^ Baptystes head was cut of in the preson? miracles.
Marci. vi. and when James the Apostle was byheaded at Jerusalem? Acto. xii.
These. ii. were excellent before God, what though they were but miserable
wretches, light fellows sedycyouse heretykes, busye knaves, and lowsye beggars
in ye sight of noble king Herod and his honorable counsel of prelates. For
had not rochettes and side gowns been at hand, rochettes.
haplye they had not so lyghtlye dyed,

If they allege Steven, Steven.
to maynteyne their purpose, that he at his death beheld heaven open. I ask
of the^ again what they were which se it more than his own person? Sure I am
that their wicked predecessors there present, se it not. For they stopped
their ears, when he told them thereof. Actoru. vii. If they yet bring fourth
the other hystoryes of Apostles and martyrs. Legendes
I answer them, that all they are of no such autorite, as these here before.
The popes martyrs in deed, were much fuller of miracles than ever were
Christ's, as his self told us they should be so. Mathey. xxiiii. Yet wrought
fryre Forest, Ioha^ Fisher, and Thomas More no miracles, Forest. Fysher. More.
what though many be now regestred in their lives and legendes by the fryres
of France, Italye, and Spain Besides that Johan Cochleus has written of
them, ad Paulum Po^tificem, ad regem Henricum, and also in their defense
against doctor Sampson. With that Erasmus ded also ad Huttenu^. Writers.
P. M. ad Basparem Agrippam, Albertus Pighius, Riuius, Fichardus, and a great
sort more. And as for the holy maid of ke^t with Doctor Bocking, though they
wrought great wonders by their life, yet apered non at their deaths. Of his
own chosen martyrs, Christen martirs.
Christ looks for non other miracle, but that only they persevere faithful
to the end. Mathe. x. And never deny his verite before men Luce. xii. For that
worthy vyctorye of the synnefull world, standethe in the inuyncyblenesse of
faith, and not in miracles and wonders, as those waueringe wits suppose. i.
Joan. v.

Right wonderfullye will this apere in the. ii. mighty conflyctes here after
following, Anne Askewe.
which the faytfull servant of Jesus Anne Askewe, a gentylwoman very young,
dayntye, and tender, had with that outragynge Synagoge, in her. ii.
examynacions, about the xxv. year of her age, whom she sent abroad by her
own hand writynge. The handelynges of her other iii. companyons, shall be
showed in other several treatyses at layser. For the glory and great power
of the lord, Gods power.
so manifestlye aperynge in his elect vessels, may not now perysh at al
hands and be vnthankefullye neglected but be spread the world over, as well in
Latyne as English, to the perpetual in famye of so wilfully cruel and
spyghtfull tyrauntes. Nothing at all shall it terryfye us, nor yet in any
point let us of our purpose, yt our books are now in England condemned and
burnt, Books condemned
by the Bishops and prestes with their frantic affinite, the great
Antichrists vpholders which seek by all practices possible to turn over ye
kings most noble and godly interpryse. But it will from hens forth occasyon
us, to set fourth in the Latin also, Latyne.
that before we wrote only in the English, and so make their spirytuall
wickedness and treason known much farther of. What auayled it Ioakim to
burn Hieremies proyhecye by the ungracious counsel of his prelates? Hiere.
xxxvi. Either yet Antiochus to set fire on the other scriptures? i. Macha. i.

God will be known.
After the Apostles were brought before the counsel and strayghtlye commanded
to cease from preaching, they preached much more tha^ before. Acto. iiii. In
most terrible persecucions of the primative church, were the examynacions and
answers, torments and deaths of the constaunt martyrs written, and sent
abroad all the whole world over, as testyfyeth Eusebius Cesariensis in his
ecclesyastyck hystorye. Their coppyes habou^de yet every where. Great slaughter
and burning has been here in England for Johan wycleues books, Johan
Wlcleues books.
ever sens the year of our lord. M. CCC. LXXXII. Yet have not one of them
throughlye perysheth. I have at this hour the tytles of a C. and XLIIII. of
them, which are many more in nombre. For some of the^ under one title
comprehends ii. books, some iii. some iiii. Yea, one of them contains xii.
I think not the contrary, but ere the world be at a full end, Canonise
God will so gloryfye that twentye times condemned heretyke, execrated,
cursed, spitted, and spatled at, that al your popish writers before his time
and after, will be reckned but vile swyne heardes to him, for the good fauer he
bare to Christ's holy Gospel. A very madness is it to strive against God,
wha^ he will have the long hydden inyquytees known. As the godly wise man
Gamaliel said. Acto. v. Gamaliel
If this enterprise that is now taken against you, be of God, ye shall never be
able with all your tirannouse practyses to dyssolue it.

Now concerning that blessed woman Anne Askewe, Anne Askewe.
which latelye suffered the tyranny of this world for right wisnesse sake. In
Lyncolneshyre was she borne of a very ancient and noble stock. Sir William
Askewe a worthy knight being her father. But no worthynesse in the flesh,
neither yet any worldly nobleness avails to god ward, before whom is no
acceptacyon of person. Actorum x. Only is it faith with his true love and
fear, which makes us the accept, True nobylyte.
noble and worthy children unto God. Joan. i. Whereof by his gift, she had
wonderful habundaunce. Soch a wone was she, as was Lydia the purple sellar,
Lydia.
whose heart the lord opened by the godly preaching of Paul at Thiatira,
Acto. xvi. For dylygent head gave she to his word when it was ones taught
without supersticion, and would no lo^gar be a false worshipper or ydolatour
after the wicked scole of Antichrist. But became from thens forth a true
worshipper, worshipping her lord God (which is a sprete and not bread) in
sprete and in veryte, according to ye word of his, Joan. iiii. The Gospel of
Christ bare she in her heart. as ded the holy maid Cecilia, Cecilia.
and never after ceased from the study thereof, nor from godly co^munycacion
and prayer till she was clerlie by most cruel torments, taken from this
wretched world.

By her do I here (dear fryndes in the Lord) as ded the faithful Brethren in
France, at the cities of Lions and Vicuna by a like faithful young woman
called Blandina, Blandina
Which was there put to death with. iii. mighty companyons more among other
(as this was) for her Christian believe, about the year of our lord. C. and.
lxx. in the primative spring of their Christyanyte. They wrote unto their
Brethren in the lands of Asia and Phrygia very far of, her mighty strong
sufferinges for Christ's faith, which the knew nothing of before, I write here
unto you in England ye double process of this noble woman, whereof ye are not
ignorant, for so much as it was there so manyfestly done among you. Coupled I
have these ii. examples together, because I find them in so many points
agree Blandina was young and tender. So was Anne Askewe also. Anne Askewe.
But that which was frail of nature in the^ both. Christ made most strong by
his grace. Blandina had iii. ernest companions in Christ. Companions.
Maturus Sanctes, and Attalus, so fervently faithful as her self. So had Anne
Askewe iii. fire fellows, a gentylman called Johan Lassels her instructour, a
priest, and a tailor called Johan Adlam, men in Christ's veryte unto the end
most co^staunt. Reca^ters.
With Bla^dina were in preson, to the nombre of x. which denied the truth and
were clerelie forsaken of God for it. How many fell from Christ besides Crome
and Shaxton, when Anne Askewe stood fast by him, I am uncertain. But I
counsel them, as saint Johan counseled the Laodycyanes, in the miserable
estate they are now in, to hye them through tried gold of Christ, Tried Gold.
least they perysh all together. Apoca. iii. If they had not still remained in
that chauncell, The chauncell.
whom Christ commanded Johan in no wise to measure, Apoc. ii. They had never
so shamefullye blasphemed, like as Bedas also touches in his former prophecye.

Prompt was Blandina, and of most lustye courage, Courage.
in renderynge her life for the lyberte of her faith. No less lyuelye and
quyck was Anne Askewe in all her enprisoninges and torments. Great was the
love, Blandina had to Christ. No less was the love of Anne Askewe. Blandina
never faynted in torment. Rakced.
No more ded Anne Askewe in sprete, when she was so terrybly racked of the
chau^celler and Rich, that the strings of her arms and eyes were peryshed
Bla^dina deryded the cruelte of the tyrauntes. So ded Anne Askewe the madness
of the Bishops and their speech men Read burning plates of iron and of
brass had Blandina put to her sides. Burned.
So had Anne Askewe the flamynge bra^des of fire. Full of God and his veryte
was Blandina. So was Anne Askewe to the very end. Christ wonderfullye
tryumphed in Blandina. So ded he in Anne Askewe, when she made no noise on the
rack, and so ernestlye afterward rejoiced in him. Blandina was given fourth
to wyld beasts to be devoured. Beasts
So was Anne Askewe to cruel Bisshoppes and prestes, whom Christ calls
rauenynge wolves, deuourers, and thieves. Mathe. vii. and Johan, x. Blandina
upon the scaffolde boldelye reprehended the pagane prestes of their error. So
did Anne Askewe when she was fast tied to the stake, with stomach rebuked yt
blasphemous apostata Shaxton with the Bishops and prestes generacyon, Shaxto^.
for their manifest mayntenaunce of ydolatrye.

Blandina at the stake showed a vysage vnterryfyed. So ded Anne Askewe
acountenaunce stowte, mighty and ernest. Infatygable was the sprete of
Bla^dina. So was the sprete of Anne Askew. The love of Jesus Christ, the gift
of the holy Ghost, and hope of the crown of martyrdom, greatly mytygated the
pain in Blandina. So ded those. iii worthy graces, Graces.
the terror of all torments in Anne Askewe. The strong sprete of Christ gave
stomach to Blandina, both to laugh and dance. The same mighty sprete (and not
the popes desperate sprete) made Anne Askewe both to rejoice and sing in the
preson. Sprete.
So bold was blandina (says Eusebius) that with a presumpcio^ of stomach she
co^moned with Christ unseen. I suppose Anne Askewes lattre examinacio^, will
show her, not to do much less. Gentyl was Bla^dina to the Christian
beleuers, High stomach.
and terryble to their aduersatyes. So was Anne Askewe very lowlye to true
teachers, but scorneful and high stomaked to the enemies of truth: Many were
converted by the sufferaunce of Blandina. A far greatter nombre by the
burning of Anne Askewe. Though Blandina were young, yet was she called the
mother of martyrs. Mother.
Many men have supposed Anne Askewe, for her Christen constancye to be no
less. Blandina prayed for her persecuters. So did Anne Askewe most feruentlye.
The ashes of blandina and of other martirs, were thrown into the stood of
Rhodanus. What was done with the Ashes of Anne Askewe and her companyons,
Ashes.
I can not yet tell.

All these former reports of Blandina and many more besides, has Eusebius in
Ecclesiastica historia, libro. v. cap. i. ii. and. iii. Hugo Floriacensis,
Hermannus Contractus, Autors.
Vincentius, Antoninus, Petrus Equilinus, and other hystoryanes more. And as
touching Anne Askewe, these. ii. examinacions, with her other known
handelynges in England, Not all deed.
are witness for her suffycyent. Thus has not the fire taken Anne Askewe al
whole from the world, but left her here unto it more pure, perfyghte, and
precious than before, as it will also Johan Lassels within short space. So that
concerning her, it may well be said, that Paul verefyeth. ii. Cor. xii. The
strength of God is here made perfyght by weakness. Weakness.
When she seemed most feeble, than was she most strong. And gladlye she rejoiced
in that weakness, that Christ's power might strongely dwell in her. Thus
choseth the lord, the folysh of this world to co^founde the wise, and the
weak to deface the mighty. Yea, things despised and thought very vile to
bring things unto naught which the world has in most high reputacio^. I
think if this martyr were rightly conferred, Martyrs.
with those canonysed martyrs, which have had, and yet has still sensynges and
syngynges, massynges and ryngynges i^ the popes English church cause with
cause and reason with reason (as haplye here after they shall) she should be a
great blemysh unto them. An example of strong sufferaunce might this holy
martyr be, Example.
unto all them that the Lord shall after like manner put forewarde in this
horrible furye of Antichriste, to the glory of his persecuted Church. Amen.

The first examinacion of the worthy servant of God mastres Anne Askewe the
younger daughter of Sir Wyllyam Askewe knight of Lyncolne shyre, lately
martyred in Smythfelde, by the Romyshe popes vpholders.
The censure or judgment of Johan Bale thereupon, after the sacred Scriptures
and Chronycles.
OF no less Christen constancy was this faithful wytnes and holy martyr of
God, Anne Askewe nor no less a fast member of Christ by her mighty
persyste^ce in his verite at this time of mischife, tha^ was the before named
Blandina in the prymatiue church. This shall well apere in her. ii.
examynacions or tyrannouse handelynges here folowinge, whom she wrote with her
own hand, at the instant desire of certain faithful men and weme^, yea rather
at the secret mocyon of God, that the truth thereof might be known ye world
over. As within short space yt will be, if the latyne spech can carye yt. Mark
well ye co^munycacio^s here both of her and of her examyners, so proving their
spretes as S. Johan ye Apostle geuethe you counsel. Sprites.
i. Io. iiii. And than shall ye know the tree by his fruit, and the man by his
work.

Anne Askewe.
To satisfye your expectacion, good people (says she) this was my first
examynacyon in the year of our Lord M.D.xlv. and in the monethe of March,
first Christofer Dare examyned me at Sadlers hall, Christofer dare,
being one of the queste, and asked if I did not believe that the sacrament
hanging over the aultre was the very body of Christ reallye. The^ I
demanded this question of him, wherefore S. Steue^ was stoned to death? And he
said he could not tell. Then I answered, that no more would I assoyle his
vain questyon.

Johan Bale.
A sacrament (says Saint Augustyne) is a sign, shappe, or symylytude of that
it representith, and no God nor yet thing represented. This word real or
reallye, Reallye.
is not of believe, for it is not in all the sacred scriptures. Only is it
sophistycallye borrowed of the paganes learning by wynchestre and his fellows,
to corrupt our Christen faith. Be ware of that filthy poison. The perfyght
believe of Steven, Actoru. vii. of Paul Act. xvii. and of Solomon. iii. Reg.
viii. and ii, Part. vi. was, that god dwells not in temples made with hands.
Agreeable unto this was the faith of this Godly woman, which neither could
believe that he dwellethe in the box. The box
God says. Esaye. lxvi. Heaven is my seat, not the box. David says. Psalm.
cxiii. our God is in heaven, not in the pyxe. Christ taught us to say, wha^
we pray Mat. vi. Luce. xi. our father which art in heaven, and not our father
which art in the box. Now discern and judge.

Anne Askewe,
Secondly he said, that there was a woman, which did testyfye, that I should
read, how God was not in temples made with hands. Temples.
Then I showed him the. vii. and the. xvii. chapitre of the Apostles acts what
Steven and Paul had said therein. Whereupon he asked me, how I took those
sentences? I answered, that I would not throw pearls among swine, for
acornes were good enough.

Johan Bale.
An ignorant woman, yea a beast with out faith, is herin allowed to judge the
holy scriptures heresye, and against al good laws admitted to accuse this
godly woman the servant of Christ, for an haynouse heretyke, for the only
readinge of them. Accusers.
As perverse and blasphemouse was this qwestmonger as she, and as beastlye
ignorant in the doctrine of health, yet is neither of them judged ill of the
world, but the one permitted to accuse this true membre of Christ, and the
other to co^de^pne her. Wherefore her answer out of the. vii. chapter of
Matthew, was most fytte for them. For they are no better than swine, that so
contempne the precious treasure of the Gospel, for the mire of men's
tradycions

Anne Askewe.
Thirdlye he asked me, wherefore I said, that I had rather to read five lines
in the Bible, than to hear five Masses in the temple. Masses.
I confessed, that I said no less. Not for the dysprayse of either the Epistle
or Gospel. But because the one did greatly edyfye me, and the other nothing
at all. As saint Paul does witness in the. xiiii. chaptre of his first
Epistle to the Corinthes, where as he does say. If the trumpe gives an
uncertain sound, who will prepare himself to the battle?

Johan Bale.
A commandment has Christ given us, to search the holy scriptures, Johan. v.
for in them only is the life eternal. Blessed is he (says Christ unto Johan)
which reads and hears the words of this prophecye. Apo. i. But of the
latyne popysh mass, is not one word in all the Bible, and therefore it
perteyneth not to faith. A straight commandment have almighty God given
Deuteo. xii that nothing be added to his word, Gods word.
nor yet taken from it. Put thou nothing unto his words (says Solomon, Pro.
xxx) least you be found in so doing, a reprobate person and a liar. S. Paul
wylled nothing to be uttered in a dead speech, i. Cor. xiiii. (as are your
mass and mattens) but silence always to be in the congregacyons, where as is
no interpretour, for five words (says he) avails more to understanding,
then. x. thousand words with the tongue. This proves temple service of the
papystes all the year, to be worth nothing.

Anne Askewe.
Forthly he laid unto my charge that I should say, If an ill pressed
mynystred, The pressed
it was the devil and not God. My answer was, that I never spoke such thing.
But this was my saying. That what so ever he were, which mynistred unto me,
his ill condycyons could not hurt my faith. But in sprete I received never
the less, the body and blood of Christ.

Johan Bale.
Christ says, Joan. vi. Have not I chosen you. xii. and yet one of you is a
devil? meaning Judas that false and unfaithful pressed. Judas.
No less says Peter. ii. Pet. ii of those lye^ge curates, by who^e the truth
is blasphemed, and the people made marchaundyce of their covetousness. If the
ill fruit than, be alone with the ill tree in noughtynesse, the work of a devil
must be deuelysh. God said unto the wicked prestes, Esa. i. Hier. vi. Am. v.
and Mala. ii. that he abhorred their sacrifyces, Sacryfyces.
and also hated them, even at the very heart, willing both heaven and earth to
mark it. Into Judas entered Satan, after the soppe was given him. Ioa^. xiii.
where as the other Apostles received the body and blood of Christ. The table
was all one to them both, so was the bread which their mouths received. The
inward receyuynges than in Peter and in Judas, made all the diuersyte, which
was believe and unbelieve, or faith and unfaithfulness, as Christ largelye
declares in the vi. of Johan, Thevi. of Johan.
whereas he showed a fore hand, the full doctrine of that mystical supper.
Only he that believes, has there the promise of the life everlasting, and not
he that eareth the materyall bread. Of God are they taught, and not of men,
which truly understand this doctrine

Anne Askewe
Fyftly he asked me, what I said concerning confession? Confession
I answered him my meaning, which was as Saint James says, that every man
ought to acknowledge his fautes to other and the one to pray for the other.

Ihon Bale.
This co^fessyon only do the scripture appoi^t us: Ia. v. as we have offended
our neighbor: But if we have offended god we must sorowfully acknowledge it
before him. And he (says Saint Johan), i. Johan. i. has faithful ye promised
to forgive us our sins, if we so do and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. If the law of truth be in the prestes mouth, Prestes.
he is to be sought unto for godli counsel. Mala. ii. But if he be a
blasphemouse hypocryte or supersticiouse fool, he is to be shourned as a most
pestilent poison

Anne Askewe
Syxhtly he asked me, what I said to the kings book. The kings book.
And I answered him that I could say nothing to it, because I never saw it.

Johan Bale.
All crafty ways, possible, sought this quaretlynge questmonger, or else the
devil in him, to bring this poor innocent lamb to the slaughter place of
Antichrist. Much after this sort sought ye wicked Pharisees by certain of their
own faccyon or hired satellytes with ye Herodyanes, Pharysees.
to bring Christ in danger of Caesar, and so to have him slain, Mat. xxii.
Mar. xii. Luce. xx.

Anne Askewe.
Seventhly he asked me, if I had the sprete of God in me? I answered if I
had not, I was but a reprobate or cast away.

Johan Bale.
Elect are we of God (says Peter) through the sanctifienge of the sprete. i.
Pe. i. In every true christian beleuer dwells ye sprete of God. The spyrite.
Ioh. xiiii. Their sowles are the sanctyfyed temples of ye holy Ghost. i.
Corin. iii. He yt has not the spret of Christ (says Paul) is non of
Christ's. Romans viii. To them is ye holy Ghost given, which hears the Gospel
and believes it, and not unto them which will be justified by their works Gala.
ii. All these worthy scryptures confirm her sainge.

Anne Askewe.
Then he said, he had sent for a pressed to examyne me, A pressed.
which was there at hand. The priest asked me, what I said to the Sacrament
of the aultre? and required much to know therein my meaning. But I desired
him again, to hold me excused concerning that matter. None other answer
would I make him, because I perceived him a papyst.

John Bale.
mockers.
Mocking prestes (says Esaye) has rule of the lords people. Whose voices are
in their dro^ckennesse. Bid that may be bidden, forbid that may be forbydde^,
keep back that may be kept back, here a little and there a little. Esaias
xxviii. A plage shall come upon these, for why, they have changed the
ordynaunces, and made the everlasting testamente of non effect, Esa. xxiiii.
They wytholde (says. S. Paul) the veryte of God in vnryghtousnesse. Roma. i.
They bred cockatryce eggs (says Esaias) and weue the spyders web. Who so
eats of their eggs, dies. But if one treads upon them, there comes up a
serpent, A serpent ryseth.
Esaye. lix.

Anne Askewe
Eyghtly he asked me, if I ded not think, that pryuate masses did help sowles
departed. And I said, it was great Idolatry to believe more in them, than in
the death which Christ dyed for us.

Johan Bale.
Here rises the serpent of the cockatryce eggs, workema^ly to fulfill the
before alleged prophecye. If their Masses had been of Gods creasyon, ordinance
or commandment, or if they had been in any point necessary for mannys
behoue, they had been regestred in the book of life, which is the sacred Bible.
But therein is neither mencyon of Mass pryuate nor public, Masses pryuate.
several nor comme^. single nor double, high nor low, by foot nor on horse
back, or by note as they call it. If they be things adds by mannys inucucion
(as they can be non other, not being there named) tha^ am I sure that the
scriptures call the^ filthynesse, rust, chafe, draffe, swille, droncke^nesse,
fornycacio^, me^strue, mannys dyrt, adders eggs, poison, snares, the bread of
wicked lies, and the cup of Gods curse. Their origynall ground should seem
to be taken of the Druydes or pagane Prestes, Druydes.
which inhabyted this reauile long before Christ's incarnacyon, and had than
practysed sacryfices public and pryuate. Look Cornelius Tacitus, Caius
Julius, Plintus, Strabo, and soch othere authors. That name of pryuacyon added
unto their Mass, clerelie depriueth it of Christen communion, where on man
eats up all, and dystrybuteth nothing.

How soche ware should help the sowles departed, I can not tell. But well I
wot, For sowles.
that ye wounded man betwyxt Jerusalem and Hierico, had no help of the^ Luce
x. The Samaritane which was rekened but a pagane among them, was his only
comfort, in ye most popysh time was never more horrible blasphemye, then this
is. This wickedness impugneth all the promyses of God concerning faith, and
remission of sins. It repugneth also to the whole doctrine of ye Gospel. The
applicacio^ of Christ's supper, avails them only that be alive, taking,
eating, and drynkyng that is therein minystred. No more can the prestes
receyuynge of that sacrament profight an other man, The prestes receyuynge.
tha^ can his receiuinge of Baptysme or of penance, as they call it. If it
profyteth not the qwyck, how can it profyght the dead? No sacrifyce is ye
Mass, nor yet good work, but a blasphemouse prophanacyo^ of ye Lords holy
supper, a manifest wickedness an horrible Idolatry, and a foul abhomynacyon,
being thus a ryte of worshyppynge without the word, yea against the express
word of God.

Anne Askewe.
Then they had me from thens, unto my lord Mayre. Mayre.
And he examyned me, as they had before and I answerede him dyrectlye in all
things, as I answered the qweste before.

Johan Bail.
After this sort was Christ led from the examinacion of the clergy to
Pylate, Matthew. xxvii. In yt the examynacion of the qweste and of the Mayre was
all one, ye may well know that they had both one scole mastre, even the
brutysh bishop of London. Bonner.
The ignorant magistrates of England will neither be Godly wise with David and
Salomo^, nor yet enbrace the ernest instruccyons of God, to be learned in ye
scriptures, Psa. ii. Sapie^. vi. but still be wicked ministers, and cruel
servant slaves to Antichrist and the devil, Apoc. xvii. More fyr are soch
witless mayres and graceless officers, Ignorance.
as knows not whyght from black, and light from darkness. Esai. v. to feed
swine or to keep kaddowes, than to rule a christen comminalte. A terryble day
abides them, which thus orders the innocent. Iaco. ii.

Anne Askewe.
Besides this my lord Mayre laid one thing unto my charge which was never
spoken of me, but of them. And that was whether a mouse eating the host,
received God or no? This questyon ded I never ask but indede they asked it of
me, whereunto I made them no answer, but smyled.

John Bale.
Is not here (think you) well fauerd and well fashyoned dyuinyte, to establysh
an article of the Christen faith? Wily wynchester answers this questyon as
folysh as it is, Wynchester.
in his wise detectio^ of ye deuyls sophystrye, fo. xvi. Believe (says he) that
a mouse can not devour God. Yet reports he after, in fo. xxi. yt Christ's
body may as well dwell in a mouse as it ded in Judas. Tha^ follows fryre
fynke, fryre Perin I should say, Peryn.
a bachelar of the same scole. And he answers in the end of his third
sermon, that ye Sacrament eaten of a mouse, is the very and real body of
Christ. And when he has affermed it to be no derogacyon to Christ's presens,
to lie in the mawe of that mouse. Diuisio.
He deuydeth me the one from the other, the sacrament from Christ's body,
co^cluding. That though the sacrament be digested in the mouses mawe, yet is
not Christ's body thee consumed. O blasphemouse beasts, and blind bloderynge
Balaamytes.

Because these. ii. workmen be scant wittye in their own occupacion, I shall
bring the^ forth here. ii. old artyfycers of theirs to help the^, Guimu^dus
Auersanus a bishop, Guimundus.
to help bishop Steven, and Thomas walden a fryre, Waldenus.
to help fryre Perin. The sacraments (say they both) are not eaten of myce,
though they seem so to be in the exteryour simylytudes. For ye virtues (says
Guimundus) of holy men are not eaten of beasts, when they are eaten of the^,
li. ii. de corpore and sanguine dn^i. No marry (quoth walden) no more is the
paynters occupacyon destroyed. when a picture is destroyed. Mark this gere for
your lernyng. But now comes Algerus a monk, Algerus.
more craftye the^ they both, and he says li.ii. cap. i. de Eucharistia, that
as well is this meat spyrituall, as material because David calls it the
bread of Angels, and a bread from heaven. Psa. lxxvii That which is materyall
in this bread (says he) is consumed by digestion, but that which is spiritual
remains uncorrupted.

If we would attend well unto Christ's dyuynyte, and let these oyled diuynes
dispute among old Gossypes, we should sone discharge myce and rattes, weak
stomakes and parbreakyng dronkardes, of a far other sort tha^ thus, he yt
eats my flesh (says Christ) Io. vi. and drincketh my blood dwells in me
and I in him. Christus.
This eating is all one with the dwellinge, and is neither for myce nor rattes,
brent chauncels nor dronke^ prestes. For as we eat we dwell, and as we dwell
we eat, by a grounded and perfyght faith in him. The substance of that most
godly refeccyon lies not in the mouth eating nor yet in the bellye feadyng,
though they be necessary, but in the only spiritual or soul eating, No
wise man will think, Faith.
that Christ will dwell in a mouse, nor yet that a mouse can dwell in Christ,
though it be the doctrine of these doughtye dowsepers, for they shall find no
scriptures for it. If these men were not enemies to faith and frindes to
Idolatry, they would never teach soche filthy learning. More of this shall I
write (God. Nota.
willing) in the answer of their books

Anne Askewe.
Then the Bishops chaunceller rebuked me, and said, that I was much to
blame for vtterynge the scryptures. For S. Paul (he said) forbode women to
speak or to talk of the word of God. Women.
I answered him, that I knew Paul's meaning so well as he, which is. i.
Corintheorum. xiiii. that a woman ought not to speak in the congregacyon by
the way of teaching. And then I asked him, how many women he had seane, go
into the pulpette and preach. He said he never saw none. The^ I said, he
ought to find no fault in poor women, except they had offended the law.

Johan Bale.
Ple^teouse enough is her answer here unto this quarellinge, and (as apereth)
unlearned chancelloure. Many godly women both in ye old law and the new,
were learned in the scriptures, Scripture women.
and made vtterau^ce of the^ to the glory of god. As we read of Helisabeth,
Mary, and Anna the wydowe, Lu. i. and. ii. yet were they not rebuked for it,
yea, Marye Christ's mother retained all, yt was afterward written of him, Luc.
ii. yet was it not imputed unto her an offense. Christ blamed not the woman
that cried whyls he was in preaching, happy is the womb that beat the, Luce.
xi. The women which gave knowledge to his discyples, Women.
that he was risen from death to life, discomfited not he, but solaced them with
his most gloriouse aperau^ce. Mat. xxviii. Io. xx. In ye primatyue church,
specially in Saint Hieromes time, was it a great praise unto women to be learned
in the scriptures. Great commendacio^s gives our Englysh Cronicles to Helena,
Vrsula, and Hilda, women of our nacyon, English women.
for being learned also in the scriptures. Soch a woman was the seid Hilda, as
openly disputed in them against the superstycyons of certain bishops. But
this chancellor by like, chanced upon that blind popysh work which Walter
Hunte a white fryre, Walter hunte.
wrote iiii. score years ago, Contra doctrices mulieres, against scole women,
or else some other like blind Romysh beggeryes.

Anne askewe
Then my Lord Mayre commanded me to ward. Preson.
I asked him, if suertees would not serve me. And he made me short answer that
he would take non Then was I had to the Counter, and there remained xii. days,
no frynde admytted to speak with me.

Johan Bale.
Here is Christ yet trodden on the hele. Christ trodden on the hele.
by that wicked serpent which tempted Eua. Gene. iii. His faithful membre for
beleuyng in him, is here thrown in preson. And no marvel, for it was his own
promise, ye shall be brought before rulers and debitees (says he) for my
truths sake Mat. x. ye shall be betrayed of your own nacyon and kindred, and
so thrown in preso^, Luc. xxi. If they have persecuted methinke not but they
will also persecute you, Io. v. This serpent is again become^ ye prince of
this world, and holds ye gouerners thereof captyue, Io. xiiii. Suertees would
have been taken for a thief or a mourtherer, but not for Christ's member, ye
bishops chau^cellour being at hand, nor yet her fryndes permitted to confort
her.

Anne Askewe.
But in the mean time there was a pressed sent to me, A pressed.
which said that he was commanded of the bishop to examyne me, and to give me
good counsel, which he did not. But first he asked me for what cause I was put
in the Cou^ter? And I told him I could not tell. Then he said, it was great
pity that I should be there with out cause, and concluded that he was very
sorye for me.

Johan Bale.
O temptacion of Satan. Christ being in ye solitary wilderness alone, was
after this flattering sort assaulted first of his enemy. Matt. iiii. This
Judas was sent before to give a frindelie kiss ye more deeply to trappe ye
innocent in snare. Judas.
But Gods wisdom made her to perceive what he was. A false prophet is sone
known by his fruits, among the^ that are godly wise. Mat. vii. She
considered with Solomon, that more to profyght are the strypes of a frinde,
tha^ the fraud^lent kysses of a deceitful enemy, Proverb. xxxvii.

Anne Askewe.
Secondly he said, it was told him that I should deny the sacrament of the
aultre. The sacrament.
And I answered him again, that that I had said, I had said.

Johan Bale.
In this brefe answer, she remembered Salomo^s counsel, Answer not a fool, all
after his folishnesse. Beware of the^ (says Christ) which come in shepes
clothinge, for inwardlye they are most rauenynge wolves, Mat. vii. God
destroieth ye crafts of the wicked (says Job) so yt they are not hable to
perform that they take in hand. Job. v.

Anne Askewe.
Thirdly he asked me, if I were shryuen, I told him no. Then he said, he
would bring one to me, for to shryue me. And I told him, Shrifte.
so that I might have one of these. iii. that is to say, doctor Crome, sir
Gyllam, or Huntyngton, I was contented, because I knew them to be men of
wisdom. As for you or any other, I will not dysprayse, because I know ye
not. Then he said, I would not have you think, but that I or an other that
shall be brought you, shall be as honest as they. For if we were not, ye may
be sure, the king would not suffer us to preach. Then I answered by the saying
of Solomon. Prechers.
By commonynge with the wise, I may learn wisdom, but by talking with a
fool I shall take skath, Prou. i.

Johan Bale.
Se how this adversary co^paseth like a rauenyng lion, to devour this lamb i.
Pet. v. Now temptethhe her with Confession, Confessyo^
which has been such a bayte of theirs, as has brought into their nets and
snares the myghtiest princes of the world, both kings and emprours Se here if
they leave any subtylte unsought, to obtain their pray. He reckened by this
to win his purpose, which way so ever he had taken. If she had been
confessed to him, he had known which way she had been bente. If she had
utterly refused confession, Practice.
he had more matter to accuse her of. O subtyle sede of the serpent. This part
played your old generation the Pharisees and prestes with Christ, to bring him
in danger of the law. Mat. xxii. and Ioha. viii. No Christian erudicio^
brings this pressed, nor yet good counsels of scripture. But as Esaias says. The
hypocryte ymagyneth abhomynacion against God, hypocryte
to famysh the hungry, and witholde drink from the thirstye Yet shall not the
eyes of the seeing be dymme, nor the ears of the hearing be deffe, Esa. xxxii.
If the king admit soch preachers (as I can not think preachers.
it) a sore plage remains both to him and to his people.

The host^
Anne Askewe.
Forthly he asked me if the host should fall, and a beast did eat it,
whether the beast did receive God or no? I answered. Seeing ye have taken the
pains to ask this questyon, I desire you also to take so much pain more, as
to assoyle it your self. For I will not do it, because I perceive ye come to
tempte me. And he said, it was against the order of scoles, that he which
asked the question, should answer it. I told him I was but a woman, and knew
not the course of scoles.

Johan Bale.
Beastlye was that question, and of a more beastlye brain propouned to this
woman. Little need shall other men have to manifest their blasphemous folyes,
wha^ they do it so plainly their selves Who ever heard before, that their
host was a God, and might fall, A falling God.
and be eaten of a beast, till they now so beastelye told the tale? Though
Saint Paul where as it is ryghtlye mynistred, does call it the body of the
Lord. i, Corin. xi. Yet does he not call it a God. Though Christ says. This
is my body, Math. xxvi. Mar. xiiii. Luc. xxii. yet says he not this is a
God. For God is a sprete, and no body, Joan. iiii. Where God is eaten, it is
of the sprete, and neither of mouse nor ratte, as wynchestre and Peryn,
Wynchestre. Peryn.
with other like popyshe heretics have taught now of late by their own hand
wrytynges. Our God is in heaven, and cannot fall nor yet be eaten of beasts.
If they have soche a God, as may both fall, and so be eaten, as this pressed
here confessethe, it is some false or counterfeit god of their own making. If
he may putryfye or be consumed of worms, moule, rust, beast, or fire, Baruch
says, it is an Idol, An Idolle
and no God. Baruch. vi.

These witles ydolators have no grace in this age, to hyde their old
legerdemaynes. They fare like those dronke^ Gossypes, Like old Gossyppes.
which tell more than al, wha^ their heads be full of well gyngerdeale. The
proud crown of the dronken Ephraemytes (says Esaye) shall be trodden under
foot. The prestes and the prophets do stacker, they are so ouerseane with
wine. Esa xxviii. They stomble in the streets, and have stained themselves with
blood. Tren. iiii. All the dwellers of Judah (says the lord) shall I fyl with
dro^ckennesse, Dronckennesse.
both the kings and the prestes. I will neither pardone them, spare them, nor
yet have pytie on them, Hier. xiii. And where as that dronckennes is (says
Salomo^) there is no counsel kept Pro. xiii. In the end, this hipocrite full
like him self, hypocrite.
allegeth to this woman, a manner used of his old predecessors in the schools
of falshed. But from the scole of truth he brings nothing to the confort of
her conscience. He declares full workemanly in this, what he and his generation
seeks, by such their spyritual and iustyfyenge works, ex opere operato.

Anne askewe.
Fyftly he asked me, if I intended to receive the sacrament at Easter, Howsell.
or no? I answered, that else I were no Christen woman, and that I did rejoice,
that the time was so nere at hand. And tha^ he departed thens, with many
fair words.

Johan Bale.
This hongrye wolf practices by all crafty ways possible, to suck the
blood of this innocent lamb. Is not that (think you) an holy congregacyon,
which is thus spyrytuallye occupied? Spirituallye.
Some Godly men will wondre, that they be not ashamed. But maruele not of
it. For the holy Ghost says, in his fore judgments, that the same holy mother
which has hatched the^ vpin oils and in shauynges, is an unshamefast whore.
Apo. xvii. and Dan. viii. A whore.
Tha^ of very nature must her whelps be shameless children. Such shameless
dogs are they (says Esaye) as be never satysfyed. Dogs
Es. lvi. wha^ they kyl you (says Christ) they shall think they do God good
service. Io, xvi. so greatly have their malice blinded them. Sap. ii. which is
partly the drunkenness before spoken of.

Anne Askewe.
And the. xxiii. day of March, my cosyne Brittayne came into the Counter to
me, and asked there, whether I might be put to bail or no? Baylynge
Then went he immedyatlye unto my Lord Mayre, desyerynge of him to be so good
Lord unto me, that I might be bayled. My lord answered him, and said, that
he would be glad to do the bests that in him lay. Howbeit he could not bail
me without the consent of a spyrytuall offycer. So requyrynge him to go and
speak with the chauncelloure of London. For he said, like as he could not
commytte me to prysone without the consent of a spirytuall offycer, no more
could he bail me without consent of the same.

Johan Bale.
True is it here, that is written of S. Johan in the Apocalyppes, that
Antychrist is worshipped of the potentates and kings of ye earth. antichryst
Apo. xiii. The mayre of London, which is the kings liefe tenant, and
represents there his own person, stands here like a dead Idol or like
such a servant slave as can do nothing within his own city concerning
their matters. Who is like the Beast (says Saint Johan) who is able to war
with him? The beast
He has brought al lands and their kingdoms in fear (says Esaye) the
strength of their cytyes has he taken away, and restrained the deliverance
of their presoners. Esai. xiiii. The pare^tes of him that was borne blind,
Examples
feared this spyritual tirannye or captyuyte of theirs, such time as they were
examined of the bishops for ye sight of their son. Io vi. Such as believed
in Christ among ye chief rulers of the Jews, would not be acknowne thereof,
for fear of like vyolence, Io. xii. No new thing is it than in that
spiritual generacyon, but a custom of old antyquite. A custom
Both Christ and his Apostles have suffered like tyranny under them. But never
did they yet ministre it to any creature after their example.

Anne Askewe.
So upon that he went to the chancellor, The chau^celler,
requyrynge of him as he did before of my lord Mayre. He answered him, that the
matter was so haynouse, that he durst not of himself do it, without my Lord
of London were made preuye thereunto. But he said, he would speak unto my
Lord in it. And bad him repare unto him the next morrow and he should well
known my lords pleasure.

Johan Bale.
Ryghtwysnesse judge they sin, and sin rightwisnesse. Es. v. so vnperfight
is their sight, Io. xii. in that God has given the^ up to their own lusts.
Faith in Christ.
Romans i. What an haynouse matter is it holden here, to believe in Christ after
the scriptures, and not after their supersticiouse manner? For non other cause
could they lay to this woman, as ye have heard here before, and as ye shall
here after perceive more largely. What so ever it be to offe^de God or man,
their offense may be no less than prison and death. Tyranny
The Turk is not more ve^geable, tha^ is this spightfull spiritual
generacio^. Yet boast they Christ's religion, and the holy mother church.

Anne Askewe.
And upon the morrow after, he came thydre, and spoke both with the
chancellor, and with my lord bishop of London. My lord declared unto him,
that he was very well contented that I should come forth to a communycacyon.
And appointed me to apere before him the next day after, at.iii. of the clock.
at after noone. More over he said unto him, that he would there should be at
that examynacyon, Wylye. Wylye.
soche learned men as I was affeccyoned to. That they might se, and also make
report that I was handeled with no rygoure. He answered him, that he knew no
man that I had more affection to than othere. Than said the bishop. Yes,
Subtyle.
as I understand, she is affeccioned to Doctor Crome, Sir Gyllam, Whyteheade,
and Huntyngton, that they might hear the matter. For she did know them to be
learned, and of a godly judgment.

Johan Bale.
A foxysh fauer was this both of the chancellor and bishop, and soch a
benyuolent ge^tilnesse, as not only sought her blood, but also the blood of
all them which are here named, A wolf.
if they had than come to this examynacyon. For the evening before (as I am
credybly infourmed) the Bishopp made boast among his own sort, that if they
came thydre he would tie them a great deie shorter. A voice was this full like
to him that uttered it. For thereby he apereth, not one that will save and feed,
but rather soche a one as seeks to kill and destroy. Iohannis x. The foxes
run over the hill of Syon (says Hyeremye) because she is fallen from God,
Foxes.
Threnorum. v. O Israel (says the Lord) thy prophets are like the wylye
foxes upon ye dry feldes, Ezechiel. xiii. The Poet has a by word, that
happy is he which can take heed by another man's hurt. I add this here, that
ye should be ware, if ye come in like danger of any soch foxish bishop. By
one of his day deuyls, A pressed.
whom this Cayphas sent to cammen with ye woman in preson, he knew part of her
meaning, and what they were also which fauered her opynyons. Yea, he craftelye
undermined this gentilman which entreated for her, if ye mark it well. Trust
not to much in the flatterouse faunynge of soche wylye foxes.

Anne Askewe.
Also he required my cosyne Bryttayne, that he should earnestly persuade me to
utter, even the very bottom of my heart, A thief.
And he swear by his fydelyte, that no man should take any advantage of my
words. Neither yet would he lay ought to my charge, for any thing that I
should there speak. But if I said any manner of thing amys, He with othere
more would be glade to reform me therein, with most godly counsel.

Johan Bale.
O vengeable tyrant and devil. How subtillie sekist thou the blood of this
innocent woman, under a color of fryndelye handelyng. Judas.
God ones commanded the ernestlye, in no case to compass thy neyber with
deceyt, to the effusio^ of his blood. Leu. xix. But his commandment, thou
rekenest but a Caunterburye tale. By swearynge by thy fydelete, thou art not
all unlike unto Herod, Herod.
who^ Christ for like practyses, first to put Johan, and than him to death,
called also a most crafty cruel fox. Luc. xiii. Thou laborest here, to have
this woman in snare, with certain of her frindes. But God put in her mind at
this time, to reckon yt a dog and a swyne. Matthew. vii. and thereupon to have
few words.

Anne Askewe.
On the morrow after, my lord of London sent for me, at one of the clock, his
hour being appointed at three. A false liar.
And as I came before him, he said, he was very sorye of my trouble, and
desired to know my opinion in soche matters, as were laid against me. He
required me also in any wise, boldelye to utter the secrets of my heart,
bidding me not to fear in any point. O traiter.
For what so ever I did say with in his house, no man should hurt me for it.
I answered. For so much as your Lordeshyppe appointed. iii. of the clock and
my fryndes shall not come till that hour. I desire you to pardon me of geuinge
answer till they come.

Johan Bale.
In this preventing of the hour, may the dylygent reader perceive the
gredynesse of this Babylon Bishop, or blood thurstie wolf, A tyrant.
concerning this pray. Swyft are their fete (says David) in the effusion of
innocent blood, which have fraud in their tunges, venym in their lips, and
most cruel vengeance in their mouths. Psalm. xiii. David in that Psalm much
marueleth in the sprete that taking upon the^ the spirytuall governance of
the people, they can fall in soche frenesye or forgetfulness of themselves,
Murderers.
as to believe it lauful thus to oppress the faithful, and to devour them
with as little compassyon, as he that gredylye deuoureth a piece of bread. If
soche have read any thing of God, they have little minded their true duty
therein. More swyft (says Hieremye) are our cruel persecuters, than the egles
of the air. Egles.
They follow upon us over the mountains, and lay preuye wait for us in the
wilderness. Trenoru^. iiii. He that will know the craftye haukynge of
Bishops to bring in their pray, let him serve it here. Judas (I think)
hade never there part of their conning warkemanshippe. Mark it here, and in
that which follows.

Anne Askewe.
More la^bes to devour.
Then said he that he thought it mete, to send for those. iiii. men which were
a fore named, and appointed. Then I desired him not to put the^ to the pain.
For it should not need, because the. ii. gentylmen which were my fryndes, were
able enough to testyfye that I should say. Anon after he went into his
gallerye with mastre Spylman, and willed him in any wise, that he should exhort
me, to utter all that I thought.

Johan Bale.
Christ shows us in the vii. chaptre of Matthew, and in other places more of
the Gospel, how we shall know a false prophet or an hypocrite, and wills us
to be ware of them. Their manner is as the deuyls is flatteringly to tempt, and
deceitfullye to trappe, Like the devil.
that they may at the lattre, most cruellye slay. Soche a won (says David)
has nothing in his tunge, but plain deceyt. He lays wait for the
innocent, with no less cruelte than the lion for a sheep. He lurketh to rauysh
up the poor. And when he has gotten him into his net, tha^ throws he him
down by his autorite. Psalm. ix. This is the third temptacion of this bishop,
that the woman should utter, to her own confusyon.

Anne Askewe.
In the mean while he commanded his Archedeacon to Archedeacon.
comme^ with me, who said unto me. Maystres wherefore are ye accused? I
answered. Axe my accusers, for I know not as yet. Then took he my book out of
my hand, and said. Soche books as this is has brought you to the trouble ye
are in. Beware (says he) be ware, for he that made it, was burnt in
Smythfelde. Then I asked him, if he were sure that it was true that he had
spoken. And he said, he knew well, the book was of Johan Frithes making. A
liar.
Then I asked him, if he were not ashamed for to judge of the book before he
saw it within, or yet knew the truth thereof, I said also, that soche
unadvised and hastye judgment, is a token apparent of a very slendre wit.
Then I opened the book and showed it him. He said, he thought it had been an
other, for he could find no fault therein. Then I desired him, no more to be
so swyfte in judgment, till he thoroughly knew the truth. And so he departed.

Johan Bale.
Here sends he fourth an other Judas of his, Judas.
to betraye this true servant of god. Mark ye good workemanshypp hardely, and
tell me if they be not the of spring of the serpent. Much are they offended
with books, for yt they so plainly do many feste their myschefes. Johan Frith
is a great moate in their eyes for so turnynge over their purgatory, Johan.
Frith.
and heauynge at their most monstruose Mass, or mammetrouse Mazon, which
sygnyfyeth bread or feadynge Notwithstanding Daniell calls it Maozim,
betokenynge strength or defense. Dani. xi. because the false worshyppynges
thereof should be so myghtelye defended by worldly autoryte and power No new
things is it, that good men and their books ar destroyed now a days wha^ they
touch ye mischefes of that generacio^. Books condemned.
For Ioakim the king of Judah cut Hieremies prophecies in pieces with a pen
knyfe, and in his madness threw them into the fire, commaundyng both Hieremye
which taught them, and Baruch that wrote them, to be put to death Hiere. xxxvi.
When king Antiochus had set upon the aultre of God, the abhomynable Idol of
desolacion (which is now ye popysh mass. Mat. xxiiii) the books of Gods law
commanded he to be torn in pieces and brent in the fire, Books brent.
sendynge fourth thereupon, this cruel proclamacyon. That what so ever he was,
which had a book of the Lords Testament found about him, or that endeavored
them selves to live after the laws of God, the Kings commandment was, they
should be put to death. i. Match. i.

Anne Askewe.
Immedyatlye after came my cosyne Bryttayne in with diverse other, Her fryndes.
as Master Hawe of Graies inn, and such other like. Then my lord of London
persuaded my cosyne Bryttayne, as he had done often before, which was, that I
should utter the bottom of my heart in any wise.

Johan Bale.
This is the fourth te^ptacyon, or craftye calling upon, to utter her mind,
that he might say of her, as Cayphas said of Christ. Cayphas.
Mat. xxvi. what need we any more witnesses? Lo, now ye have herd a
blasphemye or an heresye. How say ye now to it, which are her frindes? Is she
not gyltye of death? If they should have said nay, unto this, they should have
been so, in as deep danger as she. This serpentyne practice, Practice.
was as well to trappe them as her, let it not be unmarked.

Anne Askewe.
My lord said after that unto me, that he would I should credyte the counsel
of my fryndes in his behalf, which was, that I should utter all things that
burdened my conscience. Satan.
For he ensured me, that I should not need to stand in doubt to say any
thing. For like as he promised the^ (he said) he promised me, and would
perform it. Which was that neither he, nor any man for him, should take me
at advantage of any word I should speak. Tempter.
And therefore he bad me, say my mind without fear. I answered him I had
naught to say. For my conscience (I thanked god) was burdened with nothing.

Johan Bale.
Still follows this ghostly enemy, his former temptacio^, and calls upon
mortal vtteraunce, or vtteraunce full of death, that he might cry with
Cayphas. Cayphas
Luc. xxii. what need we further testymonye? Her own mouth has accused her.
We are able witnesses thereof, for our own ears have hard it. Thus lay they
wait for blood (says Solomon) and lurk pryuelye for the innocente, without
a cause. Prouerbioru^. i. Consent not (says he) unto soche tyrauntes, Enemies
if they entyce the. For though their word apere as honye. Prouerbiorum. xvi.
Yet shall thou find the^ in the end, so bitter as wormewode. Prouerbiorum. v.
Though that whory she generation pretends a color of gentelnesse, yet byte
the it at the latter like a serpent, and styngeth like an adder throwynge
forth poison Prouer. xxiii.

Anne Askewe.
Then brought he fourth this unsavory symylytude. That if a man had a
wound, no wise surgeon would mynystre help unto it, Surgerye
before he had seane it uncovered. In like case (says he) can I give you no
good counsel, Counsel
unless I know where with your conscience is burdened. I answered, that my
conscience was clear in all things. And for to lai a pliaster unto the whole
skin, it might apere much folly.

Johan Bale.
Has not he (think you) much need of help, which seeks to soch a surgeon
Uncircumspect is that pacyente, and most commonly unfortunate, which goes
to the comme^ murderer to be healed of his disease. A murderer.
Christ had us evermore to be ware of all such, unless we would be woryed.
Matthew. vii. The nature of these, Lord (says David) is not to make whole, but
to persecute them whom thou have smytten, and to add wou^des unto wound.
Psalm. lxviii. Their own boches are insanable, Botches.
Esa. i. for ye multitude of their myschefes. Hie. xxx. The pressed and the
Leuyte, which trauayled betwine Jerusalem and Hierico, healed not the wounded
man, yet were they no wounders. Lu. x. Who can think that he will unburden the
conscience, wych studyeth nothing else but to out load it with most greuouse
and dau^gerouse burdens: Math. xxiii.

Anne Askewe.
Then ye drive me (says he) to lay to your charge, your own report, which
is this. Gathered store.
Ye did say, he that does receive the sacrament by the hands of an ill pressed
or a sinner, he receives the devil, and not God. To that I answered, that I
never spoke soch words. But as, I said a fore both to the qwest and to my
lord Mayte, so say I now again, that Sinon cast.
the wickedness of the priest should not hurt me, but in sprete and faith I
received no less, the body and blood of Christ. Then said the bishop unto
me, what a saying is this? In sprete. I will not take you at that advantage
then I answered, my lord with out faith and sprete, I can not receive him
worthelye.

Johan Bale.
Now shows this Cayphas where about he goes, for all his false flattering
colors before. And seeing he can win none aduau^tage to his cruel purpose, of
her own co^munycacion, he shakes the bougettes of his provided Iudases and
betrayers of innocent blood He brings fourth such stuff and store,
Bowgittes.
as that wicked qwest had gathered of her answer to them, to flatter and to
please his tyranny therewith. It is to be feared, that as far was the fear of
God here from the^, as from him, Psa. xiii. for as well practiced they this
myschefe against her, as he. Mark, here ye natural workynge of a very full
Antychrist. Antichrist
He defe^deth sin in his own generacio^, and conde^neth virtue in Christ's
dear member. Malice, pride whoredom, sodometrie, with other most deuylysh
vices, reckeneth he not to hurt the minystracyon of a pressed, yet judges it he
an heresye, no less worthy then death, to believe that Christ's flesh and
blood is received in faith and spret. What though it be Christ's most ernest
doctrine, a sore heresye.
Joan. vi. what a saying (says this Bishopp) is this? In sprete. I will not
take you at the worste, says he. As though it were a most heinous heresye. But
most dyscrete and godly was the womannes answer, declaringe her a right
membre of Christ, where as those prestes, Prestes.
who^ he here defends, are unworthy receyuers and members of the devil.
Joan. xiii. and i. Corin. xi. This is an Antichrist here known by his fruits.
For he utters blasphemies against god Daniel. vii. Apoc xiii. he calls
evil Good, and Good evil. Esa. v. and Prouerbiorum. iii.

Anne Askewe.
Then he laid unto me, that I should say, that the sacrament remaining in
the pixte, was but bread. Bread.
I answered that I never said so. But in deed the quest asked me soche a
question, whereunto I would not answer (I said) till soche time as they had
assoyled me this question of mine. Wherefore Steven was stoned to death, Steven.
They said, they knew not Then said I again, no more would I tell them what
it was.

Johan Bale.
O Idolouse shepehearde (says zach.) thou sekest not to heal the wounded, but
to eat the flesh of the fat. zach. xi The watch men of Israel (says the
lord) are very blind beasts and shameless dogs. Beasts.
They have no understanding, but follow their own beastly ways for
covetousness. Esaie. lvi. Who ever read in the scripture or autorysed
Chronycle, that bread in a box should be Christ's body? The box.
Where or wha^ commanded he his most holy body, so to be bestowed? What have
ye to lay for this doctrine of yours? Are ye not yet ashamed of your
vnreuerent and blasphemouse beastlynesse? will ye still pluck our Christen
believe from ye right hand of God the eternal father, and send it to a box of
your braynyshe deuysynge?

The first boxer of it, was pope Honorius the third in the year of our lord
M.CC.XVI. after the many fold reuelacyons of diverse relygyouse women. Honorius
Neither was there any great honor given unto it of the common people, till a
sorye solytarye sister or Ankorasse in the land of Leodiu^ or Luke, called Eua
after certain visions, Eua reclusa.
had procured of pope Vrbanus the forth in the year of our Lord. M.CC.LXIIII.
the feast of Corpus Christi to be holde^ solemn all Christendom over. As
testifies Arnoldus Bostius, Bostius.
Epist vi. ad Ioannem Paleonydorum. In all the. xii. hundred years before that,
was it neither boxed nor pixed, honored nor sensed universally And se what an
horrible work here is now, for the boxinge thereof, and what a great heresy it
is to believe that Christ dwell not therein, contrary both to his own and to his
Apostles doctrine. Iudases.
Mark also how this Gods creature is handeled here for it, and how subtyllye
she is betrayed of the Bishops begles and lymmes of the devil.

Anne Askewe.
Then laid it my Lord unto me, that I hade alleged a certain text of the
scripture. I answered that I alleged none other but Saint Paul's own saying
to the Athenianes, in the. xvii. chapter of the Apostles acts. That God
dwells not in temples made with hands. Temples.
Then asked he me, whate my faith and believe was in that matter? I answered
him. I believe as the scripture does teach me. A te^pter.
Then inquired he of me, what if the scripture does say that it is the body
of Christ? I believe (said I) like as the scripture does teach me. Then asked
he again, what if the scripture does say that it is not the body of Christ?
My answer was still. I believe as the scripture infourmeth me. And upon this
argument he tarried a great while, to have driven me to make him an answer to
his mind How be it I would not, but concluded thus with him, that I believed
therein and in all othere things, as Christ and his holy Apostles did leave
them.

Johan Bale.
Se what an horrible sin here was. She alleged the scripture for her believe,
scripture.
which is a sore and a daungerouse matter For it is against the popes canon
laws, and against the old customs of holy church. Sens king Henryes days
the fourth, has it ben a burning matter, only to read it in the English
tunge, and was called wycleues lernyng, till now of late years. And it will not
be well with holy church, till it be brought to that point again. For it
makes many heretykes against holy church. O insipyent papystes. These are
your corrupted, practyses and abhomynable studyes, practyses.
to drive the simple from God, and yet ye think, he seyth you not, Psalm.
xiii. S. Paul says (Roma. xv.) what so ever things are written in the
scriptures, are written for our learning, that we through pacyence and comfort
in them, might have hope, and ye will rob us thereof. Christ commanded all
peoples, Christ.
both men and women (Johan. v.) to search the scryptures, if they think to
have everlasting life, for that life is no where but in the^. Yet will you in
pain of death keep them kill from them.

For ye take upon ye to sytte in Gods stead, In Gods stead.
and think by that usurped office, that ye may turn over all. ii. These. ii.
But Christ bad us to be ware both of you and your chaplains, wha^ he said.
There shall arise false Christ's and false prophets, workynge many great
wonders, and saying. Lo, here is Christ, and there is Christ. Believe them not.
Matt. xxiiii. And therefore alleged this woman unto your qwestmongers (the
dogs yt Christ warned us of, Mathei. vii.) and now unto you that saing of S.
Paul. Acto. xvii. That God dwells not in temples made with hands which also
were the words both of Solomon long before. iii. Reg. viii. and of Steven.
Temples.
Act vii. in his time. That scripture somoch offended you, that ye would needs
know thereof the understanding. For soche textes as agree not with the
cloynynges of your co^iurers, and the conueiaunces of your sorcerers, must
needs be seasoned with Aristotle's Phisickes, and fawced with Johan Donses
subtyltees. Arystotle. Dons.
Here make ye a wonderful turmoylynge to wrynge out of this Woma^nes beliue in
that matter, that she might either become a creature of your old God the pope
or else be burned, yet have she not ones removed her foot from the hard
foundacyon or saving rock Ihesus Christ. i. Corinth. xi. Blessed be his holy
name for it.

Anne Askewe.
Then he asked me, why I had so few words? Few words.
And I answered God has given me the gift of knowledge, but not of vtteraunce.
And Salomo^ says, that a woman of few words, is a gift of God, Prouer. xix.

Johan Bale.
Wha^ Christ stood before Cayphas he asked him, much after this sort, wherefore
he had so few words: Thou answerest not (says he) to those things which are
laid Here against yt of these me^. Nevertheless he held his peace Mar.
xiiii. Silence.
But when he was ones thoroughly compelled by the name of the living God, to
speak and had uttered a very few words, he took him at such advantage,
though they were the eternal veryte, as he was able through the^ to procure
his death. Matthew. xxvi. like as this bloudye Bishopp Bonner, Bonner.
of the same wicked generation, did at the lattre, by this faithful woman.

Anne Askewe.
Thirdelye my lord laid unto my charge, that I should say, that the Mass
was ydolatrye I answered him. No, I said not so. Howbeyt (I said) the quest
did ask me, whether pryuate Masses did releue sowles departed, Private Masses.
or no? Unto whom than I answered. O Lord, what ydolatrye is this? that we
should rather believe in pryuate masses, than in the helthsome death of the
dear son of God Than said my lord again. What an answer was that? Though
it were but mean (said I) yet was it good enough for the question.

Johan Bale.
About the lattre days of Johan wycleue, in ye year of our lord a M.CCC.
LXXXII. as Henrye Spenser than Bishopp of Norwich, Henrye. Spenser
was with a great nombre of English warryours besieginge the Town of Hypers in
Flaunders, in the quarrel of pope Vrbanus the. vi. The vessels of perdycyon or
very organes of Satan, the iiii. orders of beggynge fryres, Frires.
preached all England over, that that most holy father of theirs, had
lyberallye opened the well of mercy, and granted clean remyssyon to all them
that would either fight, or give any thing toward the mayntenaunce of
those wars in the quarrel of holy church against scysmatykes and heretics.
For than was this matter of their popyshe Mass, Masses.
in great controuersye like as it is now. More over they promised by virtue of
his great pardons, to send the sowles departed, to heaven. And diverse of them
said, they had seane the^ fly up, out of ye church yeardes from their graves
thydre ward.

This most deuilishe blasphemy with such other like, provoked the said
Johan wycleue, Johan Wycleue.
the very organe of God, and vessel of the holy Ghost not only to replye
than against them at Oxforde in the open scooles, but also to write a great
nombre of books against that pestylente popyshe kyngedome of theyrs like as
Martyn Luther has done also in our time, with many other godly men. And like
as those false prophets the frires did than attribute unto the popes pardons,
Pardons.
the remyssyon of sins, the deliverance from da^pnacyon, and the fre
enteraunce of heaven which peculyarly belongs to the precyouse payment of
Christ's blood. i. Petri. i. and. i. Io. i. So do these false anointed, or
blasphemouse Bishops and prestes now, Druydes
attrybute them again unto their pryuate and public Masses the popes own
wares as prowlynge and pelferynge as the pardons, with no less blasphemye. The
deuylysshenes of this new doctrine of theyrs, shall be refelled in my books
against fryre Peryn and Wynchestre, Perin.
and therefore I writ the less here.

Anne Askewe.
Then I told my Lord, that there was a pressed, which did hear what I said
there before my lord Mayre and them, with that the chaunceller answered,
Chaunceler.
which was the same pressed. So she spoke it in very deed (says he) before my
lord the Mayre and me. Then were there certain prestes as doctor Standyshe and
other, Sta^dyshe
which tempted me much to know my mind. And I answered them always thus.
That I have said to my lord of London, I have said.

Johan Bale.
By this ye may se, that the Bishops have every where their watchme^,
Watchemen.
lest the kings officers should do any thing, contrary to their bloody
behoue. This Chancellor would not have thus answered hardely, so agreablye to
her tale, had it not been to their advantage against her, as here after will
apere. Mark here the fashyon of these temptynge serpents, Standysh and his
fellows. And tell me if they be not like unto those vypers whelps which came
to Iohans Baptym, Vypers.
Mathei. iii. and to Christ Jesus preaching, Luce. xi. I think ye shall
find them the same generation.

Anne Askewe.
And then doctor Standyshe desyered my lord, I tempter.
to bid me say my mind, concerning that same text of S. Paul. I answered,
that it was against saint Paul's learning, that I being a woman, should
interpret the scriptures, specyallye where so many wise learned men were.

Johan Bale.
It is not yet half a score of years ago, sens this blasphemouse Idyote
Standyshe, Sta^dyshe
compared in a lewd sermon of his, the dear price of our redemption, or
precyouse blood of Christ, to the blood of a fylthy swyne, like himself a
swyne. And for his good doing, he is now becomen a dawe, a doctor I should say,
Doctor.
of the popes dyuynyte, and a scolasticall interpretour of the scriptures to
his behoue. Here would ye swynysh ge^tylman have proved, both that S. Steven
dyed an heretyke, and S. Paul a scysmatyke, for teaching that God dwells
not in temples made with hands Act vii. and. xvii. if he might have reaso^e^ out
the matter with this woman. But she took a swyne for a swyne, Swyne.
and would lay no pearls before him, as Christ had charged her before. Mathei.
vii For all their interrogacions are now about the temple and the temple wares.
Matthei. xxvi.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord of London said he was infourmed, that one should ask of me, if
I would receive the Sacrament at Easter, and I made a mock of it. Accuser.
Then I desired that mine accuser might come fourth, which my lord would
not. But he said again unto me. I sent one to give you good counsel, and at
the first word ye called him papyste. That I denied not, for I perceived, he
was no less, yet made I non answer unto it.

Johan Bale.
No confortable scriptures, nor yet any thing to the sowles consolacyon, may
come out of the mouth of these spirytuall fathers. But dogs rhetorycke and
curres curtesye, Dogs rhetoryck.
narrynges, brawlynges, and quarellynges. When she was in the mids of the^,
she might well have said with David. Deliver me lord from the quarelouse
dealings of men, that I may keep thy commandments. I deal with the thing
that is lawful and right. O give me not over to these oppressers, let not
these proud quarellers do me wrong. Quarellers.
Psalm. cxviii. But among all these quarellynges, her accusers might not be
seane, which were the grounders of them.

Anne Askewe.
Then he rebuked me, and said that I should report, that there were bente
against me three score prestes at Lyncolne. Three score prestes.
In deed (quothe I) I said so. For my fryndes told me, if I did come to
Lyncolne, the prestes would assault me and put me to great trouble, as
thereof they had made their boast. And when I heard it, I went thither in deed,
not being afraid, because I knew my matter to be good. Prestes.
More over I remained there. vi. days, to se what would be said unto me. And
as I was in the mynster, reading upon the Bible, they resorted unto me by. ii.
and by. ii. by v. and by. vi minding to have spoken to me, yet they went their
ways again with out words speaking.

Johan Bale.
Rebukes in that generacyo^, are much more redye at hand, than either Christen
admonyshmentes, or gentle exhortacions, though they be all spyrytuall. And
that comes by reason of their lordeshyppes, Lordshyp.
which wa^teth due fournyshynge out, unless they have tyrannouse bragges and
braulynges. Herin follow they the examples of their natural predecessors the
Iewysh bishops, pharysees, and prestes. Joan. vii. and. ix. She might full
well say, that the prestes were against her. For hypocresy and Idolatry were
never yet with him, Hypocresi
whose blessed quarrel she took. Mark the forth chaptre of Johan, and so fourth
almost to the end of his Gospel. Behold also how his Apostles and disciples
were handeled of the prestes, after his gloryouse ascencyon, Acto. iiii. and
all that book following and ye shall find it no new thing The servant is no
better tha^ her mastre which suffered of that malignaunt generation like
quarellynges and handelynges, Ioha^. xv. Se here how they wondered upon her by
couples, Wonders
for reading the Bible, as their fore fathers wondered upon Christ for
preaching and doing miracles.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord asked, I pressed.
if there were not one that did speak unto me. I told him, Yeas, that there
was one of them at the last which did speak to me in deed And my lord than
asked me, whate he said? I told him, his words were of so small effect that
I did not now remember the^.

Johan Bale.
So far was not Lyncolne from London, but the Bishop there hade knowledge
of this tragedye. Hereby may ye se their spirytuall occupyenge against Christ
and his faithful members. Occupyenge.
Such is the study (says S. Ioha^) of that congregation, which is a
spiritualte, called Sodom and Egypt. They rejoice in mischefes among
themselves, and send massengers one to an other against Gods witnesses, when
they are vexed by them, Apoca. xi.

Anne Askewe.
Then said my lord. There are many that read and know the scripture,
Scripture
and yet do not follow it, nor live thereafter. I said again. My lord, I
would wish that all men knew my co^uersacio^ and living in all points, For
I am so sure of my self this hour, that there are non able to prove any
dyshonestye by me. If you know any that can do it. I pray you bring them
forth.

Johan Bale.
I maruele that Bishops can not se this in themselves, that they are also no
folowers of the scriptures. Folowers
But parauenture they never read them, but as they find them by chance in
their popish portifolioms and maskyng books. Or else they think all the
scriptures fulfilled when they have said their mattens and their masses.
Christ said to the hypocrite. Why seist thou a moate in thy neybers eye, and
consyderest not the great beam that is in thine own eye? Luce vi. Matthew.
vii. Christ forbode his Bishops under pain of dampnacion to take any
lordshyppes upon them. Luce xxii. Lordships possessions.
How is this followed of our prelates? He commanded the^ also to possess
neither gold nor silver. Matthew. x. How is this commandment obeyed? If we
looked so ernestlye to Christ's instytucions, as we look to the popes to be
observed, these would also be seane to, by act of parliament, so well as prestes
marryage whom Christ never inhibyted. Marryage.
I doubt it not, but this will also be one day seane to. Godly did this woman
in defending here her innocencye. For S. Peter says, i. Petri iiii. Se yt non
of you suffer as an evil doer. But in your hard sufferynges, commit your
sowles unto God with well doing, as unto your faithful creator.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord went away and said, he would entytle sumwhat of my meaning.
And so he writ a great cyrcumstaunce. He writes.
But what it was. I have not al in memory. For he would not suffer me to have
the coppye thereof. Only do I remember this small portion of it.

Johan Bale.
Here wrote he certain articles of the popes Romish faith, willing her to
subscribe unto the^, and so blaspheme God or else to burn. His seeking was
here, to make her to worship the first beast, Worship the beast
whose deadly wou^d was healed again Apo. xiii. But she would not so have her
name raced out of the la^bes book of life Apoca. xx. Rather would she contend
to the end, hoping by the might of his sprete, at the lasie to over come,
and so to be clothed with ye promised white aparel. Apoc. iii.

Anne Askewe.
Be it known (says he) to all men, that I Anne Askewe, do confess this to
be my faith and believe, notwtstanding my reports made before to ye contrary. I
believe yt they which are howseled at ye hands of a priest whether his
conuersacio^ be good or not, Holy lecherye.
do receive the body and blood of Christ in substance reallye. Also I do
believe it after the consecracion, whether it be received or reserved, to be no
less than the very body and blod of Christ in substance. Fynallye I do
believe in this and in all other sacraments of holy church, papystyck
in all points according to the old catholycke faith of the same. In
witness whereof, I the said Anne have subscrybed my name. There was sumwhat
more in it, which because I had not the coppye, I can not now remember.

Johan Bale.
All the world knows, that neither in Christ's time, nor yet in the days of
his Apostles, was any soche confession of faith. Neither yet in the church
that followed after, by the space of much more than a M. years. What have
Christen men's conscience than to do with soche a progydyouse confession? Are
not Christ and his Apostles, teachers suffycyent enough for our Christian
believe, and their holy doctrynes lawful, but we must have these unsavory
brablementes? We must now believe in the bawdrye of prestes, or that their
Sodometrie and Whoredom for want of marryage, Canonysed lecheri
can be no impedyment to their God making. What is it else to be sworn but ye
believe of soche artycles, but to honor their abominable lecherye? O most
swynish sacrifiers of Baal Peor, Psalm. cv. You is it that the Apostle Judas,
in his canonical epistle speaks of. Ye have turned the grace of God, into
your lecherye, denyenge our only governor Ihesus Christ. Priapystes.
The holy Ghost shows us. Apoca. xxi. and xxii. that non are of the new
hallowed city or congregation of the lord, which works abhomynacyo^ or
maynteyneth lies, as ye do them both here.

Anne Askewe.
Then he read it to me, and asked me, if I did agree to it. And I said again.
I believe so much thereof as the holy scripture does agree to. Scripture
Wherefore I desire you, that ye will add that thereunto. Then he answered, that
I should not teach him what he should write. With that, he went forth in to
his great chamber, and read the same byll before the audyence. which enuegled
and wylled me to set to my hand, saying also that I hade fauer showed me.

Johan Bale.
In every matter concerning our Christen believe, is the scripture reckened
vnsuffycyent of this wicked generacyon. Vnsuffycient.
God was not wise enough in setting the order thereof, but they must add
thereunto their swybber swylle, that he may abhor it in us, as he did ye Jews
ceremonies, Esa. i. Hiere vii. zacha. vii. Amos. v. Michee vi. But this godly
woman would corrupt her faith with no such beggerye, least she in so doing
should admit them and their pope to sit in her conscience about the eternal
God, The pope
which is their daily study. ii. These. ii. A virgin was she in that behalf,
redeemed from the earth and following the lamb, and having in her forehead the
fathers name written. Apocalypses. xiiii.

Anne Askewe.
Then said the Bishop, I might thank other and not my self, of the fauer I
found at his hand. Fauer.
For he considered (he said) that I had good fryndes and also that I was come
of a worshypfull stock. Then answered one Christofer, a servant to master
Dennye. Rather ought ye (my lord) to have done it in such case for Gods sake
tha^ for man's

Johan Bale.
Falshede.
Spiritual will these fathers be named, and yet they do all to be seane of
men. Mat. xxiii. Their old conditions will they change, when the black moreane
change his skin, and the catte of the mountain her spots. Hieremy. xiii.
If I sought to please me^ (says S. Paul) I were not the servant of Christ.
Gala. i. When this tyrannouse Bishop can do no more myschefe, than flattereth
he the world seeking to have thank where he has non deserved. Flatterye.
And as concerning the love or true fear of God (as is here laid unto him) he
has non at all. Psalm. xiii.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord sat down, and took me the writing to set thereto my hand, and
I writ after this manner, I Anne Askewe do believe al manner things contained
in the faith of the Catholycke Church. catholyck
Then because I did add unto it, the Catholycke Church, he flonge into his
chamber in a great furye.

With that my cosyne Bryttayne followed him, desyerynge him for Gods sake to be
good lord unto me. He answered that I was a woman, ^ woman
and that he was nothing deceived in me. Then my cosyne Britain desired him
to take me as a woman, and not to set my weak woma^nes wit, to his
lordshippes great wisdom,

Johan Bale.
Was not this (think you) a sore matter to be so grievously taken of this
prelate? But that they are naturallye given to soch quarellinges. Math. xxiii.
This word Catholyck was not wont to offend them. Catholic
How becomes it than now a name so odeose? Paraue^ture through this only
occasion. They knew not till now of late years (for it came of the Greek) the
true sygnyfycacyon thereof. As that it is so much to say in the Englysh, as
the universal or whole. Before time, From oil.
they took it to mean their oyled co^gregacio^ alone. But now they perceive
that it includes the layte so well as the^ no lo^gar they do esteem it. Other
cause can I non conjecture, why they should now more contempne it than before.

Anne Askewe.
Then went in unto him doctor weston, Weston.
and said, that the cause why I did writ there the Catholyke church, was,
that I understood not the church written before. So with much a do, they
persuaded my lord to come out again, and to take my name with the names of
my suerties, which were my cosyn Brittayne and mastre Spylman of Grayes inn.

Johan Bale.
For an holy church will they be taken, and seem much to differ from the
lewd lowsye layte or profane multitude of the common people, Layte.
by reason of their holy vnccyons and shauynges which came from their pope.
Most specyallye because they have nothing a do with marryage, reckened a most
co^tagiouse poison to holy orders, as their for said Romysh father has taught,
why she brings up al his children in Sodo^ and Gomor. Jude. i. Apoca. xi.
Sodomytes.
And this point have they learned of their predecessors the old pharyses and
prestes, which were not, sicut ceteri hominu^, as the common sort of men are,
but holy, spiritual gostly fathers, Luce xviii. Wherefore they will not now be
called a catholyck, but an holy spiritual church.

Anne Askewe.
This being done, we thought that, I should have been put to bail
immedyatlye, according to the order of the law, Many delays.
Howbeit he would not so suffer it, but committed me from thens to preson
again until the next morrow. And than he wylled me to apere in the guylde
halle, and so I did. Notwithstanding they would not put me to bail there
neither, but read the Bishops writing unto me as before, and so commanded
me again to preson.

Johan Bale.
A very servitude of Egypt is it, to be in danger of these papystyck
Bysshoppes, as in this act does apere. Se what cauillacio^s this Pharao did
seek here to hold this Christian woman still under his captivity, Pharao.
so louth is the gredye wolf to depart from his desired pray Joan. x. These
delays and these sendinges from Cayphas to Pilat, and from Pylate again to
Annas in Paul's, Practyse
were not else but to seek more matter against her, and to know more depelye
who were her fryndes and maynteners, They that shall confer the fashyons of
this termagaunt Bishop concerning this woman, with the cruel manners of
great Parao in the delyueraunce of the people of Israel at Gods commau^deme^t.
Exo. v. or with the handelinges of the Jews spirytualte concerning Christ,
Math. xxvi. and Johan. xviii. they shall not find them all unlike.

Anne Askewe.
Then were my suerties appointed to come before them on the next morrow in
Paul's church, which did so in deed. Notwithstanding they would ones again
heave broken of Knavery spiritual.
with them, because they would not be bound also for an other woman at their
pleasure, whom they knew not, nor yet what matter was laid unto her charge.
Notwythstandynge at the last, after much a do and reasonyng to and fro, they
took a bond of them of recognisaunce for my fourth coming. And thus I was at
the last, delivered. Written by me Anne Askewe.

Johan Bale.
No veryte (says Oseas the Prophet) no mercy nor yet knowledge of God, is now
in the earth, but abhomynable vices have every where gotten the ouerhande, one
blood gyltynesse following an other, Osee. iiii. Think you that the Bishops
and prestes could take so cruel ways, With prestes
and would work so false feats, if they had the true fear of God, or yet
reckened to feel a right wise judge at the lattre day? Suppose it not. Not
only minded they to show no mercy to this woman, Tyrau^tes
but also to werie al her frindes and acquayntaunce, which is most extreme
cruelte and malice.

The other woman, whom they would here most craftily have delivered with this
(as I am credyblye infourmed) was a certain popysh queen, which they had before
provided both to betray her, and accuse her. In more deep danger of the law
at that time, Practyse.
was this for her false accusement without record, than was the other which
was so falselye accused. Feign would the prelates therefore have had her at
lyberte, but they feared much to be noted parcyall. Mark this craftye point
for your learning, and tell me if they be not a subtyle generacyon. Subtylte.
More of their spirytuall packynges and conueyau^ces, for the death of this
faithful woman, and most dear membre of Christ Anne Askewe, shall ye well
perceive in the latter part here following, by her own confession and hand
writing also to the honor of God and their great dishonor. So be it.

Vain is the conuersacyon, which ye received by the tradycions of your
fathers.

i. Pet. i. The veryte of the lord endures for ever.

Psalm. cxvi.
The Conclusion.
HEre haste thou (gentle reader) the first examynacyon of the faithful
martyr of Christ Anne Askewe with my simple elucidacion upon the same, Wherein
thou maiste clereli behold our Bishops and prestes so spirituallye to be
occupied now a days, Bishops.
as is the gredy wolf that rauenouslye ronneth upon his pray. For the
tyrannouse behauer in their cruel predecessors have they no manner of shame.
Neither yet repent they their own blasphemouse treason against God and his
veryte, what though their most wretched consciences do daily accuse them
thereof. The kingdom of God, Kyngedo^ of God.
which is a true faith in his word or a perfighte knowledge of the gospel, do
not they seek to uphold. But violently they speak ill of it, trouble it,
persecute it, chase it, and bannish it, by cause it is of him and from within
Luce vii. The kingdom of the pope, Popes kyngedom
which comes with outward obseruacion of days, persons, places, times,
meats, garments, and ceremonies, they magnify above the move, because it is
from without, and to their peculiar advantage in the loyterynge reign of
ydelnesse

They have thought and yet think by their terryble turmoilinges to turn over
all, and to change the most noble enter pryse of our king, A change.
yet ones again laiserlie, to their popes behoue. But the godly wise man
Salomo^ says. There is no polycie, Polycye.
there is no practice, no, there is no counsel that can any thing prevail
against the lord, Prouerbiotu^. xxi. They reckon that with fire, water and
sword they are able to answer all books made against their abuses, and so to
discharge their inuyncyble arguments (for otherwise they have not assoyled
them as yet) but truly they are sore deceived therein, as shall well apere. They
suppose by consumynge of a score or ii. in the fire, they have gotten the field
of the lamb and his host. No field*
Apoca. xvii. No they rather by yt means, add strength thereunto, and so
deminishe their own. I dare boldly say unto them, that by burning Anne
Askewe and her. iii. co^panyons, they have one thousand less of their popish
believe than they hade before. They think also by condempninge and burninge our
books, to put us to silence. But that will sureli bring double upon them, if
they be not ware. Apoc. xviii. For if we should be still, the very stones
would speak in these days. Luc. xvi. And detect their horrible treason
against God and the king.

If they mind to hold their ydell offices still, and here after to have
profyghte of their old sale wares, as Diriges, Masses, and soche other. My
counsel were that they did by them, Counsel.
as they now do by their pope the great mastre and first founder of them. A
subtyle silence is among them concerning him, Silence
and has been ever syns his first putting down. Ye shall not now hear a
word spoken against him at Paul's cross, nor yet against his old iuglynge
feats. And in deed it is a good wise way to set him up again. Wynchester and
Sampson made a little brag at the beginning, to seem yet to do sumwhat, but
sens they have repented, and made a large ame^des for it other ways Fryre
Peryn began to write in defense of their monstruouse Mass, Perryn.
but now of late days, and he can not find there in one blasphemouse abuse
iustlye to be reprehended. Men say there be craftye knaves abroad in the
world in all ages Well, this polytyk syle^ce would do well also paraue^tur i^
other matters. take heed.
For the more ruffelynges they make, and the more murder they do, for that
ydell kingdom of theyrs, the more clear ye veryte apereth, and the more vile
their sorcerouse wares. For the more dyrt be shaken (they say) the more it
stynketh.

So outragyously to rail in their preachynges, of the noble and learned
Germans (which of al nations loves our king most intyerlye) for secludynge
their pope and chaunginge their masses they do not most wisely for themselves
They are not so ill beloved of their cou^treie merchants, Germans.
which customabli travail thither, but they know what is there both said and
done against the^. By yt means came Peryns book of his. iii. most ydolatrouse
and foxysh sermons, Peryns sermons.
first of al to my hands. Wherein he rhetoricallye calls them, in the hot
zele of his Romysh father, the erronyouse Germans, subtyle witted heretykes,
obstynate adversaries, new fangled expositours perverse sacrame^taryes,
blasphemouse apostataes, wicked wretches, deuylysh liars, lewd lyuers, and
abhomynable beleuers, with soch other like, But certaynelye I know, that they
will one day be eue^ with him and with other like apes of Antichrist, for it.
Wynchestre
Wha^ the popes great da^synge bear, a proud pra^kynge prelate of there is, was
the last year with the emprour Charles at his fourth going against the said
Germans, his bragginge begles were not ashamed to boast it in the open streets
of Vtrecht in Hollande, that the pope should again have his full swaye in
England. Of a lykely hode they know there, some secret mysteries in
workynge. I say yet, be ware of that subtyle generacio^, which seeks not else
but to work all myschefe.

Gentyl and soft wits are often times offended, that we are now a days so
vehement in rebukes. But this would I feign know of them, what modestye they
would use (as they call it) if they were compelled to fight with dragons
hyders, modesty.
and other odyble mo^sters. How paycye^t they would be and how gentil if a
ravenous wolf came upon the^, they having able weapon to put him a side
Surely I know no kind of Christen charity to be showed to the devil. Of non
other nature is Moses serpent, but to eat up the serpents of Pharaoes
sorcerers. Exo. vii. If we did suffer any longar the oak grove of Baal to
stand about the aultre of the lord, Oak grove.
we should much offend his commandment, Iudi. vi. If I should hold my
peace, and not speak in this age, the verite so blasphemed, my conscience
would both accuse me and condemn me of the vnconsyderaunce of my lord God.
More precyouse is the thing which is in daily controuersye and parell (which
is now Gods true honor) than is al this worlds treasure here. Co^scye^ce.
What Christen heart can abide it, to se the creature yea not of God but of man,
to be worshypped in the stead of God, and say nothing therein?

Solomon says, there is as well a time to speak, as a time to keep silence,
and a time as well to hate, Hate them
as a time to love. Ecclesiast. iii. With a perfyght hate, lord (says David)
have I hated those blood thursty enemies, which were in they presumpcion
against the, Psalm. cxviii. Strongly and with most mighty stomach, are
hypocrytes to be invaded, which will not give place to the veryte. Mark how
myghtelye Moses resysted Pharao, Examples.
Helyas king Achab, Helyseus Ioram, zachary Ioas Daniell the ydolaters, Johan
Baptyst the Pharysees and Herod, Steven the Jews, the Apostles the Bishops
and prestes. Christ rebuked his discyple Peter, and bad him come after him
devil Math. xvi. Yet called he Judas his frinde, Mat. xxvi. Necessary is it
that the elect flock of God, do hate the unclean fowls, which yet hold
their habytacion in Babylon. Apoca. xviii. Ioha^ wycleue and Johan Huse
confess in their writings, Wycleue. and huse.
that they were by strong force inwardlye constrained of God to work against
the great antichrist. Erasmus boldly uttered it, that God for ye euyls of this
latter age, has provided sharp phesycyanes. Quench not the sprete (says S.
Paul) despise not prophecyes. Sprete.
i Thessalon. v. I put my ernest words into thy mouth (said the Lord to
Hieremye) that thou should both destroy and build. Hieremye. i Let this
suffice ye concerning our rebukes, for they are Gods enemies who^ we invade

If ye perceive it and feel it on the other side, that the waves of the sea are
great also, and does horryblye rage in these days, Waves.
Psa. xcii. Considre again (says David) that the Lord which dwells on
high, is a great deal myghtyer than they. As he is of power to cease the storm
and to make the wether caulme, Psalm. cvi. So is he able to change a kings
indignacion (which is but death) into most peaceable fauer and loving
gentylnes. Pray and obey.
Prouerbiorum xvi. For the heart of a king is evermore in the hand of God, and
he may turn it which way he will, Prove. xxi. His eternal pleasure it is,
that ye should honor your king as his immediate mynyster concerning your
bodies and lives i. Petri. ii. and that ye should with all gentylnesse obey the
temporal rulers. Romano. xiii. But such spiritual hypocrites, both Bishops
and prestes, as are continual haters of his heavenly verite, Abhor
would he that we should hold for most detestable apostates and blasphemouse
reprobates, as did Christ and his Apostles which never obeyed them, but most
sharpelye rebuked them. Matthei xxiii. Acto. xx. and. ii. Pet. xi. The grace of
that lord Jesus Christ, be ever with the^, which ryghtly hate that sinagoge
of Satan, as did Anne Askewe. Amen

God stands by the generacyon of the ryghteouse.

Psalm. xiii.
Thus ends the first examynacion of Anne Askewe, latelye done to death by
the Romyshe popes malycious remnaunte, and now canonysed in the preciouse
blood of the lord Jesus Christ. Imprynted at Marpurg in the land of Hessen, in
Nouembre. Anno. 1546.
The voice of Anne Askewe out of the. 54. Psalm of David, called. Deus in
nomine tuo.
FOr thy names sake, be my refuge.
And in thy truth, my quarrel judge
Before the (Lord) let me be hard
And with fauer my tale regard
Loo, faythles men, against me rise,
And for thy sake, my death practyse,
My life they seek, with main and might
Which have not the, before their sight
Yet helpest thou me, in this distress,
Saving my soul, from cruelnesse.
I wot thou wylt revenge my wrong,
And vysyte them, ere it be long.
I will therefore, my whole heart bend
Thy gracious name (Lord) to commend.
From evil thou have, delivered me,
Declarynge what, mine enemies be.
Praise to God.
Who so ever lives, and believes in me shall never dye.

Joan. xi. He that hears my words, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into dampnacyon, but pass from death
unto life.

Joan. v.
The latter examynacyon of Anne Askewe latelye martyred in Smythfelde, by the
wicked Sinagoge of Antychrist, with the Elucydacyon of Johan Bale.

Psalm. cxvi. The verite of the lord endures for ever

Anne Askewe stood fast by this verite of god to the end.

I will pour out my sprete upon all flesh (says God) your sons and your
daughters shall prophecye. And who so ever call on the name of ye Lord shall be
saved Iohel. ii.

Johan Bale to the Christen Readers.
IN the primative church, as the horible persecucyons increased, many dylige^t
writers collected the godly answers and tryumphau^te sufferinges of the
martyrs, as necessary examples of Christen constancye to be followed of other.
Of this nombre was Lucas, which wrote the Apostles acts So were after him
Linus, Marcellus, Egesippus, Meliton Asianus, Abdias Babilonius, Writers.
Josephus Antiochenus, Clemens Alexau^drinus, Antherus, Phileas, Eusebius,
Nicephorus, and a great sort more, Fabianus, not a chair Bishop, but a
pulpet Bishop of Rome, ordained in his time for that only office vii. deaco^s
and so many notayres, about the year of our lord. CC. XXXVI. that they
should faithfully regestre their martyrdomes, notaireye.
to hold the^ in contynual remembrance, as witnesses Platina Polydorus,
Masseus, and soch other chronyclers. No les necessary is that office now though
few me^ attempt it, nor no less profitable to ye christian common welthe than
it was in those terryble days. For now are persecucions all Christendom over,
so well as were than. Martyrs.
Now are ye true Christians vexed of the sitting Bishops for their Christen
believe, so well as tha^. Now are they reviled, punyshed, imprisoned and have
all evil spoken against them for Christ's verites sake. Math. v. so well as
than.

And what can be more confortable to the sufferers, Sufferers
than to know the ernest constancye of their troubled companyons in that
kingedome of patience? Apo. i. or to mark in them the strong workynge of
faith, and behold the mighty mageste of God in their agonies? what though
they were before, sinners of the world. Saint Barnard says in his homelyes
upon Salomons cantycles, Bernardus,
that the godly sufferaunce of martyrs has given as good erudycyon to the
christen church, as ever did the doctrine of the saints. Than is it mete that
some besterynge, and not that all men in these days be ydell concerning that
godly office. Many have suffered in this realm of late years, Barnes and
other.
by the bold calling on of Antichrists furyouse advocates, whose lattre
confessyons, causes, and answers, are a great deal more notable and godly, if
they be ryghtlye wayed, than ever were the confessyons, causes and answers of
the old canonysed martirs which in the popes Englysh church have had so many
solempnitees, services, and sensinges. Reca^ters.
Many have also most desperately recanted through their most wicked
persuacions and threttenynges in whose vain recantacio^s are both to be seane,
their blasphemies against God, and manifest treasons against their king.

Now in conferring these martyrs, the old with the new, and the popes with
Christ's. I seclude first of all the Brytayne church, or ye primative church
of this realm, which never had autoryte of ye Romish pope. Brytayne church.
Her martirs in deed were agreeable to that Christ spoke a fore in the Gospel
concerning his martyrs, whereby we should know the^, as we euydentlye find in
the lives of Emerita king Lucyes sister, Amphibalus, Albanus, Aaron, Julius,
Dionothus, and soche other. I send you forth (says he) as sh^pe among
wolves. Me^ shall deliver ye up in their counsels and sinagoges. Christ.
Ye shall be brought before rulers and kings, and be hated of all men in a
manner for my names sake, Mathei x. Cast not before in your minds what answer
to make. For I in that hour shall give ye both vtteraunce and wisdom, which al
your adversaries shall not be hable to withstand, Luce xxi. They shall
excommunycate you or conde^pne you for heretics. Yea, Bishops.
they shall bring you in soch hate of the world, that who so ever kills you,
will think he does God great good service. And this shall they do because they
know rightly neither father nor yet me, Johan. xvi.

Many other like sentences left ye lord Jesus Christ in his holy Gospel, yt
we should always by the^ discern his true martyrs, from the popes and
Mahomettes cou^terfet martyrs. In England here sens the first pla^tacion of ye
popes Englysh church, Englysh church.
by Augustine and other Romish monks of Benettes supersticio^, ii. kinds of
martyrs has been, One of monasterye buylders and chaunterye founders, whom the
temporal princes and secular magystrates have dyuerslie done to death, sumtyme
for disobedience, and sumtyme for manifest treason, as we have of Wallenus of
Crowland, Martyrs.
Thomas of Lancaster, Richard Scrope, Becket and soch other. The images of
these have been set up in their temples, like the old Gods of the paganes, and
have had their vigyls, holy days, ringinges, sacrifisi^ges, ca^dels
offeri^ges, feasti^ges, and much a do besides, as they had. The other sort were
preachers of the Gospel, Other martyrs.
or poor teachers thereof i^ corners, wha^ the persecucio^ was soche, that it
might not be taught abroad. And these poor sowles, or true servants of God,
were put to death by the holy spiritual fathers Bishops, prestes, monks,
chanons, and friars, for heresye and lollerye, they say. These Christen
martyrs were never sole^pnysed of them. No, they had not so much as a penny
dirge or a grote mass of Requiem, No dyrge
no more tha^ had Johan Baptyst and Steven among the Jews. But they have been
holden for condemned heretykes ever sens.

Who ever heard any goodness yet reported of Dionothus with his M. and CC.
companyous, Augustine
whom Augustyne can sed to be slain at Westchestre in his churches beginning,
because they would not preach as he did apoynt the^, nor baptyse after the
Romysh manner, neither yet hallow the Eastre feast as they did. Many a blessed
creature, both men and women, have been bre^t sens Johan Wycleues time and a
fore, Wycleue.
for only disclosynge the pharysees yokes and teaching the Gospels liberte.
And the^ have that bawdye bloody Synagoge of Satan dyffamed, blasphemed,
conde^pned, execrated and cursed to hell as most detestable heretykes and
dogs. Where as if they were of Christ, they ought (in case they were their
haters or enemies) to suffer the^, Suffer.
to say well of them, to do them good, and to pray for them. Math. v. Luce.
vi. and not thus to use more tyranny over them than ever did Saracene, Turk,
Tirau^t or devil. A great dyfference is there of the martyrs whom they make,
from the martyrs whom they canonyse. Of them whom they dampne, Difference of
martyrs.
from them whom they worshypp, yea so great a difference or dyuersyte betwine
them (if ye mark them well) as is betwyxt gold and dyrt, or light and
darkness.

The martyrs, Martyrs.
whose deaths they have procured by all ages of their bloud-thursty church,
harkned unto Christ, healde of ryghtousnesse, and sought their lord God in
sprete, Esa. li, but the martyrs for the most part, whom they have with so
many latyne wawlynges, torches and candell burnynges, magnyfyed in their
temples, harkened to the pope, healde of his vnrightousnesse, and sought out
his superstycyouse ydolatryes. Compare.
In the conferring of their old canonysed martyrs, with our newly condemned
martyrs here. Anne Askewe and her other iii. companyons, with soche like, their
difference will be much more easelie perceived. First let us begin with
Thomas Becket, Becket.
which was so gloryouse a martyr and precyouse advocate of theirs, that they
made his blood equal with Christ's blood and desired to clime to heaven
thereby. Many wonderful miracles could that mitred patron of theirs do in
those days, Miracles
when the monks had fryre Bakons books and knew the bestowynge of fryre
Bo^gaies mystes but now he can do none at al. This Becket in all his
floryshynge doings, harkened to the pope, defended his pompouse kingedome,
supported his churches excess, and wretchedlye dyed for the synnefull
lybertees of the same. Anne Askew and her sort, Right matyrs.
gave dilligent head to their lord Jesus Christ, sought the kingedome of
heaven in daily repentance, mightelye detested all ydolatrouse worshippynges,
and in conclusyon suffered most tryumphaunt death for the same.

Concerning other martyrs. As Wenefrid, otherwise called Boniface an Englysh
monk and archebyshopp of Magunce was slain co^firminge neophytes, Bonifacius
Anglus
or professynge his newly baptized broad to ye Romysh popes obedience. There
was found about him a casket full of rellickes or dead me^nis bones, wha^ he
was put to death in the year of our lord. vii. c. lv. Anne Askewe and here
felyshyp, had none other rellyckes about the^, wha^ they stood at the stake to
be brent in Smythfelde but a bundell of the sacred scriptures enclosed in their
hearts, and redye to be uttered aganist Antichrists ydolatries. Saint Clare of
Orchestre contemninge lawful marryage, Clarus.
made him self an ydel pressed, and was by headed in his own gardene by
procurimente of a woman. S. Clita^ke of Southwales, was in like case stabbed in
with a dagger, Clitancus
because a young maiden loved him. The only true honor of God was it, and no
worldly cause, that Anne Askewe and her company dyed for. Saint Edwyne being
well armed, Edwinus
was slain in battle at Hatfelde in the North, and S. Edward riding a
Huntinge in the forest of Warham in the weast, Edwardus.
was killed upon his horse in drinkinge a cup of wine. And all this was done
for the kyngedomes of this world. The martyrdom of Anne Askewe and her
Brethren, was neither in battelinge nor hunting, riding nor drinking, but
in that right course which Christ prescribed unto his dyscyples under the
cruel Bishops, for his only glory.

Saynet Cadocke of Cowbridge a Bishop, Cadocus.
was pierced through with a spear, as he stood at his Mass at one of the
clock at after non, because he would be of the order of martyrs. Saint
Elphege archebishopp of Caunterburye was stoned to death of the Danes, because
he would not pase them three. M. Mark, in the year of our lord. M. and xii.
Of soch martyrs, much doubted La^francus, Lanfrancus.
which suceeded him in that office about a iiii. score years after, and
disputed thereof with Anselmus. The cause of Anne Askewe and her companions, was
neither madness nor money, but the only sekinge of their lord God right. As
Saint Indract with other devout pilgrims of Rome lay in bed in their inn
at Shapwyck by Blastenbury, Indractus.
their throtes were cut in the night for moneie, which was reckened to be in
their pilgrims scryppes. Saint Iuthware a virgin was behedded also, Iuthwara.
for layenge fresh chese or cruddes whether ye will to her breasts. The cause
of Anne Askewe and her other fellows, conferred with Christ's scriptures
seems a far other matter. Hewalde the black and Hewalde the whyght ii.
Englysh monks, Newaldy duo.
going from place to place with cruettes, chalyce, and superaltare, to do
their daily sacrifices, were done to death in Frislande by the bowers of the
country for teaching a strange relygyon, and are worshypped at Coleyne for
martyrs. For bearing about Christ's testament, which is most heavenly
treasure, Anne Askewe.
and for spredynge ye wholesome doctrine thereof, was Anne Askewe and her sort
bre^t by the prestes procureme^t, yet are they no honor for it.

Osytha runnynge away from her husband, Ositha.
by the intysement of. ii. monks became a professed nonne, and was murdered
of the Danes. Wenefryda by counsel of a pressed, Wenefrida.
dysdaynouslye refusing the marryage of a prince chrystened, lost her head for
it. Maxentia also played a part not al unlike to this. Maxe^tia.
Soch pylde popysh martyrdomes, compared to the martyrdom of Anne Askewe and
her faithful company, is as is rustye iron compared to pure silver. Guilhelmus.
S. William of Rochestre a Scotte, leaving both wife and household, ydly to
trudge on pilgrimage, was strycken in the head with an axe, of his own
companyon by the way. Saint Thomas of Dover a monk was such a wone, Thomas.
as was slain of the french men for hydynge the churches jewels, crosses,
chalyces and copes. No such light corruptible vanytees were they, that Anne
Askewe and her constaunt brethren dyed for, but for the precyouse veryte of
God. Young S. Wyllyam of Norwych, Young Saints
young S Robert of Burye, young S. Hugh of Lyncolne, yo^ge S. Melor of
Cornewayle, yo^g s. Kenelme of Glocestre, young S. Eldrede of Ra^saye and his
brother, with soch other like, were but very babes (they say) and were
martyred of the Jews and of other enemies. Wherefore their martyrdomes shall be
but babysh in co^paryso^ of these ye verite having by the^ so small furtherau^ce

Foillanus and his. iii. brethren, Foillanus.
going homeward in the night, after they had well banketed with S. Gertrude
and her nonnes, were killed in a wod of one murderer, and their horses sold
in the next market town. Iustinanus. S. Dauyes ghostlye father in Wales,
Iustinanus.
was slain in a gardene of his iii. monks, because he compelled them to do
more labor than he would do his self. After Kilianus was come home from
Rome, Kilianus
he was murdered in his selle with other holy pilgrims by a woman, as they
lay there a sleep in the night. Saint Vrsula also and her she pilgrims,
Vrsula.
with their chaplaynes, nurses, and suckyng babes were but homely handeled at
Coleyne of the hunnes and pietes (if that legende be true) as they were
coming homewardes from Rome. Compare me Anne Askewe and her condemned
company, with these clowted, canonysed, solempnysed, sensed, matrensed, and
massed, martyrs, Prove the ipretes.
and tell me by the Gosples trial, which of them seem most Christenlyke
martyrs. Yea, bring saint Edmound of Burye, saint Fremu^d of Dunstable,
saint Ethelbert of Herforde, S. Oswalde of Glocestre, saint Oswyne of Tynmoth,
and Saint Wynstane of Euesham (which are the best of the English martyrs) to
the touch stone of Gods word, Edmu^dus. Fremu^dus and other
and ye shall find their martyrdomes and causes full unlike to theyrs whom
the Bishops murder now apace in England.

In all these Englysh martyrs reherced here before, Tokens.
ye shall find very few colors or yet tokens, that Christ said his martyrs
should be known by, on less ye take pylgrimages, po^pes rellyckes, women,
battles, hu^tynges, ydelnes, monkeryes, money, treasure, worldly kingdoms,
contempt of marryage, superstycyo^s and such other vanitees for the^. the
author.
And than will I say, and not lie in it, that ye are much better ouerseane
tha^ learned in the scriptures of God, as your old blind bludderynge
predecessors has been. Ye will axe me here, if I recke^ England tha^ all
barre^ of Christian martyrs: Nay marry do I not. For I know it has had good
store se^s the popes faith came first into England to the Gospels obscuracyo^,
though their names be not known to al me^. Great tyra^nye was showed by ye
heythnysh emprours and kings at the first preaching of ye Gospel in ye
primatyue church of ye brytaynes, Brytannyshe,
by ye cruel calling on of ye pagane prestes. But nothing like to yt has
been showed se^s in ye Englysh church by ye spiritual tyrau^t of Rome and his
mytred termagau^tes, English.
at ye prouocacyo^ of their oyled swylbolles and bli^d Baalamites. For they
most cruellye bre^t those innoce^tes, which did but only read ye testament of
God in their mother runge, and do not yet repent them of that myschefe but
contynewe therein.

If ye mark well these. ii. examinacio^s of Anne Askewe, ye shall find in her
and in her other. Tokens.
iii. co^mpanio^s, besides other who^ the Bishops in our time and before has
bre^t, the express tokens yt Christ seals his martyrs with. They apered as
sheep among wolves. They were thrown in strong preso^. They were brought
forth into counsels and synagoges. Their answers were out of gods spret (as
herin apereth) and not out of their own. Answers.
They were reuyled, mocked, stocked, racked, execrated, condemned, and
murdered, as is said before. By a spiritualte also, as he promised they should
be. Mat. xxiii. and xxiiii. Yea, those spiritual tyrauntes besides their mortal
malice upon the innocent bodies, Tyrau^tes
have most blasphemouslye uttered in their spyghtful sermons and writings,
that their sowles are dampened, as is to be seane in the books of winchestre and
Peryn. Winchostre Peryn.
But let them be ware lest they dampne not their own wretched souls. For full
sure we are by Christ's strong promise. Luce. xii. That their sowles they can
not harm with all their popes black curses. Full swetelye rest they now in the
peace of God, where their slanderous and malyciouse judgments can not hurt
them at al Sapi. iii. Let those Epycures pigs dampne them with as many
blasphemouse lies as they can ymagyne, Epycures pigs.
for other armor they have not. And we shall on the other side canonyse the^
again with the mighty words and promises of Christ, which they shall never be
hable to resist. The father of our lord Jesus Christ, grant the light of his
word so to spread the world over that the dark mysces of Satan may clearly be
expelled, Light.
to the special conforte of his redeemed Church, and glory of his eternal
name. Amen.

The latter examynacio^ of the worthy servant of God mastres Anne Askewe the
younger goughter of sir Wyllyam Askewe knight of Lyncolne shyre, lately martyred
in Smythfelde by the wicked Synagoge of Antichrist.
The censure or judgment of Johan Bale thereupon, after the sacred Scriptures
and Chronycles.
Christ wylled his most dear Apostle and secretarye saint Johan the
Evangelist, S. Ioha^.
to signyfye by writing to the ouersear or preacher of the congregation of
Pergamos, that there only are his faithful members murdered, where Satan
inhabyteth or holdethe resydence. And for example he brings forth his
constaunte witness Antipas, which was there most cruellye slain of that
Synagoge of his, for confessing the veryte. Apoca. ii. That Behemoth (says
Job) that Leuyathan, yt Satan, regneth as a most mighty king over all the
spiritual children of pride. Job. xlii A murderer (says Christ to the
spirytualte of ye Jews) and a blasphemouse liar, Satan.
is that father of youres, and has been from the worlds beginning Johan.
viii. These manners has he not yet left, but contynueth them still in his
wicked posteryte.

In the prymatiue church (as testyfyeth Bedas) they persecuted the hears of
Christ's head, Christ's. hears.
which were so pure as the white wolle that is apt to receive al colors,
Apoca. i. They slew those true beleuers which his word and spret had depured
from al false worshyppinges, and made fytte for all trybulacions to be suffered
for his names sake. In these lattre days they meddel with his fete, Christ's
fete.
which are like unto brass, burning as it were in an whote furnace,
Apocalypsis. i. For they that believe now agreably to his word, and not after
their corrupted and cursed customs, are consumed in the fire As here after
will appear, Fire.
by this godly woman Anne Askewe, which with othere more was burnt at London
in the year of our lord a. M. D. XLVI. For the faithful testymonye of Jesus
against Antichrist. Whose lattre handelynge here follows in course, like as I
received it in coppye, Coppye.
by serten duche merchants coming from thens, which had been at their
burning, and beholden the tyrannouse vyolence there showed First out of the
preson she wrote unto a secret frynde of hers, after this manner following.

Anne Askewe.
I do perceive (dear frynde in the Lord) that thou art not yet persuaded
thoroughlye in the truth concerning the Lords supper, because Christ said
unto his Apostles. Christ.
Take, eat This is my body which is given for you. In geuynge forth the
bread as an outewarde sign or token to be received at the mouth, he minded
them in a perfyghte believe to receive that body of his which should dye for
the people, or to think the death thereof, the only health and salvation of
their sowles. The bread and the wine were left us, Bread.
for a sacramental communyon, or a mutual partycypacyon of the inestymable
benefyghtes of his most precyouse death and blood shedynge. And that we
should in the end thereof, be thankful together for that most necessary
grace of our redempcyon. For in the closing up thereof, he said thus. This do
ye, in remembrance of me. Remember.
Yea, so often as ye shall eat it or drink it, Luce xxii. and. i. Corinth. xi.
Else should we have been forgetful of that we ought to have in daily
remembrance and also been altogyther unthankful for it.

Johan Bale.
Agreeable is this woman's doctrine here, Edere and Bibere.
to the scriptures of both testame^tes. Wherein these words Edere and Bybere to
eat and to drink, are often times spiritually taken for Credese, to believe or
receive in faith. The pore (says David) shall eat and be satisfied. All that
seek to please the lord shall praise him, and their sowles shall never perysh,
Psalm. xxi. They that eat me (says the veryte of God) shall hunger more and
more, and they that drink me shall thirst more desirouslie for me. Believe.
Eccles. xxiiii. On less ye eat the flesh of the son of man (says
Christ) and drink his blood, ye can have no life in you, Joan. vi. These
scirptures expound the doctors spyrytuallye, yea, the papystes and al.
Whereas the other iii. Euangelystes, Euangelystes.
Matthew Mark, and Luke, shows nothing else of the lords supper but the
plain historye. Saint Johan writynge last of the^ all, Doctrine.
many festeth there the whole co^plete doctrine and full understanding thereof
after Christ's own instruccyons and meaning. Required it is there, that ye
true receivers thereof, be taught of God, and learned of the heuenlye father and
not of synnefull men's customs.

The work of God, or that pleases God, is not there the putting of bread
into the mouth and bellye, but to believe or exactlye to consydre, Faith.
that Christ dyed for us to cleanse us from sin, to join us into one
mystycall body, and to give us the life everlasting. And that there is none
other but he that can procure us that life. For that which enters the mouth,
feadeth only the body. But that enters faith, feadeth the soul. I am the
living bread (says he) which came down from heaven. He only that believes
in me, Christ.
has ye life everlasting, Ioha^. vi. The sprete is it that quyckeneth, the
fleshely under standing, or only mouth eating, profyteth nothing at all.
Here will an obstynate papyst parauenture say, that we attrybute nothing to
the corporal communyon. Communyon.
Yeas, we reuerentlye, grant, that ryghtlye mynystred after Christ's
instytucyon, it both confirms our faith in the necessary consyderacyons of
his death, and also sturrethe up that brotherlye Christian love which we ought
to have toward our neyber, Love.
besides that this faithful woman has spoken here of it before. And these are
the only fruits which he requires of us in that supper of sacramental
metynge.

Anne Askewe.
Therefore it is mete, that in prayers we call unto God, to grafte in our
foreheades, the true meaning of the holy Ghost concerning this communyon. For
Saint Paul does say that the letter slays. Letter.
The sprete it is only that gives life. ii. Cor. iii. Mark well the vi.
chapitre of Johan, where all is applied unto faith. Note also the fourth
chaptre of Saint Paul's first epistle to the Corynthes, and in the end thereof
ye shall find playnelye, that the things which are seane are temporal, but
they that are not seane are everlasting Yea, look in the third chaptre to the
Hebrews, and ye shall find that Christ as a son and no servant, Christ.
rulethe over his house (whose house are we, and not the dead temple) if we
hold fast the confydence and reioysynge of that hope to the end. Wherefore as
says the Holy Ghost. To day if you shall hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, etc. Psalm. xciiii.

Johan Bale.
By the fore heads understand she the hearts or minds of men, Foreheades.
for so are they taken of S. Ioha^, Apoc. vii. and xxii. I can not think, but
herin she had respect unto the plate of fine gold which the lord commanded
to be set upon Aarons fore head, for the acceptacyon of the people of Israel.
Exodi ii. For here would she all mennys hearts to be endued and lyghtened with
the most pure sprete of Christ, Hearts.
for the understanding of that most holy and necessary co^munyon, the
corrupted dreams and fantasyes of synnefull men set a part. She knew by the
singular gift of the holy Ghost, that they are lyenge masters, procurers of
ydolatrye, and most spytfull enemies to the soul of man, that applies that
office to the corruptyble lips, which belongs to an uncorrupted faith, so
setting the creature that is corruptyble bread, in place of the creator
Christ both God and man, Roma. i. lamenting it with the ryghteouse, at the
very heart rote. And in this she showed her self to be a natural membre of
Christ's mistycall body. A membre
i Cor. xii. relygyouslye careful for her Christen brethren and systerne,
least they should take harm of the popes masmongers.

Anne Askewe.
The sum of my examynacion before ye kings counsel at Grenewyche.
Your request as concerning my preson fellows, Co^panyons.
I am not hable to satysfye, because I heard not their examynacyons. But the
effect of mine was this, I before the counsel, was asked of mastre kyme. I
answered, that my lord chancellor knew all redye my mind in that matter.
They with that answer were not contented, but said, it was the kings
pleasure, Kyme.
that I should open the matter to them. I answered them playnelye, that I would
not so do. But if it were the kings pleasure to hear me, I would show him
the truth. Then they said, it was not mete for the king with me to be
troubled. I answered, that Solomon was reckened the wysest king that ever
lived, Solomon
yet myslyked not he to hear. ii. poor common women, much more his grace a
simple woman and his faithful subject. So in conclusyon, I made them non
other answer in that matter.

Johan Bale.
Concerning master Kyme, this should seem to be the matter. Her father Sir
Wyllyam Askewe knight and his father old master Kyme, Kyme.
were sumtyme of famylyaryte and neybers within the countye of Lyncolne shyre.
Whereupon the said Sir Wyllyam, couenaunted with him for lucre, to have his
eldest daughter married with his son and heir (as an ungodly manner it is in
England much used among noble men) And as it was her chance to dye before the
time of marriage, An use.
to save the money he constrained this to supplye her to wine. So that in the
end she was compelled against her will or fre consent to marry with him.
Notwithstanding the marryage ones paste, she demeaned her self like a
Christen wife, Married.
and hade by him (as I am infourmed) ii. children. In process of time by often
reading of the sacred Bible, she fell clerelye from al old supersticyons of
papystrye to a perfyght believe in Jesus Christ. Whereby she so offended the
prestes (as is to be seane before) that he at their suggestion, vyolentlye drove
her out of his house. Whereupon she thought her self free from that uncomely
kind of coacted marryage, Exyled.
by this doctrine of S. Paul i. Cor. vii. If a faithful woman have an
unbelieving husband, which will not tarrye with her, she may leave him. For a
brother or sister is not in subieccion to soch, specyallye where as the
marryage before is unlawful. Upon this occasion (I hear say) she sought of
the law a diuorceme^t from him, Dyuorcement.
namely and above al, because he so cruellye drove her out of his house in
despyt of Christ's veryte. She could not think him worthy of marryage which
so spyghtfullie hated God ye chief author of marryage. A beast.
Of this mattre was she first examyned (I think) at his instau^t labor and
suit.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord chancellor asked me of my opinion in the sacrament. Sacrament.
My answer was this. I believe, that so often as I in a Christen congregacyon, do
receive the bread in remembrance of Christ's death, and with thanks geuynge
according to his holy institucyon. I receive therewith the fruits also of his
most gloryouse passion. The Byshope of wynchestre bad me make a dyrect
answer. Wynchestre.
I said, I would not sing a new song to the lord in a strange land.

Johan Bale.
Dyrect enough was this answer after Christ's syngle doctrine, but not after
the popes double and couetouse meaning for his oyled queresters advantage.
Answer.
And here was at hand his general advocate or steward, to look upon the
matter, that nothing should perysh perteynynge to the mayntenaunce of his
superstycyous vain glory, if any craftye polycye might help it. What
offended this godly Christen woman here, either in oppinion or faith, ye
cruel and vengeable tyrauntes? Tyrant.
But that ye must (as David says) temper your tunges with venemouse words
to destroy the innocent. Psalm. lxiii. Could you have brought in against her a
matter of more danger concerning your laws, Danger
to deprive her of life, ye would have done it, soch is your gostlye charity.
But be sure of it, as hawtye as ye are now, the hard plage thereof will be
yours, when the great vengeance shall fall for shedynge of innocents blood.
Mat. xxiii.

Anne Askewe.
Then the Bishop said, I speak in parables. Parables
I answered it was best for him. For if I show the open truth (quoth I) ye
will not accept it. Then he said I was a paratte. I told him again, I was
ready to suffer all things at his hands. Not only his rebukes, but all
that should follow besides, yea, and that gladlye. Then had I diverse
rebukes of the counsel because I would not express my mind Rebukes.
in all things as they would have me. But they were not in the mean time
unanswered for all that, which now to rehearce, were to much. For I was with
them there above five hours. v. hours
Then the clearke of the counsel conveyed me from thens to my lady Garnyshe.

Johan Bale.
Most commonly Christ used to speak in dark similitudes and parables, Parables
wha^ he perceived his audyence rather given to the hearing of pharysaycall
constytucyons and customs, than to his heavenly veryte. Mathei. xiii. Marc.
iiii. Luc. vii. which rule this woman being his true dyscyple, forgotte not
here, in co^menynge with this proud Bishop who^ she knew to be always
most obstynat withstander of that wholesome veryte of his. Wynchestre.
And as concerning mockes and scornful reuylynges, Mockers
they have been ever in that generacyon of scorners more plenteouse than good
counsels to the ryghtwyse. And therefore as a name after their condycyons, it is
unto them appropriate of the holy Ghost in many places of the scryptures. In
the lattre days (says Judas the apostle) shall come mockers, walking in
ungodliness all after their own lusts. These are they which separat
themselves from the common sort by a name of spirytualtye, being in
conversation beastlye, and having no sprete that is godly. Hypocrytes.
But derelye beloved (says he) ground your selves surely upon our most holy
faith. etc.

Anne Askewe.
The next day I was brought again before the counsel. Then would they
needs know of me, what I said to the sacrament. Sacrament
I answered, yt I alredye had said that I could say. Then after diverse
words, they had me, go by. Then came my lord Lyle, my lord of Essexe, and
the Bishop of winchester requirynge me ernestlye, Wynchester
that I should confess the sacrament to be flesh, blood and bone Then said
I to my Lord Par and my Lord Lyle, that it was great shame for them to
counsel contrary to their knowledge. Whereunto in few words they did say,
Godly.
that they would gladlye al things were well.

Johan Bale.
Always have the worldelye governors showed more gentylnesse and fauer to the
word of God, Princes*
than the consecrate prestes and prelates. As we have for example in the old
law, that Ezechias the king of Judah would in no case at their calling on, put
Mycheas the true prophet unto death, Micheas.
when he had prophesied the destruction of Samaria for their ydolatrye, and for
the tyranny of their princes and false prophets, Miche. i. and. iii. Neither
would the princes at the prestes headye exclamacyons, murder Hieremye for the
lords verite preaching, Hieremye.
but mercyfullye delivered him out of their malycyous hands. Hieremi. xxvi.
Pylate in like case, Pylate.
concerning the new law, pleated with the Jews spirytualte, to have saved
Christ from the death. Math xxvii. Io. xviii. So did ye captain Claudias
Lisias deliver Paul from their mortal malice, Lisias.
after that the high pressed Ananias had commanded him to be smytten, and his
retynewe co^spired his death, Act. xxiii. At the prestes only prouocacyon was
it, that the heythnysh emprours so greuouslye vexed and tormented the Christen
beleuers in the prymatyue church, Cesares.
as testyfyeth Egesyppus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Esebius, and other old
hystoryanes.

Anne Askewe.
Then the Bishop said, he would speak with me famylyarlye. I said, so did
Judas when he vnfryndelye betrayed Christ Then desired the Bishop to speak
with me alone. Wynchester.
But that I refused. He asked me, why? I said, that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every mattre should stand, after Christ's and Paul's
doctrine. Mathei. xviii. and. ii. Cor. xiii.

Johan Bale.
Did she not (think you) hit the nail on the head, in thus tauntynge this
Bishop? Treason.
yeas. For as great offense does he to Christ, that gives one of his
beleuynge members unto death, as did he that betrayed first his own body.
That ye have done unto those little ones (shall he say at the lattre day)
which have believed in me, ye have done unto mine own person, Christ's.
Math. xxv. Who so touches them (says zacharye) shall touch the apple of
the lords own eye zacha. ii. But this believes not that perverse generation.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord Chauncelloure began to examyne me again of the sacrament.
Sacrament.
Then I axed him, how long he would halte on both sides: Then would he
needs know, where I found that? I said in the scripture. iii. Reg. xviii.
Then he went his way

Johan Bale.
Of Helias the prophet were these words spoken, to the people of Israel, such
time as they halted betwyne. ii. opynio^s or walked vnryghtly betwyne ye true
living god, Halte
and the false God Baal as we do now in England betwyne Christ's Gospel and
the popes old rotten customs. We slenderlye consydre with S. Paul, England
that Christ will have no felyshyppe or concord with Beliall, light with
darkness, ryghtwysnesse with vnryghtwysenes, the temple of God with images, or
the true beleuers with the infydels. ii. Corinth. vi. For all our new Gospel,
yet will we still bear ye strangers yoke with the unbelievers, and so come
neither whote nor cold, that god may spewe us out of his mouth as unsavory
morsels. Tepidi.
Apo. iii. Saying unto us as to the folyshe vyrgynes. Verily I know you not.
Math. xxv.

Anne Askewe.
Then the Bishop said, I should be burnt. Brenne
I answered, that I had serched all the scriptures yet could I never find there
that either Christ or his Apostles put any creature to death. Well, well, said
I God will laughe your threttenynges to scorn. Psalm. ii. Then was I
commanded to stand a side.

Johan Bale.
Among other songs, that the holy scripture gives us to know an Antychrist
by, Antichrist.
it shows that he shall be an aduersarye. ii. These. ii. An insatiable dog,
Esa lvi. A persuynge enemy. psa. iiii. An enemy in the sanctuary, Psalm.
lxxiii. A ravening wolf, To bre^ne.
Mat. vii. Luce x. Ioha^. x. Acto. xx. And a most cruel murderer, Dani. xi.
Johan xvi. Apoc. xiii. Unto soche (says S. Johan) is it given to vex me^ with
heat of fire. Apo. xvi. The wickedness of prestes (says Hiere.) shedeth
innoce^tes blood. Yea (say they) ye must be bre^t, ye must dwell among ye
gentiles. Treno iiii. Or be committed to prison of ye wordli powers, and so put
unto death by the^. We maruele not therefore though these parts be played of
proud Bishops. Prestes.
Co^sydering ye holy Ghost must be found true in his foriudgeme^tes, and that
some there must be to do the feats. But truly did this woman conclude with the
prophecye of David, Psalm ii. God laugheth
That God which dwells in heaven shall have their tyranny in deryson, and
bring all their wicked counsels to naught, in the clear opening of his word,
have they never so many painted colors of false rightwysnesse.

Anne Askewe
Then came mastre Pagette to me, and desired me to speak my mind to him. I
might (he said) deny it again, if need were. I said, that I would not
deny the truth. He asked me, how I could avoid the very words of
Christ. Take, eat, This is my body, which shall be broken for you. I
answered, that Christ's meaning was there, Christ's meaning
as in these other places of the scripture. I am the door Joan. x. I am the
vine. Joan xv. Behold the lamb of God Johan. i. The rock stone was Christ.
i. Cor. x. and soche other like. Ye may not here (said I) take Christ for
the materyall thing that he is sygnyfyed by. Sygnyfye.
For than ye will make him a very door, a vine, a lamb, and a stone, clean
contrary to the holy Ghostes meaning. All these in did do sygnyfye Christ,
like as the bread does his body in that place. And though he did say
there. Take, eat this in remembrance of me. Remembrance.
Yet did he not bydde them hang up that bread in a box, and make it a God,
or bow to it.

Johan Bale.
Much ado is here made, and many subtyl ways are sought out, to bring this
woman into their corrupted, Idolatrye.
and false believe, that the corruptyble creature made with hands, might
stand in place of the eternal creatore or maker God and man for the prestes
advantage. But all is in vain. In no case would he so accept it. Nothing
less minded Christ, than to dwell in the bread, Not in bread,
or to become a feadinge for the body, when he said. Take, eat. This is my
body. For a contrary doctrine he taught his dyscyples the year before his
last supper, as we have in the vi. chaptre of Johan Where as he declares his
flesh to be a spirtiuall meare, his blood a spiritual drink, and both the^
to be received in faith, the bread and the wine remaining as signs of his
everlasting covenant. Reason is it that he rather be judged the receyuer
which lives in that refeccyon than he which lives not thereby. Which is the
soul and not the body. The eater
What neaded Christ to have given to those bodies a new body lie feadynge,
which were suffycyently fed before with the pass over lamb? If he had not
meant therein some other manner of thing?

But he sufficie^tlye enough declares his own meaning, Luce xxii. Where he
commands us to do it in his remembrance, and not to make him again by
blowynge upon the bread. This sacramental eating and drinking in his
remembrance, Remembrance.
S. Paul more largely declares, i. Cor. xi. So often (says he) as ye shall
eat of that bread and drink of that cup, ye shall show the lords death
till he come. Till he come.
If ye earnestly mark that lattre clause (till he come) ye shall well perceive
that his bodilye presence in the bread, is utterly denied there. More over in
the before said xxii. chaptre of Luke, because we should not be to scrupulose,
Christ shows what that wine and bread of his supper were, yea, as he left
the^ there, eue^ i^ these words. I say unto you (says he) that hens forth I
shall not drink of this fruit of the vine (or eat of this fruit of wheat)
till the kingdom of God be come, Fruit of the vine.
or till I drink it new with you in my fathers kingedome, Math. xxvi. Marci.
xiiii. Here calls it he ye iuse of ye grape or fruit of the vine, and not the
blood yssuynge from his body. Yet is that cup (as S. Paul says) the
partakynge of Christ's blood, and the bread that we break there, the
partakynge of Christ's body, Partakynge.
i. Corint xi. But that is in faith and sprete, as before in Johan.

Anne Askewe.
Then came to me doctor Coxe, and doctor Robynson. Coxe and Robynso^
In conclusion we could not agree. The^ they made me a byll of the sacrament,
willing me to set my hand thereunto, but I would not. Then on the sunday I
was sore sick, thinking no less than to die. Therefore I desired to speak
with Latimer it would not be. The^ was I sent to Newgate in my extremyte of
syckenesse. For in all my life before, newgate
was I never in soche pain. Thus the lord strengthen you in the truth. Pray,
pray pray.

Johan Bale.
What an hurly burlye is here, for this new believe? that Christ should dwell
in the bread, In bread.
which is mannys creature and not gods, Christ is the living bread which
came from heaven, Johan. vi. But that is not sufficye^t (say the prestes) on
less ye believe also, that he is that dead bread which came from ye waffer
bakers And theru^to must ye set your own hand writynge, A waffer
else will it not be allowed in the spirytuall court. For he that speaks
great things and blasphemies (which is Antichriste) making war with the
saints, antychrist
will have it so, Apo. xiii. In the Apostles time, and many years after, it
was enough for a chryste^ ma^n is ryghtwysnesse, to believe with the heart, that
Jesus is the lord, and that God raised him up from the dead. Roma. x. But now
we must believe that he comes down again at the will of the prestes, to be
inpaned or inbreaded for their bellyes common welthe, Inpaned
like as he before came down, at the will of his heuenlye father, to be
incarnated or infleshed for our universal sowles health. And unto this we must
set our hand writynge, that we may be known for Antichrists catrell. Else
shall we to stinkynge Newgate by their spyrytuall appointment, newgate.
be we never so sick, and with in a while after, to the fire in Smythfelde.
For Christ's member must taste with him both esell and gall.

Anne Askewe. The confession of me Anne Askewe, for the time I was in Newgate
concerning my believe.
I find in the scriptures (says she) that Christ took the bread, Bread.
and gave it to his dyscyples, sainge, Eat. This is my body, which shall be
broken for you, meaning in substance his own very body, the bread being
thereof an only sign or sacrament. For after like manner of speaking, he
said he would break down the temple, and in iii. days build it up again,
sygnyfyenge his own body by the temple, Temple.
as, Saint Johan declares it. Ioa^ ii. And not the stonye temple it self. So
that the bread is but a remembrance of his death, or a sacrament of thanks
geuynge for it, whereby we are knytte unto him by a communyon of Christen love.
Although there be many that can not perceive the true meaning thereof, for the
veil that Moses put over his face before the children of Israel, Moses veil
that they should not se the clerenesse thereof, Exo. xxxiiii. and ii. Cor. iii.
I perceive the same veil remains to this day. But wha^ God shall take it a
way, than shall these blind men se.

Johan Bale.
Ye will say parauenture, that the symplitudes here of bread and of the
temple, are not like. For he blessed the bread with thanks geuynge. So will
ye say, an other time for your pleasure and advantage, that he blessed the
temple also, Blessed
and called it both the house of his father, and also the house of prayer. I
pray ye, be as good here to your market place, as ye are to your sale wares
therein, for your only bellyes sake. For ye one will not do well to your
commodyte in ydelnesse, without the other. But take good head of it, if ye
list. Temple.
For christ has alredye called one of them an house of merchaundyse and a
den of thieves, by reason of your unlawful occupyenge therein, Joan. ii. and
Luce xix. He has also promised to overthrow it, Math. xxiiii. and not to
leave one stone thereof standing upon an other, Marci. xiii. Because ye have not
regarded the time of your vysytacyon, or not accepted his eternal word of
health. A warning might the turnynge over of your monasteryes have been unto
you, warning
if ye were not, as ye are altogyther blind.

I can not think the contrary but he calls the other also, as ye handle it
now a days in the popes old toys of conueyaunce, the abhomynacion of
desolacyon, or soche an abomynable ydoll as subuertynge Christ's true religyon.
The mass
will be your fynall destruccyon both here and in the world to come. For
ydolles are called abhomynacyo^, Idolles.
all the scriptures over. Yet shall it endure (say the Daniel) sumwhere, unto
the end of al Daniel. ix. Whereby ye may well perceive, that it comprehendethe
not only the tryumphaunt stremers of Tyberius or golden images of Caligula,
Tyberius Caligula.
which both prevented the subuersyon of Jerusalem, but some other ydolles
which should contynewe. And it folowethe in the Gospel text, that he should
sytte in the holy place for the time of his contynuaunce. Mathei. xxiiii. And
not in the paganes temples. Tell me if your Masses be done any where else,
Masses.
than in your hallowed sanctuaryes, upon your sanctified aulters, and in your
holy ornaments and consecrate cups? Neither may any do them, unless they be
anointed thereunto of your Bishops and sorcerers.

Not without the holy place (sayth-Christ) is that abhomynacyon, but in it,
Mathei. xxiiii. Antichriste (says saint Paul) shall sit, Antichrist
not without, but within the very temple of God. ii. Thessalo ii. The papacye
is not without, but within the very church of Christ, what though it be no
part thereof. Apoca. xi. Therefore it shall be mete that we be ware, and separate
our selves from them at the admonyshmentes of his hoolye doctrine, Shurns
them.
least we be partakers with you in their promised dampnacio^. Apoca. xviii. By
the veil over Moses face, she means the blind confydence that many men yet
have in old Iewysh ceremonies and beggarlye tradycions of men, as S. Paul
does call them, The vails
Gala. iiii. Whereby ye veryte of God is sore blemished. The spiritual knowledge,
which comes by the clear doctrine of the Gospel, mynystreth no soch
impedymentes of darkness. Darkness.
But all things are clerelye seane to them which are endued therewith. They can
be deceived by none of Satan's subtyle conuayers, but perceyueth all things,
which have obtained the pure eyes of faith. Sight.


Anne Askewe.
For it is playnelye expressed in the hystorye of Bell in the Bible, that God
dwellethe in nothing materyall. O king (says Daniel) be not deceived
Daniel. Daniel.
xiiii. For God will be in nothing that is made with hands of men. Actor.
vii. Oh what styffnecked people are these, that will always resyste the hoolye
Ghost. But as their fathers have done, so do they, because there have stonye
hearts. Written by me Anne Askewe that nether wyshe death, Strength
nor yet fear his might, and as merye as one that is bowne toward heaven.
Truth is laid in prison. Luce. xxi. The law is turned to worm wood. Amos.
vi. And there can no right judgment go forth, Esaias. lix.

Johan Bale.
Mark here how graciouslye the lord keeps promise with this poor servant
of his. Promise.
He that beleuethe on me (says Christ) out of his bellye shall flow ryuers
of living water. Ioa. vii Neither lasheth this woman out in her extreme
troubles, language of despair nor yet blasphemouse words against God with
the unbelieving, but utters the scriptures in wonderful habundaunce to his
lawde and praise. She rebukes here the most pestylent vice of ydolatrye.
Faith.
Not by old narracions and fables, but by the most pure word of God as did
Daniel and Steven. And in the end she shewethe the strong stomach of a
most Christen martyr, in that she is neither desyrouse of the death,
neither yet stands in fear of the vyole^ce or extremyte thereof What a
constancye was this of a woman, frail, A martyr
te^dre young and most delycyouslye brought up? But that Christ's sprete was
mighty in her who bad her be of good cher. For though the tyrauntes of this
world have power to fleye the body, Tyrau^tes
yet have they no power over the sowles. Matthei. xx. Nether have they power in
the end to demynyshe one hear of the head, Luce. xxi.

She faynteth not in the mids of ye battle. i. Corint. ix. But perseuerethe
strong and stedefast to the very end. Stedefast
Mathei. x. Not doubting but to have for her faithful perseuerau^ce, the
crown of eternal life. Apoc. ii. So merry am I (says she good creature, in
the mids of Newgate) as one that is bowne toward heaven. A voice was this
of a most worthy and valeaunt witness, in the paynefull kyngedome of patience
Apocalip. i. Valcaunt.
She faithfullye reckened of her lord God, that he is not as men are fyckle,
Numeri. xxiii. But most sure of word and promise, Psalm. cxliiii. And that he
would most faithfully keep conuenaunt with her, when time should come. Apoca.
ii. She had it most grou^dedlye planted in her heart, that though heaven and
earth did pass, yet could not his words and promise pass by vnfulfylled.
Faith.
Lu. xxi. Ashamed may those carnal Helchesytes be, Helchesytes.
which have not on lie denied the verite of their lord god, but also most
shamefullye blasphemed, and dishonored both it and themselves for the
pleasure of a year or. ii. to dwell still in this flesh. They consider not,
that he, with whom they mock, has power to send them to hell for their
blasphemye. Luce. xii. They shall not find it a matter light, for their
inconstancye to be vometed out of the mouth of God as unsavory morsels.
Apocalypsis. iii Neither shall they prove it a Christmas game, to be denied of
Christ before his heavenly father and his angels, In constaunt.
for denyenge here his verite. Math. x.

Anne Askewe.
Prayer.
Oh forgive us all our sins and receive us gracyouslye. As for the works of
our hands. we will no more call upon them. For it is thou lord that art our
God. Thou sheweste ever mercy unto the fatherles. Oh if they would do this
(says the Lord) I should heal their sores, yea with all my heart would I
love them. O Ephraim, Ephraim.
what have I to do with ydolles any more Who so is wise, shall understand
this. And he that is ryghtlye enstructed, will regard it. For the ways of the
Lord are ryghteouse. Soche as are godly will walk in them. And as for the
wicked, they will stomble at them. Osee. xiiii.

Johan Bale.
All these words alleged she out of the last chaptre of Oseas the prophet,
Oseas.
where as he prophesied the destructyon of Samaria for the only vice of
ydolatrye. In the word of the lord, she declares her self therein, to detest
and abhor that vice above all, and to repent from the heart, that she has
at any time worshypped the works of men's hands, Ydolatrie
either stone, wode, bread, wine, or any soche like, for the eternal living
God. Consequently she confessyth him to be her only God, and that she had at
that time trust in non other else, nether for the remyssion of her sins, nor
yet sowles comfort at her need. And like soch a wone as is unfeignedly
converted unto the lord, she axethe of the spyritual Ephraimytes in his word,
Ephraimytes.
what she has any more to do with ydolles? or whyether mind so tyrannouslye
enforce her to the worshyppynge of them? considering that he so ernestly
abhors them Fynallye. ii. sorts of people she reckeneth to be in the world,
ii. sorts.
and shows the diverse manner of them. The one in the sprete of Christ
obeys the word, the other in the sprete of error co^tempneth it. And like
as S. Paul does say To the one part is it, the savor of life unto life and
to the other, the savor of death unto death. ii. Corinth. ii.

Anne Askewe.
S. Steue^.
Solomon (says saint Steven) builded an house for the God of Jacob. How be yt
the hyeste of all dwells not in temples made with hands. As says the
prophet. Esaye. lxvi. Heaven is my seat and the earth is my footstool What
house will ye build for me? says the Lord, or what place is it that I shall
rest in? has not my hand made al these things? Actorum. vii. Temple.
Woman believe me (says Christ to the Samaritane) the time is at hand that ye
shall neither in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem worship the father. Ye
worship ye wot not what, but we know what we worship. Worship.
For salvation comes of the Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, wherein
the true worshyppers shall worshype the father in spirit and veryte. Ioannis.
iiii. Labor not (says Christ) for the meat that perysheth, Meat.
(...) for that endures into ye life everlasting, which the son of man
shall give you. For him god the father has sealed, Johan. vi.

Johan Bale.
Here bring she. iii. strong testymonyes of the new testament, to confirm
her own Christen believe therewith and also both to confute and condemn the
most execrable heresy and false filthy believe of the papystes. 3. bulwerkes.
The first of them proves, that the eternal God of heaven, will neither be
wrapped up in a clowte, nor yet shut up in a box. The second declares,
that in no place of the earth, is he to be sought, neither yet to be
worshypped, but wythyn us, in sprete and veryte. The third of the^ concludes,
that Christ is a feadynge for the soul and not for the body. More over he is
soche a meat, as neither corrupts, mouldeth, nor perishes, neither yet
consumethe or wastes away in the bellye. ^omystes.
Let not the Romysh popes remnaunt in England think, but in condempnynge
the faith of this godly woman, they also condemyne the veryte of the lord,
unless they ca^ discharge these iii. textes of the scripture with other iii.
more effectual. As I think, they shall not, nisi ad Calendas Grecas. If they
allege for their part, the saying of Christ, Math. xxiiii. Lo here is Christ,
Lo, here, Se there.
or there is Christ. They are confounded by that which follows. Wherein he
ernestlye charge his faith full folowers not to believe it, calling the
teachers of soch doctrine, false anointed deceyuable prophets, and sorcerouse
work men. Marci. xiii.

Anne Askewe. The sum of the condempnacyon of me Anne Askewe. at yield hawle.
They said to me there, that I was an heretyke and condemned by the law,
Heretyke
if I would stand in my opinion. I answered that I was no heretyke, neythere
yet deserved I any death by the law of God. But as concerning the faith
which I uttered and wrote to the counsel, I would not (I said) deny it
because I knew it true. Then would they needs know, if I would deny the
sacrament to be Christ's body and blood: Sacrament.
I said, yea. For the same son of God, that was borne of the vyrgyne Marie
is now gloriouse in heaven and will come again from thens at the lattre day
like as he went up. Acto. i. And as for that ye call your God, is but a piece
of bread. For a more proof thereof (mark it when ye list) let it lie in the
box but iii. months, Moulde in the box.
and it will be moulde, and so turn to nothing that is good. Whereupon I am
persuaded, that it can not be God.

Johan Bale.
Christ Jesus the eternal son of God, was condemned of this generation for
a sedicyouse heretyke, Christ condemned
a breaker of their sabbot, a subuerter of their people a defyler of their
laws, and a destroyer of their temple or holy church, Joan. vii. Luce xxiii.
Mathei. xxvi. Mar. xiiii, and suffered death for it at their procuremente, by
the law than used. Is it than any maruele, if his inferior subject here, and
faithful membre do the same, Membre
at the cruel calling on and vyolent vengeance of their posteryte? No, no,
the servant must follow her mastre, and the foot her head, and may be
found in that point no better tha^ he, Joan. xiii. Saint Augustine diffynynge
a sacrament, calls it in one place, Sacrament.
a sign of an holy thing. In an other place a vysyble shape of an inuisyble
grace. Whose office is to instruct, anymate, and strengthen our faith
toward God, and not to take it to it self, and so depryue him thereof.
Christ's body and blood are neither signs nor shadows, no signs
but the very effectual things in did, signified by those figures of bread
and wine. But how that dry and corruptyble cake of theirs should become a God,
many men wonder now a days in the light of the Gospel, like as they have
done before time also. And specially why the the wine should not be accepted and
set up for a God also so well as the bread, the wine
considering that Christ made so much of the one as of the other.

Anne Askewe.
After that they wylled me to have a priest. And than I smyled. Then they asked
me, if it were not good? I said, I would confess my fawtes to God, Confess.
for I was sure that he would hear me with fauer. And so we were condemned
without a queste.

Johan Bale.
Prestes of godly knowledge she did not refuse. For the knew that they are the
massengers of the lord, Teachers
and that his holy words are to be sought at there mouths, Mala. ii. Of them
she instauntlye desired to be instructyd, and it was denied her, as is written
before. What should she than else do, but return unto her lord God? in whom,
she knew to be habundaunce of mercy for all them which do from the heart
repent. Belles Prestes.
Deutro. xxx. As for the other sort of prestes, she did not amys to laugh both
them and their maynteners to scorn. For so does God also, Psalm ii. And
curses both their absolucyons and blessings, Mala. ii. A thief or a murderer
should not have been condemned without a queste, by the laws of England. But
the faithful members of Jesus Christ, for the spyght and hate that this world
has to his veryte, must have an other kind of tyranny added thereunto,
Tyranny.
besides ye vnryghteouse bestowynge of that law. Do be unto you (says ye
eternal God of heaven by his prophet) or dampnacyo^ be over your heads, that
make wicked laws, Wicked laws.
and devise cruel things for the poor oppressed innocents. Esaie. x Do unto
him that buyldeth Babylon with blood, and maynteyneth that wicked city still
in vnryghtwysnesse. Abacuch. ii. Nahum. iii. Ezech. xxiiii.

Anne Askewe.
My believe which I wrote to the counsel was this. That the sacramental
bread was left us to be received with thanks geuynge, in remembrance of
Christ's death, Remembrance.
the only remedy of our sowles recover. And that thereby we also receive the
whole benefyghtes and fruits of his most gloryouse passion.

Johan Bale.
We read not in the Gospel, that the materyall bread at Christ's holy
supper, was any other wise taken of the Apostles, tha^ thus. Neither yet yt
Christ our mastre and sauer required any other taking of them. If so many
strange doubts had been therein, and so high dyffycultees, as be moved and are
in controuersye among men now a days both papystes and other, they could no
more have been left vndyscussed of him, than other high matters were. Apostles*
The discyples axed here neither how nor what as doubtless they would have
done, if he hade minded them to have taken the bread for him. They thought it
enough to take it in his remembrance, like as he than playnelye taught them,
Luce. xxii. The eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood therein,
Eating.
to the releuynge of their sowles thyrst and hunger, they knew to perteyne
unto faith according to his instruccyons in the vi. of Johan. What have this
godly woman than offended, which neither have denied his incarnacyon nor
death in this her confession of faith, The su^m^ of belefe.
but most firmelye and groundedlye trusted to receive the fruits of them both.

Anne Askewe.
Then would they needs know whether the bred in the box were God or no? O
beastlye ydolaters.
I said God is a sprete and will be worshypped in sprete and truth, Joan.
iiii. Then they demanded. Will you plainly deny Christ to be in the
sacrament? I answered that I believed faythfullye the eternal son of God not
to dwell there. In witness where of I recyted again the hystorye of Bell, O
constaunt martyr.
and the. ix. chaptre of Daniel, ye. vii. and the. xvii. of the Acts, and the.
xxiiii. of Matthew, concludynge thus. I neither wyshe death, nor yet fear his
might, God have the praise thereof with thanks.

Johan Bale.
Among the old ydolaters, some took the su^ne, some the moon, some the fire,
some the water, with soch other like for their Gods, Old ydolaters.
as witnesses Dioderus Siculus, Herodotus, Plynius, Lactantius and diverse
autours more. Now come our dottinge papists here, wadinge yet more deper in
ydolatrye, New ydolaters.
and they must have bread for their God, yea, a waffer cake which is scarce
worthy to be called bread. In what sorrowful case are Christen people now a
days? that they may worshypp their lord and redemer Ihesus Christ in no
shappe that his heavenly father has set him forth in, but in such a shappe
only as the waffer baker has ymagined by his slendre wit. A waffer.
Gods creatures were they whom the ydolaters took for their Gods, but this cake
is only the bakers creature, for he alone made it bread, if it be bread. And
so much is it a more unworthy God than the other. Far was it from Christ to
teach his dyscyples to worship soche a God, either yet to have himself
honored in such a symylytude. The supper.
No thing is here spoken against the most holy table of the lord, but
against that abhomynable ydol of the prestes, which has most detestablye
blemyshed that most godly and wholesome communyon

A gloryouse witness of the lord did this blessed woman shows her self, in
the answer making to this blasphemous beggerye, Answer.
wha^ she said, that god was a sprete and no waffer cake, and would be
worshypped in sprete and veryte, and not in superstycyon and inglynge of the
ydoll prestes. An ydoll.
Godly was she to deny Christ's presence in that execrable ydol but much more
godly to give her life for it. Her alleged scriptures prove, that God dwells
not in temples, but a foul abhomynacyon in his stead, as is showed before. In
that she fears not the power of death, Death.
she declares her self a most constaunt martyr praysynge her Lord God for
his gift. She called to remembrance the promyses of her lord Ihesus Christ,
that they should se no death which observed his word, Joan. viii. Again they
that believed on him should joyfully pass through from death unto life. Johan.
v. And upon these promises, Promises
she most stro^gely trusted. She considered also with Peter, that Christ had
swallowed up death, to make us the heirs of everlasting life. i. Petri, iii.
More over that he had overthrown him which sumtyme had the rule of death.
Hebreorum. ii. And also taken away the sharp stynge of the death it self.
Osee. xiii.

Anne Askewe. My lettre sent to the lord Chancellor.
The Lord God, by whom all creatures have their being, To the Chancellor.
bless you with the light of his knowledge, Amen. My duty to your lordshyppe
remembered etc. It might please you to accept this my bold suit, as the suit
of one, which upon due consyderacions is moved to the same and hopethe to
obtain. My request to your lordeshyppe is only, that it may please the same
to be a mean for me to the kings majesty, The king
that his grace may be certyfyed of these few lines which I have written
concerning my believe. Which when it shall be truly conferred with the hard
judgment given me for the same, I think his grace shall well perceive me to
be wayed in an uneven payer of balaunces. But I remyt my matter and cause to
almyghtye God, To God.
which ryghtlye judges al secrets. And thus I commend your lordeshyppe to
the governance of him, and felyshipp of all saints. Amen. By your handemayde
Anne Askewe.

Johan Bale.
In this byl to the chancellor, apereth it plain, all froward affeccyo^s
sequestered, what this woman was. Strong.
She is not here defected with the desperate, for vnryghteouse handelynge,
mourning, cursynge, and sorowyng, as they do commo^lye. But sta^dynge up
strongely in the lord, most gentyllye she obeys the powers, she blesses her
vexers and persuers and wysheth them the light of Gods necessary knowledge.
Luce. vi. She consydereth the powers to be ordained of God, Romanorum. xiii.
Obedye^t.
And though their autoryte be sore abused, yet with Christ and his Apostles
she humblye submytteth herself to them thinking to suffer under them as no
ill doer but as Christ's true servant. i. Peter. iiii. Notwithstanding she
lays forth here both before chauncelloure and king, the matter whereupon she
is condemned to death, Her matter.
that they according to their bound duty, might more ryghtlye way it.
iii. Regu. x. Not that she coueted thereby to avoid the death, but to put them
in remembrance of their office concerning the swerd, Their office.
which they ought not vaynely to ministre, Roman. xiii. and that they should
also be without excuse of ignorance in the great day of reckenynge, for
permitting soch vyole^ce to be done. Roma. ii. In the end yet to make all
sure, To God.
she commytteth her cause and quarrel to God, wherein she declares her only
hope to be in him, and no man. Psalm. cxlv.

Anne Askewe. My faith breuelye written to the kings grace.
I Anne Askewe of good memory although God has given me the bread of
aduersyte and the water of trouble, Trouble.
yet not so much as my sins have deserved, desire this to be known to your
grace. That for as much as I am by the law condemned for an evil doer. Here
I take heaven and earth to record, that I shall dye, in my innocencye. And
according to that I have said first, and will say last, I utterly abhor
and detest all heresies. Heresies.
And as concerning the supper of the Lord, I believe so much as Christ has
said therein. Which he confyrmed with his most blessed blood. I believe also
so much as he wylled me to follow and believe, and so much as the catholycke
church of him does teach. For I will not forsake the commandment of his
holy lyppes. Faith.
But look what God has charged me with his mouth that have I shut up in my
heart And thus breuely I end for lack of learning. Anne Askewe.

Johan Bale.
In this she dyschargethe her self to the world against all wrongefull
accusations and judgments of heresye, Dyscharge
what though it be not accepted to that blind world, unto whom the lord
said by his prophet. Your thoughts are not my thoughts, neither yet are
your ways my ways. But so far as the heue^s are hyer than the earth, so
far do my ways excede youres, and my thoughts yours, Esa. lv. Heresye is
not to dyssent from the church of Rome in the doctrine of faith, Heresye.
as La^fra^cus in his book de Eucharistia aduersus Berengariu^, and Thomas
walde^ in his work of sermons Ser. xxi. What it is.
Dyffyneth it. But heresy is a voluntarye dysse^tyng from the veryte of the
scriptures of God, and also a blasphemous deprauyng of them, for the wretched
bellyes sake, and to mayntene the pompes of this world. Thus is it dyffyned of
S. Hierome in co^mentariis Hiere. S. Augustyne and Isidorus agreynge to the
same. Consider tha^ whether he be ye thief that sytteth upon the be^che, or he
that stands at the bar? Who is the heretyke.
The popyshe clergy that condempneth, or the innocent that is condemned?
Athanasius in his book de fuga aduersus Arrianos, calls them the heretykes,
which seeks to have the Christian beleuers murdered as did the said Arryanes.
This godly woman, her innocencye to clear, labors not here to an inferior
membre of the realm, but to the head thereof, the kings own person. Whom
she believes to be the high minister of God, The king
the father of the land, and vpholder of the people, Sapi. vi. that he might
faythfullye and rightlye judge her cause. But who can think that ever it came
before him? Not I, for my part.

Anne Askewe. The effect of my examynacyon and handelynge, sens my departure
from New gate.
On twesday I was sent from new gate to the sign of the crown where as mastre
Rich and the Bishop of London with all their power and flattering words
went about to persuade me from God. Rich.
But I did not exteme their glosynge pretenses. Then came there to me Nicolas
Shaxton, Shaxton
and counseled me to reca^t as he had done. Then I said to him, that it hade
been good for him, never to have been borne with many other like words.

Johan Bale.
Afer that Christ had ones ouercommen Satan in the desert, Satan
where he had fasted long time, Math. iiii. We read not in the scriptures
that he was much assaulted or vexed of the world, the flesh, and the fyende,
which are reckened the common enemies of man. But yet we find, in the
Gospel, that these iii. ghostlye enemies, 3. ghostlye enemies.
the prelates, the prestes, and the lawers, or the Bishops, pharysees, and
scrybes, never left him afterward, till they had throughlye procured his
death. Mark it (I desire you) if it be here any otherwise with his dear
membre. What other enemies tempts here Anne Askewe, tha^ the Bishop of
London, mastre Rich, and doctor Shaxton, besides the great Caiphas of
Winchestre with his spightfull (I should say) spyrytuall table, Wynchestre.
or who else procures her death? Ye will think parauenture, concerning mastre
Rich, that though he be an enemy, yet is he no spirytuall enemy, spirytuall
because he is not anointed with the popes grese. But than are ye much
deceived. For it is the sprete (of blasphemye, auaryce, and malice) and not the
oil, that makes them spirytuall. And where as they are anointed in the hand
with oil, he is in the heart anointed with the sprete of Mammon, Mammo^
betraynge with Judas at the Bishops malycyouse calling on, ye poor
innocente sowles for money, or at the least for ambycyouse fauer.

O Shaxton, Shaxton.
I speak now unto the and (I think) in the voice of God. What devil by
wytched the to play this most blasphemouse part? as to become of a faithful
teacher, a temptynge sprete? Was it not enough, that thou and soch as thou art,
had forsaken your lord God and trodden his veryte most irreverently under your
fete, but with soch feats (as this is) thou must yet procure the a more deper,
or double da^pnacio^? Double.
Ryghtlie said this true servant of God, that it had been better for the and
thy fellows, that ye never had been borne. Ye were called of God, Unworthy
to a most blessed office. If ye had been worthy that vacacyon (as ye are
but swyne, Mathei. vii.) ye hade perseuered faithful and constaunte to the
end, Mathei. x. and so have worthelye received the crown thereof, Apoca. ii.
But the love of your beastlye flesh, has very far in you over wayed the
love of the lord Jesus Christ. Ye now show what ye are in deed, even
wauerynge reeds with every blast moved, Luce vii. Yea very faynte hearted
cowardes and hypocrytes, Hypocrytes.
Apo. iii. Ye abide not in the sheep fold as true shepeherdes, but ye flee
like hyrelynges, Johan. x. Had ye been builded upon the hard rock, as ye were
on the fyckle sand, Math. vii. neither Romish stoodes nor Englysh wyndes hade
overthrown you. But now look only, after your deserving, for this terrible
judgment of God. Judgment
For them (says S. Paul) which volu^tarylye blaspheme the truth, after they
have received the Gospel in faith and in the holy Ghost, remains no
expyacyon of sin, but the fearful judgment of hell fire. For a mock have
they made of the son of God, Hebrew. vi. and x.

Anne Askewe.
Then mastre Rich sent me to the tower, Rich.
where I remained till three of the clock. Then came Rich and one of the
counsel, chargynge me upon my obedyence, to show unto them, if I knew man or
woman of my sect. My answer was, that I knew none. Then they asked me of my
lady of Sothfolke, Christen ladies
my lady of Suffer my lady of Hertforde, my lady Dennye and my lady
Fizwyllyams, I said, if I should pronounce any thing against them, that I
were not hable to prove it.

Johan bale.
Never was there soche turmoylynge on the earth, as is now a days for that
wretched blind kingdom of the Romysh pope. But trust upon it truly, Babylon.
ye terryble termagantes of hell. There is no practice, there is no wisdom,
there is no counsel, that can against the lord prevail Proverb. xxi. Ye look
to be obeyed in all deuilyshnesse. But ye considre not, that where God is
dishonored by your obedyence, Obedyence.
there belongs none to you. Acto, v. Ye have much ado here with sects, as
though it were a great heresye, rightlye to believe in our lord Jesus Christ,
after the Gospel and not after your Romysh father. But where was ever yet a
more pestylent and deuilish sect, A sect.
than is that Sodomytyshe sect, whom ye here so ernestlye maynteyne with
tyranny and mischefe? How gredilye seek you the slaughter of Gods true
servants, ye blood thurstye wolves? as the holy Ghost does call you. Psalm.
xxv. If ye virtuous ladies and most noble women, Ladies.
whose lives ye cruellye seek in your mad ragynge furye, as rauishynge lions
in the dark Psalm. ix. have thrown of their shulders for Christ's easy and
gentill burden, Mathey. xi. the popes uneasy and importable yoke. Luce xi.
Happy are they that ever they were borne. For thereby have they procured, a
great quietness and health to their sowles. Health.
For Christ's word is quick, and brings nothing else to ye soul but life.
Hebreo. iiii. The popes old tradicyons and customs, being but the wisdom of
the flesh, are very poison and death, Roma. viii.

Anne Askewe.
Then said they unto me, that the king was infourmed, The king
that I could name, if I would a great number of my sect. The^ I answered,
that the king was as well deceived in that behalf, as dissembled with in
other matters.

Johan Bale.
Great Assuerus, king of the Perseanes and Medes, was infourmed also, that ye
servant of God Mardocheus was a traitor, Mardocheus.
which nevertheless had discovered ii. traitors a little before, and so saved
the kings life, Hester. iii. But Haman that false cou^seller, Haman.
which so infourmed the king, was in the end proved a traitor in deed (as I
doubt it not but some of these will be found after this) and was worthelie
hanged for it, so fallinge into the snare that his self had prepared for
other, Psalm. vii. Albertus Pyghius, Cochleus, Eckius, and soch other pestilent
papists, Papystes.
have filled all Christendom with railings books of our king, for renouncinge
the Romish popes obedience, but thereof ye infourme not his grace. No, neither
excuse ye, nor yet defend ye his godly act in that behalf. Craftye.
But ye are (as apereth) very well contented, that he be ill spoken of for it.

It is not a year ago, sens out wynchestre was at Vtrecht in holla^d (where as
the said Pighius dwelt, Pyghius.
and was for his papistrye in great autoryte) I know certaynlye, the man there
was much more easy to please in that cause, than in another sleuelesse matter
of his own concerning Martyne Bucer. Bucer.
His gallau^tes also warrau^ted there (I know to whom) that the Romysh pope,
by the Emprours good help, should within few years have in England, as great
autoryte as ever he had before. I doubt not but su^what they knew of their
masters good co^ueyau^ce, but of this is not the king infourmed. I could
write here of many other mysteryes, concerning the obseruaunt fryres and
other rau^gynge Rome ronners, Obseruauntes.
what news they receive wekelye out of England from the papystes there, and
in what hope they are put, of their return thydre again. For I have seane
there bragging letters thereof, Letters.
sent from Emeryck to Frysta^de, and from the co^traie of Coleyne into
Westphalie. Of this and soch other co^ueyau^ces, the king is not yet
infourmed, but (I trust) he shall be.

Anne Askewe.
Then commanded they me to show, how I was maynteyned in the Counter, and
who wylled me to stycke by my opinion. I said that there was no creature, that
therein did strengthen me. And as for the help that I had in the counter, to
accuse.
it was by the means of my maid. For as she went abroad in the streets, she
made to the prentyses, and they by her did send me money. But who they were,
I never knew.

Johan Bale,
Joseph was in prison under Pharao the fearce king of Egypt, Joseph.
yet was he favorably handeled and no man forbidden to confort him. Genesis
xxxix. Wha^ Johan Baptist was in strong duraunce under Herod the tyrant of
Galile, his discyples did freely vysyt him, and were not rebuked for it, Mat.
xi. Paul being emprysoned and in cheynes at Rome, Paul.
under the most furyouse tyrant Nero, was never blamed for sendynge his
servant Onesimus abroad, nor yet for writynge by him to his fryndes for
socour. Philem. i. Neither yet was Philemon troubled for releuyng him there by
the said Onesimus, Onesymus.
nor yet his old frynd Onesipherus, for personally there vysytynge him, and
supportyng him with his money, like as he had done before also at Ephesus. Now
confer these stories and soche other like, with the present handelynge of
Anne Askewe and ye shall well perceive our English rulers and judges in their
new Chrystyanyte of renouncing the pope, Judges.
to excede all other tyrauntes in all cruelty, spyght and vengeance. But look
to have it no otherwise, so long as mytyred prelates are of counsel. Prelates.
Be ashamed cruel beasts, be ashamed, for all Chrystendome wondereth on your
madness above all.

Anne Askewe.
Then they said, that there were diverse gentylwomen, Gentyllwomen.
that gave me money. But I knew not their names. Then they said that there
were diverse Ladies, which had sent me money. I answered, that there was a
man in a blewe coat, which delivered me. x. shyllynges, and said that my
lady of Hertforde sent it me. Ladies.
And an other in a vyolette coat did give me. viii. shyllynges, and said that
my lady Dennye sent it me. Whether it were true or no, I cannot tell. For I am
not suer who sent it me, but as the men did say.

Johan Bale.
In the time of Christ's preaching what though the holy clergy were tha^
not pleased therewith, Christ.
but judged it (as they do still to this day) most horrible heresye, yet
certain noble women, is Marye Magdalene. Johan the wife of Chusa Herodes high
steward, Susanna, and many other followed him from Galile, and mynystred unto
him of their substance, Noble women.
concerning his bodylye needs Luce. viii. These with other more, after he was by
the said clergy done to most cruel death for the veryte preaching, both
prepared oyntementes and spyces to anoynte his body. Luce. xxiiii. and also
proclaimed abroad his gloryouse resurreccyon to his Apostles and other, Ioa^.
xx. contrary to the Bishops inhybycion Act. iii. Yet read we not that any
man or woman was racked for the accusement of them. A woman among the
Macedonyanes, dwelling in the city of Thyatira and called Lydia by name, Lydia
a purple seller very rytche in marchaundyse, received Paul, Sylas, and
Timothe with other suspected brethrene into her house and habundantly releued
the^ there. Acto. xvi. yet was she not troubled for it. In like manner at
Thessalonica, a great no^bre of the Greeks and many noble women among the^,
Noble women.
believed Paul's forbidden doctrine, and resorted boldelye both to him and to
Sylas. Act. xvii. yet were they not cruellye handeled for it.

Be ashamed than ye tyrauntes of England, that your horrible tyra^nyes should
exeede all other Jews or Gentyles, Tyrau^tes
turks or ydolaters. More noble were these women here rehearsed, for thus
releuynge Christ and his members, than for any other act, either yet degree of
nobylyte. For where as al other have peryshed, these shall never perysh, but be
conserved in the most noble and worthy scriptures of God, the tyrannouse
Bishops and prestes with their tyrannouse maynteners there condemned.
Prelates.
A through Christian charity is not lyghtlye terrifyed, with the tempests of
worldly affliccyons, no more than true faith is changed in men that be
Christenly co^staunte. Faith.
Soch can not chose but considre that it is both gloryouse to be afflicted for
Christ. i. Pet. iii. and also most merytoryouse to releue them here in their
afflyccyons. Mat. xxv. Unto that Christen office has Christ promised the life
everlasting at the lattre day, where as Mass hearing is like to remain
without reward, Masses hearing.
except it be in belle for ydolatrye and blasphemye. Not unto them that in
prison vysyteth murderers and thieves (if ye mark well the text) is this
reward promised. For they are not there allowed for Christ's dear members, but
unto them that releue the afflycted for his verytees sake.

Anne Askewe.
Then they said, there were of the counsel that did maynteyne me. And I
said, no. Then they did put me on the rack, The rack
because I confessed no ladies nor ge^tylwomen to be of my opinion, and thereon
they kept me a long time And because I lay still and did not cry, the
Chauncelloure and maystre Rich, took pains to rack me their own hands,
till I was nygh dead.

Johan Bale.
Nicodemus, Nicodemus.
one of the high counsel, was sore rebuked among the senyours of the Jews,
for defe^ding Christ's innoce^cye, wha^ they went about to flee him, Ioa^.
vii. And therefore it is no new thing that Christ's doctrine has supportacyon
among the counsels of this world. All men be not of one corrupted appetyte,
nor yet of one ungracious diete. Christ promised his dyscyples, that they in
one how should should find both his enemies and fryndes. Fryndes.
I am come (says he) to set man at varyaunce against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against the mother in
law. He that louethe his father or mother, his son or daughter, his prince
or governor, above me, he is not mete for me, Math, x. I fear me this will be
judged high treason. High treason.
But no matter. So long as it is Christ's word, he shall be also under the
same iudgeme^te of treason Let no man care to be conde^pned with him, for he in
the end shall be hable to rectyfye all wrongs.

Mark here an example most wonderful, and se how madlye in their ragynge
furies, Frenesye.
men forget themselves and lose their right wits now a days. A kings
high counselor, a Judge over life and death, yea, a lord Chancellor of a
most noble realm, is now become a most vile slave for Antychrist, and a most
cruel tormentoure. A tourmentour.
Without al dyscresyon, honestye, or manhood, he casts of his gown, and take
the here upon him the most vile office of an hangeman and pulls at the rack
most vyllanouslye. O Chaunceller and Rich. ii. false christianes and
blaphemouse apostataes from God. Chaunceller and Rich.
What chaplayne of ye pope has inchaunted you, or what devil of hell
bewytched you, to execute upon a poor condemned woman, so prodygyouse a kind
of tyranny? Even the very Mammon of iniquyte, Ma^mon.
and that insaciable hunger of avarice, which compelled Judas to betray unto
death his most loving, master, Ioa^. xii. The wynnynges were not small that ye
reckened upon, when ye took on ye that cruel enterprise, and would have had
so many great men and women accused. But what else have ye won in the end,
wretches.
than perpetual shame and confusion? God has suffered you so to dyscouer
your own myscheues, yt ye shall no more be fogotte^ of ye world, than are now
Adomsedech, Saul, Hieroboam, Manasses, Tyrau^tes
Olophernes Haman, Tryphon, Herod, Neto, Traianus, and soche other horrible
tyrauntes. Tyrauntes.


And as concerning the innocent woman, whom you so cruellye tormented. Where
could be seane a more clear and open experyment of Christ's dear membre, than
in her mighty sufferynges? like a lamb she lay still without noise of
cryenge, A lamb.
and suffered your uttermost vyolence, till the sinnowes of her arms were
broken, and the strings of her eis peryshed in her head. Right far does it
pass the strength of a young, tender, weak, Tyrau^tes
and sick woman (as she was at that time to your more confusion) to abide so
vyolent handelynge, yea, or yet of the strongest man that lives. Thynk not
therefore but that Christ has suffered in her, Christ.
and so myghtelye showed his power, that in her weakness he has laughed your
mad enterpryses to scorn. Psalm. ii. Where was the fear of God, ye tyra^tes?
Where was your christen professyon, ye hell hounds? Where was your oath and
promise to do true justice, ye abominable periures, Periures.
when ye went about these cursed feats? More fytte are ye for swyne keeping,
than to be of a princes counsel, or yet to govern a Christen commen welthe.
If Christ have said unto them which do but offend his little ones that believe
in him, that it were better they had a millstone tied about their necks, A
mylsto^
and were so thrown into the bottom of the sea, Luce xvii. What will he say to
them that so villaynouslye pull at the rack in there myscheuouse malice? These
are but warnynges take heed if ye lift, for a full sorrowful plage will follow
here after.

Anne Askewe.
Then the lyefetenaunt caused me to be loused from the rack. Unloosed
Incontynentlye I swounded, and then they recovered me again. After that I
sat ii. long hours reasonynge with my lord Chancellor upon the bare
floor, where as he with many ftatterynge words, persuaded me to leave my
opinion. But my lord God (I thank his everlasting goodness) gave me grace
to persevere, Persevere.
and will do (I hope) to the very end.

Johan Bale.
Ever more have the old modye tirauntes, used this practyse of deuilyshnesse.
Practyse.
As they have perceived themselves not to prevail by extreme handelinges they
have sought to prove masteries by the contrary. With gaye glosynge words and
fair flatteryng promises, they have craftelye compassed the servants of God,
to cause them consent to their wickedness. And in this temptynge occupacyon,
Te^ptacio^
are Wrisleye and Rich very conninge, Notwithstanding they shall never find
the chosen of God, all one with the forsaken reprouates. The elect vessels
hold the eternal God for their most special treasure, and have him in soch
intiere love, that they had much lever to lose themselves, than him. The wicked
desperates have the voluptuouse pleasures of this vain world so dear, that
they hade lever to forsake God and all his works, ^. sorts.
than to be sequestered from them. This godly young woman refers praise unto
her lord God, that he has not left her in this paynefull conflycte for his
verytees sake, Praise.
but perseuered strong with her, being in hope that he would so still
contynewe with her, to the very end, as without fail he did.

Many men sore wondre now a days that Wrisleye which was in my lord
Cromwels time so ernest a doer against the pope, Wrisleye
is now becomen again for his red larye wares so mighty a captain. But they
remember not the common adage, that honor changes manners, and lucre
judgments. These great ynne kepers (they say) had lever to have one good
horse man to hooste, Ynne kepers.
than vi. men on foot, specially if they wear velvet whodes or fine rochettes.
What else follows Christ but beggary and sorrows which are very hateful to
the word? Where fatness is cawse of every mannys labor, there is yet sum
what to be looked for. Profyght
If his christen zele be soch, that he will have no she heretykes vnponnyshed
let him do first of all, as we read of diverse ryghtfull gouerners among ye
heythen. Let him search his own house well. My lady
Parauenture he may find about my lady his wife, a rellycke of no little
virtue, a practyse of Pythagoras, or an old midwyues blessyng, which she
carries closelye on her, for preseruacyo^ of her honor. Her opinyo^ is
(folk say) that so long as she has that upon her, her worldly worship can
never decay. Honor.
I pray God this prouysyon in short space deceyueth her not as it has done
pope Siluester the second, and as it did of late years Thomas wolsye our late
Cardynall. cardynall
This heresye goes neither to the rack nor to the fire, to Newgate nor yet
Smythfelde, as contynuallye does the pore Gospel.

Anne Askewe.
Then was I brought to an house, and laid in a bed, with as werye and
paynefull bones, as ever had pacyente Job, I thank my lord God thereof. Then
my lord Chancellor sent me word if I would leave my opynio^ I should want
nothing. A tyrant
If I would not, I should fourth to Newgate, and so be burned. I sent him again
word, that I would rather die, tha^ to break my faith. Thus the lord open
the eyes of their blind hearts, Sweet woman.
that the truth may take place. Fare well dear frynde, and pray, pray,
pray.

Johan Bale.
Behold in this last parcel, most euyde^t signs of a christian martyr and
faithful witness of God, A martyr
besides that went before, She allegeth not in all this long process, lienge
legendes, popyshe fables, nor yet old wives parables, but ye most lively
autoritees and examples of the sacred Bible. Gods creature
Se puts her self here in remembrance, not of desperate Cayne, nor yet of
sorrowful Judas, but of most pacyent Job, for example of godly sufferaunce.
For Anguysh and pain of her broken joints and broused arms and eyes, she
curses not the time that ever she was borne, as the manner of the unfaithful
is. But she hyghlye magnyfyeth and prayseth God for it. Neither was she
perverted with flatteringe promyses, Christ's servant.
nor yet over common with terryble threttenynges of death. Neither doubted she
the stynke of Newgate nor yet the burning fire in Smythfelde. But coueted
rather death of her body for the sincere doctrine of Christ, than life of
the same under the ydolatrouse doctrine of the Romysh pope. She desired God to
take mercy of her enemies, and exhorted all Christen people instauntlye to
pray for them. A very Saint.
If these be not the fruits of a true beleuer. what other fruits else can we axe?

Anne Askewes answer unto Johan Lassels letter.
Oh frynde most derelye beloved in God. I maruele not a little what should move
you, to judge in me so slendre a faith, as to fear death, Death.
which is the end of all myserye. In the lord I desire you, not to believe of
me soch wickedness. For I doubt it not, but God will perform his work in
me, like as he has begone.

Johan Bale.
I would but know of them which are common readers of chronycles and Saints
lives, Chronycles.
where they ever read of a more feruente and lyuelye faith than was in this
godly young woman. As light a matter esteemed she death, as did Eleazarus that
ancient senyour, or yet the vii. Machabees with their most worthy mother. ii.
Match. vi. and vii. Death.
For she said, that it was but ye end of al sorrows. She reckened not with
the couetouse man, the remembrance thereof bitter, Eccle. xiiii. But with the
righteouse she thought it a most ready and swyfte passage unto life, Joan. v.
The fear of death judged she great wickedness in a Christen beleuer, and was
in full hope that God would not suffer her to be troubled therewith. For why, No
fear.
death lo^seth us no life, but brings it in unto us like as the hard winter
brings in the most pleasant somer. Who can think, wha^ the sun goes
down, yt it utterly so perysheth? Death unto the righteouse beleuer, is as a
profitable harvest, Harvest.
which after sweat and labor brings in most dylectable fruits. None
otherwise thought it Anne Askewe, than a very entrau^ce of life, wha^ she had
it thus in desire, and faithfully trusted with Paul that God would fynyshe in
her that he than begone to his own glory. Philippen. i.

Anne Askewe.
I understand, the counsel is not a little dyspleased, that it should be
reported abroad, that I was racked in the tower. Racked.
They say now, that they did there, was but to fear me. Whereby I perceive,
they are ashamed of their uncomely doings, and fear much least the kings
mageste should have informacion thereof. Wherefore they would no man to noise it.
No noise
Well, their crueltye God forgive them. Your heart in Christ Jesus. Farewele,
and pray.

Johan Bale.
Hypocrites and tyrauntes would never be gladly known abroad, for that they
are in did. But for that they are not they look always to be gloryouslye
noysed. Wrisleye and Rich would yet be judged of the world, Wrisleye and
Rich.
ii. sober wise men, and very sage counselors. But this ty^^nnouse example of
theirs, makes a most manifest show of the contrary. Yea, and the God of
heaven will have it so known to the universal world, to their ignomynyt and
shame. So is he wont to reward all cruel Apostataes as he rewarded Iulianus,
Iulianus
for their wylfull contempt of his verite. The martyr of Christ for her pacyent
sufferaunce shall leave here behind her a gloryouse report, whereas these
forworne enemies and pursuers of his word, have purchased themselu^^ a
perpetual infamy by their cruelte, and myschef. In excuse of their madness, In
excuse
they say, they did it only to fear her, Is it not (think you) a propre
frayenge play, wha^ our arms and eyes are compelled to leave their natural
holds? Ye meant no light dallyaunce, when ye would have had so many great women
accused, and took the hangemannes office upon your own precyouse persons. O
tourmentours and tyrauntes abhomynable. Tyrau^tes
Ye fear least your temporal and mortal king should know your mad
frenesyes. But of the eternal king, which will ryghtly punysh you for it, with
the devil and his angels (unless ye sore repent it) ye have no fear at all. It
is so honest a part, ye have played, that ye will not have it noysed. But I
promise you, so to dyuulge this unseemly fact of yours in the latyne, that
all christendom over, No noise.
it shall be known what ye are.

Anne Askewe.
I have read the process, which is reported of them that know not the
truth, to be my recantacyon. But as sure as the Lord lives. I never me^t
thing less, than to reca^t. Notwithwandynge this I confess, that in my first
troubles. I was examined of the Bishop of London about the sacrame^^, Of
Cayphas.
Yet had they no grant of my mouth but this. That I believed therein as the
word of God did bynd me to believe. More had they never of me.

Johan Bale.
In the end of her first examynacyo^ is this matter treated of more at large
Here do she repete it again, only to be known for Christ's stedefast membre,
Christ's martyr.
and not Antichrists. To the voice of him she faythfullye obeyed, but the
voice of that Romyshe monstre and other strangers she regarded not, Johan. x.
As she perceived when she was before the Bishop of London, Bonnee.
that all passed still after their old tyranny, and nothing after the rules
of scripture, she suspected their doctrine more than before, and thought them
none other than Christ warned his dyscyples to be ware of Luce. xii. Wolves.
Whereupon she through^^e couenaunted with her self, never to deny his verite
before men at their calling on, lest he should again deny her before his
eternal father. Math. x. For if the confessing thereof bryngethe salvation, as
saint Paul says it does, Romanorum. x. Saluacyo^
The denyeng thereof on the other side, must needs bring in damnacyon.

Anne Askewe.
Then he made a coppye, which is now in prynte, and required me to set
thereunto my hand But I refused it. Then my. ii. suertyes did will me in no
wise to stycke thereat, Hand writing
For it was no great matter, they said. The^ with much ado, at the last I wrote
thus. I Anne Askewe do believe this if Gods word do agree to the same, and the
true catholycke church.

Johan Bale.
Commonly is it spoken of popysh prestes, that in doing their false feats,
they sit in Gods stead. Gods stead.
This point followed the bludderinge Bishop of London here, which for their
old fantasied superstycyon, labored in this woman to displeace the sincere
veryte of the lord. But so surely was she builded upon the hard rock,
Builded.
that neither for enmite nor fryndeshyp, would she ones remove her foot. Math,
vii. Neither anguyshe, trouble, tormente, nor fire, could separate her from
that love of her lord God Romans viii. A lamb.
Though she were for his sake rebuked and vexed, and also appointed as a sheep
to be slain. Psa, xliii. Yet did she strongely thorughe him overcome, and have
(I doubt it not) obtained ye crown of life. Apoc. ii.

Anne Askewe.
Then the bishop, being in great dyspleasure with me, because I made
doubts in my wryttynge, commanded me to prysone. Where I was a while, But
afterward by the means of fryndes, I came out again. Here is the truth of
that matter. And as concerning the thing that ye couete most to know.
Resort to the. vi. of Johan, Eucharystys.
and be ruled always thereby. Thus fare ye well. Quoth Anne Askewe.

Johan Bale.
In all the scriptures we read not, Prison.
that either Christ or yet his Apostles commanded any man or woman to prison
for their faith, Prison.
as this tyrant Byshope did here. But in deed we find that Christ's holy
Apostles, were often times cruellye commanded to prison of the same spyghtfullye
spirytual generacyon. Acto. iiii. v. xii. xvi. Christ wylled his true beleuers
to look for none other at their spirytual hands, Christ
than enprisonmentes and death. Math. x. Johan. xvi. And therefore said Peter
unto him. I am redye to go with the, Lord, both into prison and to death.
Luce. xxii. Paul greatly complayneth of his enprysonmentes and scourgynges by
them. ii. Corinty. xi. Diverse in the congregacyon of Smyrna were enprisoned by
that fearce synagoge of Satan, Smyrna
Apocal. ii. Esaye prophecyenge the condycyons of the spirytuall Antichriste,
Antichrist
says among other, that he should bold men captyue in prison, Esaye. xiiii.
Ezechiel reports that he should churlyshlye check, and in cruelte rule.
Ezech. xxxiiii. zacharye shewethe that he should eat up the flesh of the
fattest. zachary. xi. Daniel declares that he should persecute with sword
and fire. With fire
Daniel. xi. And saint Johan verefyeth that he should be all drunk with the
blood of the witnesses of Jesus, Apoca. xvii. And therefore in these feats, his
Bishops do put their kinds.

Thus ends the lattre examynacyon.
The confession of her faith which Anne Askewe made in Newgate before she
suffered.
I Anne Askewe, of good memory, although my merciful father has given me
the bread of aduersytie, and the water of trouble, Trouble.
yet not so much as my sins has deserved, confess my self here a sinner
before the trone of his, heavenly majesty desyerynge his eternal mercy. And
for so mouche as I am by the law vnryghtouslye condemned for an evil doer
concerning opynions. I take the same most merciful God of mine, Condemned.
which has made both heaven and earth, to record, that I hold no opynyons
contrary to his most holy word.

Johan Bale.
What man of sober dyscresyon, can judge this woman ill, indyfferently but
markynge this her last confession? Not a few of most euydent arguments are
therein, to prove her the true servant of God. Prove her
Her wits were not ones dystracted, for all her most tyra^nouse handelynges.
She was still of a perfyght memory, accountynge her emprysonmentes,
reuylynges, rackynges, and other torments, but the bread of aduersyte and the
water of trouble, as did David before her. Psa. lxxix. ^^nt^s of faith.
As the loving child of God, she received them without grudge, and thought
them deserved on her party. She took them for his hand of mercy, and gave
most high thanks for them. She mekelye confessed herself in his syghte a
sinner, but not an haynouse heretyke, as she was falselye judged of the world.
Obedye^t to God.
In that matter she took him most stronglye to witness, that though in faith
she were not agreeable to the worlds wild opinion, yet was she not therein
contrary to his heavenly truth. She had before that proved their spretes
conferring both their iudegementes. i. Johan. iiii. and perceived them far
unlike. Esaye. iv.

Anne Askewe.
And I trust in my merciful Lord, which is the geuer of all grace, that he
will gracyoslye assyst me against all evil opynyons, No here^yke.
which are contrary to his blessed veryte. For I take him to witness, that I
have, do, and will do, unto my lives end, utterly abhor them to the
uttermost of my power. But this is the heresye which they report me to hold,
that after the pressed has spoken the words of consecracyon, there remains
bread still. Bread.


Johan. Bale.
Consydre without froward, party all or wylful affection, the points herin
contained, Prove yet
and than judge of what hatte or conscience they have risen. The hope of this
woman was only in God? Him she confessed to be of all grace the geuer. Alone
in his mercy she trusted. She instauntlye desired him to defend her from all
errors. She abhorred all heresies. She detested mennys superstycyouse
inuencions. And most firmelye cleaued to his eternal word. If these with
those that went before, be not fruits of true christianyte, Fruits of faith.
or of a perfyght member of Gods eleccyon, what fruits will we demand? S.
Paul says No man can confess that Jesus is the lord (as she has done here)
but in the holy Ghost, i. Corinth. xii. David also specifieth, that the lord
never forsakes them which call upon his name, and put their trust in him.
Psalm. ix. And as touching the prestes consecracio^, Consecracyon.
which is soch a charm of inchaunteme^t as may not be done but by an oyled
offycer of ye popes generacyon, she did godly to reject it in that clowtynge
kind. For in all the Bible is it not that any man can make of a dry waffer
cake, Waffer.
a new sauer a new redemer, a new Christ, or a new God. No though he should
utter all the words and scriptures therein.

Anne Askewe.
But they both say, and also teach it for a necessary article of faith that
after those words be ones spoken, there remains no bread, but even the self
same body that bynge upon the cross on good frydaye, Bread.
both flesh, blood, and bone. To this believe of theirs, say I nay. For then
were our commen Creed false, which says that he sytteth on the right hand of
God the father almyghtye, and from thens shall come to judge the quycke and the
dead. Shall come.
Loo, this is the heresye that I hold, and for it must suffer the death.

Johan Bale.
Of Antichrist read we in the scriptures, Antichrist.
that he and his oyled Apostles should do false miracles, Math. xxiiii.ii. These
ii. and Apoca. xiii. We find also in ye same self places, that he should
exalte himself above all that is called God, or that is worshypped as God. Who
ever heard of so great a wondre that a dry cake might become a God to be
worshypped? A miracle were this above all the miracles that ever were wrought,
Miracle
and a work above all the works that ever were done, if it were true as it is
most false. Though our eternal God created heaven and earth in the first
beginning, and fourmed all other creatures, Gene. i. Yet read we not of him,
that he made of his creatures any new God to be worshypped. No God.
In that point are our oiled Antichrystes before him. And where as he rested
whollye in the seventh day, from that office of creacyon, Gene. ii. and never
took it upon him sens that time, as testyfyeth Johan Chrysostom, Augustyne,
Hierome, Bedas, Alcuinus, and all there other doctors. Doctors
Yet will they take upon the^ to create every day a fresh, and when their
old God stynketh in the box, Moulde in the boxes
remove him out of the way, and put a new in his rowme, yea, they can make of
bread (which is but mannys corruptyble creature, and ordained only to be eat)
soch a God as shall stand checkemate with the great God of heaven and
parauenture deface him also. Oh blasphemouse wretches and thieves. Godmakers.
Be ones a shamed of your abhomynable blyndenesse, and submyte your selves to a
just reformacyon.

Anne Askewe.
But as touching the holy and blessed supper of the lord I believe it to be a
most necessary remembrance of his gloryouse suffering and death. The
supper.
More over I believe as much therein, as my eternal and only redemer Jesus
Christ would I should believe. Finally I believe al those scriptures to be true
whom he has confirmed with his most preciouse blood. Scriptures.


Johan Bale.
No godly institucion nor ordinance of Christ, do this faithful woman
contempne, but reuerentlye submytteth herself thereunto, Without Mass.
in the kind that he did leave them. She protests here to believe so much, as
can be showed by the scriptures of both testamentes. And what is more to be
required of a Christen beleuer: Only did she in conscience refuse and abhor,
Idolatryes.
the ydell obseruacyons, the paganes superstycyons, the sorcerers
inchauntmentes, and the most parellouse ydolatryes, which the Romyshe pope and
his clergy have added to their Mass for covetousness. In this (I suppose
(she remembered the words of saint Paul. i. Corint. ii. My talking (said he)
and my preaching, was not with persuasyble or entysynge words of man's
corrupt wysedom, Man's wisdom
but in vtteraunce of the sprete and of power, that your faith should not
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. For that (says Christ)
which seems high and holy before men, is filthy abhomynacyon before God.
Luce xvi.

Anne Askewe.
Yea, and as saint Paul says, those scryptures are suffycyente for our
learning and salvation, Scriptures.
that Chri^te has left here with us. So that I believe, we need no unwritten
verytes to rule his church with. Therefore look what he has laid unto me
with his own mouth, in his hoolye Gospel, that have I with Gods grace,
Hope.
closed up in my heart. And my full trust is (as David says) yt it shall be a
la^terne to my footsteps, Psa. cxviii.

Johan Bale.
Still are these fruits of inestymable wholsomnesse, declarynge this woman a
most perfyght and innocent membre of Jesus Christ. In this whole process
(mark it hardelye) she joins not for socourre to muddye waters or broken
pyttes of the Phylystynes, prove still
Hieremye. ii. Which are the corrupt doctrynes and tradycyons of men. But she
seeks to the very welsprynge of health, and fou^tayne of salvation. Joan
iiii. All unwritten verytees left she to those waueringe wanderers which will
eternallye perysh with the^. And in ye verytees written, Fruits of faith.
appointed she to iournaye among the true Christen beleuers toward the land
everlasting. In all her affairs most fyrmelye she cleaves to the scriptures
of God, which gives both spret and life, Joan. vi. As the hate in the forest
desires the plesaunt water brokes, so longed her soul and was desyerouse of
the manifest glory of her eternal God, Psalm. xli. If her porcyon be not in
the land of the living, Her god.
Psalm. cxli. Yea, if she be not allowed a cytezen with the Saints, Ephe. i.
And her name regestred in the book of life, Apoca. xxi. Yt will be hard with
many. But certain and sure I am, that with Marye Marthaes sister, soch a sure
part have she chosen, A sure part.
as will not be taken away from her, Luce. x.

Anne Askewe.
There be some do say, that I deny the Eucharistie or sacrament of thanks
geuynge. Eucharystye.
But those people do untruly report of me. For I both say and believe it,
that if yt were ordered like as Christ instytuted it and left it, a most
syngular conforte it were unto us all. But as concerning your Mass, as it is
now used in our days. I do say and believe it, to be the most abhomynable
ydoll that is in the world. mass. an ydoll.
For my God will not be eaten with tethe, neither yet dies he again. And upon
these words, that I have now spoken, will I suffer death.

Johan Bale.
All the works of God and ordinances of Christ, she reuerenlye admytted. as
grounded matters of Christen believe But the Romysh popes creatures would she in
no case allow to stand up check mate with them. obidye^ce.
The Mass (which is in all points, The Mass
of that filthy Antychristes creacyon) took she for the most execreable ydoll
upon earth. And rightly. For non other is the child to be reckened, than was
his father before him, be he man or beast. The whelpe of a dog, is non other
than a dog, when he comes ones to his age. Ydolles (says David) are like
them that make them. Ydolaters
So are they also which put their trust in them, Psalm. cxiii. An ydoll does
zacharye call that proud slaughterouse shepehearde, An ydoll
zacharye. xi. Who then can deny his prodigiouse ordynaunces to be the same?
What other is the work of an ydolatrouse worker, than an execrable ydoll. And
look what propertees any ydoll has had, or feats has wrought yet sens
the worlds beginning, the popes prodygyouse Mass has had and wrought the
same, with many conueyaunces more.

Of popes has it received disgisynges, Popes.
instruments, blessings, turnynges and legerdemaynes, with many strange
obseruacyons borrowed of the Jews and paganes old sacryfyces, besides pardons
for delyueraunce of sowles. Of monks have it gotten a purgatory after many
strange apparycyo^s with a long ladder from thens to scale heaven with.
Monks.
It has obtained also to be a remedy for all dyseases both in man and beast,
with innumerable superstycyons else. Of vnyuersytes and their doctors, have it
cawte all the subtyltees and crafty lernynges of the profane philosophers, to
be defended by, as is to be seane in the works of their sentencioners,
Vniuersytees.
like as I have showed in the mysteri of iniquyte. fo. xxxiii. It serves all
wytches in their wytchery, all sorcerers, charmers, inchaunters, The mass
dreamers, sothsayers, necromansers, coniures, cross dyggers, devil raysers,
miracle doers, doggeleches, and bawdes. For without a Mass, they can not well
work their feats. The lawers, like wise, which seek in Westmynstre hawle to
get most money by falschede, can neither be well without it. It vpholdeth
vain glory, pride, ambycyon, auaryce, gluttony, slouthe, ydelnesse,
Profitable.
hypocresye, heresye, tyranny, and all other deuylyshnesse besides. It
maynteyneth the spirytuall soldiers of Antichriste, Necessaryes
in all superfluouse living and wanton lecherouse lusts, with the chaste
occupyenges of Sodom and Gomor.

What other ghostly fruits it has, I shall more largelye show in my book
called. The miracles of the Mass against Perine. miracles of the mass.
Perchance some devout Mass hearers will lay for the holiness thereof, that it
contains both pystle and Gospel. Truly that Epistle and that Gospel may
well have a name of life, as S. Johan says of the church of Sardis. Apoca. z.
Yet is it in that office of massynge, no^ other than the dead or mortyfienge
letter. Dead letter.
ii. Cor. iii. For the sprete that should quycken, is clearly taken from it. So
that nothing else thereof remains to the common people, but a dead noise and an
idle sound, as it is now in the Romysh language. Who can say, but it was the
scripture, that Satan alleged unto Christ upon the pynnacle of the temple?
Satan.
Mat iiii. Yet remains it there still, after his ungracious handelynge
thereof, as a false crafty suggestyon, a deuylyshe error, or a shylde of his
wyckednes, and will do evermore; Where are the names of God, Wytches
of his Angels, and of his saints, more ryfe than among witches, charmers,
inchau^ters, and sorcerers? Yet can ye not say, that they are among the^ to
any man's salvation as they would be in right handelynge. What it is that
seruethe an ydoll, An ydoll.
let godly wise men conjecture, which are not all ygnorraunt how the Angel
became a devil.

Anne Askewe.
O Lord, I have more enemies now, Enemies
than there be hears on my head. Yet lord let them never overcome me with
vain words. But fight thou lord in my stead. For on the cast I my care.
With all the spyght they can ymagine, they fall upon me which amthipore creature.
Yet sweet lord, let me not set by the^ which are against the. For in yt is my
whole delight. Hate the^.


Johan Bale.
O blessed woman, and undoubted cytyzen of heaven. Truth it is that thou have
had many adversaries, Adversaries.
yea, and a far greatter nombre of them, than thou have here reckened. And the
more thou have had, the greatter is now thy vyctorye in Christ. The great
body of the Beast thou have had to enemy, which co^prehendeth the malignaunt
muster of Satan on the one side, and the earthly worshyppers of his
blasphemous beastlines on the other side, Haters.
Daniel. xi. Apoc. xi:i. whose no^bre is as the sand of the sec, infynite.
Apo. xx. But consydre again, what fryndeshyp thou have gotten for it on the
other part. Fryndes.
Thou have now to frinde for thy faythefull perseueraunce against those ydoll
mongers, the sempyternall trynyte, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost.
Ioa^. xiiii. With the gloryouse multitude of Angels, the patriarchs, Prophets,
Aposteles and Martyrs, with all the electno^bre from righteous Abel hitherto.
Thou have also here upon earth, and evermore shall have, the fauer of all the^
which have not bowed to that fylthy Beast, Favorers
whose names are regestred in the book of life. Apo. xxi. And as for thy
ungodly and cruel enemies, as dust in the wind the lord will scattre them
from the face of the earth, Northfolke.
be they never so stowte and many. Psalm. i.

Anne Askewe.
And Lord I hartelye desire of the, that thou will of thy most merciful
goodness, forgive them that vyolence, which they do and have done unto me.
Open also thou their blind hearts, Prayer.
that they may hereafter do that thing in thy syghte, which is only
acceptable before the. And to set fourth thy veryte a right, without all
vain fantasyes of synnefull men. So be it. O Lord, so be it. By me Anne
Askewe.

Johan Bale.
Before here she confesses with David that on God she had cast her care, Sweet
woman.
and that in him was all her hearts delyght Psa. lx. She desired him also,
never to fail herin to is hard co^dicte, but stro^glye to assist her, and in
no case to permyt her to be ouercommen of the flatteryng world, neither yet to
give place to his enemies. And I doubt it not, but these are most euydent
signs that she was his faithful servant. Gods true servant.
I know certainly, that all the power of hell, can not prevail against so
earnest a faith. Math xvi. For he has so spoken it there, which can not
lie, Luc. xxi. and. i. Petri. ii. In this lattre part, she shows the nature
of Christ's lyuelye membre, Christ's membre.
and of a perfyghte christen martyr in.ii. points, first she desires god to
forgive her enemies as Christ desired him in the time of his passion, Luc.
xxiii. And as holy Steven also did for the time of his death. Actorum. vii.
Secondlye she desires their hearts to be opened, that they may truly believe
and be saved. Actorum. xvi. This supernatural affecte of charity had she
only of the sprete of Christ, Charity.
which wylleth not the death of a froward sinner, but rather that he be from
his wyckednes turned, and so live Ezech. xxxiii. Thus is she a Saint canonysed
in Christ's blood, A Saint.
though she never have other canonysacyon of pope, priest, nor Bishop.

The destroyer shall be destroyed without bands,

Daniel. viii.
The Balade which Anne Askewe made and sange wha^ she was in Newgate.
Like as the armed knight
Appointed to the field
With this world will I fight
And faith shall be my shyelde.
Faith is that weapon strong
Which will not fail at need
My foes therefore among.
Therwyth will I proceed.
As it is had in strength
And force of Christ's way,
It will prevail at length
Though all the deuyls say nay.
Faith in the fathers old
Obtained ryghtwysnes
Which make me very bold
To fear no worlds dystresse.
I now reioce in heart
And hope bid me do so,
For Christ will take my part
And ease me of my woe.
Thou say lord, who so knock
To them wylt thou attend
Undo therefore the lock
And thy strong power send.
More enemies now I have
Than heeres upon my head
Let them not me deprave
But fight thou in my stead.
On the my care I cast
For all their cruel spyght
I set not by their have
For thou art my delyght.
I am not she that list
My anchor to let fall
For every drystynge mist
My ship substancyall.
Not often use I to wryght
In prose nor yet in time
Yet will I show our sight
That I saw in my time.
I saw a tyall trone
Where Justice should have sytte
But in her stead was one
Of modye cruel wit.
Absorpt was tyghtwysnesse
As of the ragynge floude
Satan in his excess
Suete up the gyltelesse blood.
Then thought I, Jesus lord
When thou shalt judge us all
Hard is it to record
On these men what will fall.
Yet lord I the desire
For that they do to me
Let them not taste the hyre
Of their inyquyte.
God save the king.
God has chose^ the weak things of ye world to confound things which are
mighty. Yea, and things of no reputacio^, for to bring to naught things of
reputacion, that no flesh should presume in his sight.

1. Corin. 1.
The Conclusyon.
THus have thou (dylygente reader) the end of these. ii. examynacio^s and
answers of the most christen martyr Anne Askewe, with other addycyons besides.
Mark in the^ the horrible mad furye of Antychrist and the devil how they
work in this age by their tyrannous me^bres, Antichrist
to bring the last vengeance swyftlye upon the^. Before time has not been
seane, soch frantyck outrage as is now, the judges without all sober
dyscressyon, ronnynyge to the rack toggynge, halynge, and pulling thereat,
like tormentours in a play. compassion
Compare me here Pylate with Wrisleye the high chancellor of England, with
Rich and with other which will be counted no small moates. And se how much the
pagane Judge excels in virtue and wisdom, the false christened judge, yea,
rather prodygyouse tyraunte. When Pylate had enquired, Pylate
what accusacyon the Jews clergy had against Christ, he perceived they did
all of malice, and refused to meddle therein. Joan. xviii. In Wrisleye and Rich
is no such equite. Wrisleye.
But they rather seek occasyon to accomplish the full malice of Antychriste.

Pylate showed the accused all fauer Pylate
possible. He examyned him pryuatelye he gave him fryndelye words, he had him
not fear to speak, he heard him with gentylnesse, he counseled with him
that he might the more frelye suppress their mad furye, and he promised,
they should do him no wrong in case he would utter his full mind. Ioa^. xviii
Far contrary to this were Wrisleye and Rich, Wrysleye
which not all ignorant of the Bishops beastlye errors, malycyouslye
without all fear of God and shame of the world, executed upon this godly
woman most terryble tyranny. Pylate spoke for the innocent, Pylate.
excused him, defended him, laid fourth the law, pleated for him sharpelye,
required them to show mercy, alleged for him their custom, declared him an
innocent and sought by all means to deliver him, Mat xxvii. These perjured
magistrates Wrisleye and Rich, Wrisleye.
not only examyned this innocent woman with rigor, but also hated her,
scorned her, reuyled her, condemned her, for an heretic, and with unspeakable
torments sought to enforce her to bring by accusacion other noble women and
men to death.

More over Pylate would shede no innocent blood, Pylate.
but labored to mytigate the Bishops furye, and instau^ted them as they were
relygiouse, to show godly fauer, concludynge that he could by no law of
justice, judge him worthy to die Marci. xv. These vengeable tyrauntes Wrisleye
and Rich insaciably thirsted. Wrisleye
not only the innocent blood of this faithful servant of God, but also the
blood of the noble duchess of Sothfolke, the blood of the worthy countess of
Hertforde, and of the virtuous countess of Suffexe, the blood of the
faithful lady Dennye, Ladies.
of the good lady Fizwilliams, and of other godly women more, soche widows
and wives as Paul, Peter, and Johan commends in their epistles, besides the
blood of serten noblemen of the kings high counsel. And all at the
spyghtfull calling on of the Bishops. Slack ear gave Pilate to the
prestes, Pylate.
he regarded not there dyspleasure, he detected their proternouse madness, by
delays he dyfferred the sentence, and fynallye washed his hands as one that
was clear from their tyranny, Luce. xxiii. Swyft ear gave Wrisleye and Rich
with their wicked affynyte to ye puffed up porkelynges of the pope Gardener,
Wrisleye and Rich.
Bonner, and soch other, they followed their revel counsel, they enprysoned
her, judged her, condemned her, and racked her, at the last with their own
poluted bloody tormentours hands, till the veins and synnowes brast.

If ye mark the scriptures well, ye shall easelye perceive that Pylate was not
in fawte of Christ's bufferynges, Pylate,
bearynges, scornynges, face spyttynges, crownynge with thorn, and soch other
extreme handelynges. But the malycyouse Bishops and prestes which waged Judas
to betraye him, Prestes.
hired false witness to accuse him, monyed the multitude to dyffame him,
feigned false matter against him, compelled the law and terrifyed the judge,
to have their full myschefe accomplished, as our Bishops have done in this
cruel act and soche other. When the prestes would have blemished his name by
the ignomyniouse death which he suffered among thieves on the cross, Pilate
proclaimed it gloriouse unto all the world, Pylate.
writing his title in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, Jesus of Nazareth king of
the Jews, and would not at their instau^t calling on, change it, Ioa^. xvi.
Wrisleie and Rich with their ungracious affynyte, Wrysleye
have in every point followed here the execrable affectes of the prestes.
Fauorablye Pilate licensed Joseph of Arymathye to take down Christ's body,
and to bury it. Math. xxvii. Wrisleye commanded this martyr of God with her
faithful companyons to be brent to ashes. Pylate was ignorant of Gods laws,
Pilate.
and a pagane Wrisleye and Rich know both the law and the Gospel, Wrisleye
and are christyanes, the more is it to their dampnacyon, to execute soch
turkish tyranny.

Now to conclude with Anne Askewe as the argument of this book requires In the
year of our lord a M.D.XLVI And in the month of Iulye, at the prodygyouse
procuremente of Antichrists furyouse remnaunt, Gardyner, Brent.
Bonner and soch like, she sufferd most cruel death i^ Smythfelde with her
iii. faithful companyons, Ioha^ Lassels a gentylma^ which had been her
instructour, Johan Adlam a tailor, Martyrs
and a pressed so constaunt in the veryte against the said Antichrists
supersticyons as they, whose name at this time I had not. Credybyle am I
infourmed by diverse duche merchants which were there present, that in ye
time of their sufferinges, the sky abhorringe so wicked an act, A sign.
suddenly altered color, and the clouds from above gave a tho^der clappe, not
al unlike to that is written, Psa. lxxvi. The eleme^tes both declared therein
the high dyspleasure of God for so tyra^nouse a murder of innocents. Gods
hand.
and also expreslye sygnyfyed his mighty hand present to the comfort of them
which trusted in him, besides the most wonderful mutacyon which will within
short space thereupon follow. And like as the Centuryon with those that were
with him, Centurio
for the tokens showed at Christ's death, confessed him to be ye son of God,
Math. xxvii. So did a great nombre at the burning of these martyrs, upon the
sight of this open experyme^t, afferme them to be his faithful members.

Full many Christen heart have risen and will rise from the pope to Christ
through the occasyon of their consumynge in the fire. Christianes.
As the saying is, of their ashes will more of the same opinion arise. Many a
wone says yet both in England and Duchelande, also, Take heed
O that woman that woman, O those men those men. If the popes generacyon and
wicked remnaunt make many more soch martyrs, they are like to mar all their
whole market in England. It were best for the^ now a days to let men be at
lyberte for their holy fathers gaudish ceremonies, Ceremonies.
as they are for bear baytynges, cock fyghtynges tennys play, tables,
tombelinge, daunsynge, or hu^tynge, who list and who may. for as little have
those traditions of his of the word of God, in their prowdest out show, as
they have. Here will some tender stomakes be grieved, Tendrelynges,
and report that in our headye hastiness, we refuse to suffer with our weak
brethren according to the doctrine of Paul. But I say unto them, what so
ever they be which are so scrupulouse wanderers, that they most execrablye
err in so bestowynge the scryptures. For abhomynable is that tolleraunce of
our brethernes weakness, Hypocresye.
where God is by ydolatrouse superstycyons dysobeyed, dishonored, and
blasphemed. A plain practyse were this of Satan in hypocresye to uphold all
deuylyshnesse

On the other side was there an other sort at the death of these blessed
martyrs, Papystes
and they judged of this alteracion of the air and thonder clappe, as did the
Iewysh Bishops with their perverted multitude. Which waggynge their heads,
rayled, reuyled, iangled, iested, scorned, cursed, mocked, and mowed at
Christ's precyouse sufferynges on the cross, Prestes.
Mat xxvii. and Luce xxiii. These were the idle wytted prestes at London and
their beastlye ygnoraunt broodes with old superstycyouse bawdes and brethels,
the popes blind cattle. Bawdes.
These cried there like mad me dye bedlemes, as they heard the thonder. They
are dampened, they are dampened, their wise preachers outasynge the same at
Paul's cross, In deed full no billie are they ouerseane in the Bible that
judge the thonders to signify da^pnacion. Thonder (says the scripture) is ye
voice of god, Tho^ders.
Eccle. xliii. Thonder is ye helpinge power of ye lord, Job. xxvii. and no
dampnacion. Christ called Johan and James the sons of thonder, Marci iii.
Which betokened that they should be ernest preachers, and no children of
dampnacion. The lord by thonder shows his inscrutable workinge, Thonder.
Job. xxxviii. Moses received ye law. Helias the sprete of prophecy, the
Apostles the holy Ghost, and all in thonder. What wicked sole will say, they
received so dampnacion?

As the lamb had opened the first seal of the book, the voice that went forth
was as it had been thonder, Apoca. vi. which is no dampnacion, Apocal.
but a sharp calling of people to Godwarde. The thonderynges that apered when
the Angel filled his censer. Tho^ders.
Apoc viii. were no dampnacions but Gods crueste words rebukinge the world
for sin. The best interpretours do call those tho^deringes which came from the
trone of God. Apocal. iiii. soch verites of the scripture as terrifieth
sinners, and no dampnacions. Neither were the vii. thonderynges which gave
their voices, Apoc. x. any other than mysteryes at their times to be opened,
Eucherius Lugdunensis and other moralisers, Eucheryus
call thonders in the scripture, the voices of the Gospel, and their
lighteninges, the clear openinges of the same. If tho^der be a thretteninge or
a fearful judgment of God (as in Psalm. ciii.) it is to them that abide here,
and not to them that depart from hens. A token is it also that the horrible
tirauntes shall be as the meledust, For tyrauntes.
that the wind takes away sodenlie, Esaie xxix. If Plage do follow of
tho^der, as it did in Egypt, when Moses stretched forth his rod, Exodi. ix.
North folk.
It shall light upon them which has showed the tira^nouse vyolence on the
people of God, as it did upon pharao and his cruel minysters.

At the mighty voice which was both sensyble heard and understandyd of the
Apostles from heaven, Markewele.
that the father was and would be glorified by Christ the people said nothing
but, It thondereth, Joan. xii. For nothing else they understood thereof. What
Anne Askewe and her companyons both heard and se in this thonder to their
sowles co^solacyon in their paynefull sufferinges, no mortal understanding
can discern. Only was it Steven (and paraduenture a few dysciples) that se
the heavens open when he suffered, S. Steue^
and not the cruel multitude which ran upon him with stones, Acto. vii. Let
beastly blind babbyllers and bawdes with their charmynge chaplaynes than
prate at large, out of their malycyouse sprete and idle brains. We have in
habundaunce the veryte of Gods word and promise, gods words
to prove them both saved and gloryfyed in Christ. For God ever preserves
them which trust in him, Psalm. xvi. All that call upon his holy name, are
saved, Iobel. ii. What reasonable man will think that they can be lost,
which have their lord God more dear than their own lives? No man shall be
hable (says Christ) to pluck my sheep out of my hands, Not lost.
but I will give the^ eternal life, Joan. x. Believe (says Paul to the iayler
at Philippos) on ye lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy whole
howsholde, Acto. xvi. They that seem in the sight of the unwise to go into
destruccyon, do rest in the peace of God, and are replenished with immortalite,
Sapien. iii. With other in numerable scriptures, to the praise of God, whose
name be glorified world without end, Amen.

FINIS.
God save the king.
Thus ends the lattre conflict of Anne Askewe, latelye done to death by the
Romysh popes malycyouse remnaunt, and now canonysed in the preciouse blood of
the lord Jesus Christ Imprynted at Marpurg in the land of Hessen. 16, die
January, anno 1.5.4.7.

