By the King.
Orders for the Posts of Our Realms, and for all men to observe and obey in
the speedy carriage of Packets, directed for Our Affairs.
Whereas heretofore the Lords of the Privy Council to the Queen Our sister
deceased, for great and weighty causes concerning the State, have endeauored
to set do wne, and publish fundry Orders, and general directions for matters
of Posting, especially for the speedy dispatch of Packets and Letters
importing the Princes immediate Affairs, the color whereof serving private
turns, has greatly frustrated their endeauours: It is now therefore, for the
better warrantise and direction of Our Posts, thought meet and convenient,
that the former Orders be revived, and (according to the necessity of the
times) renewed and published in Our name in manner as follows.

1. FIrst, every Post receiving a daily Fee, and entertained specially for the
Packet, according to the proportion of his Wages by the day, shall keep
certain Horses, to the number of two at the least, with furniture convenient,
and those always to have at hand in a readiness to run with our Packets only
in Post, so soon as the same are brought to his hands. He shall have also two
Bags of Leather at the least, well lined with Bays or Cotton, to carry the
Packet in, and Horns to sound and blow, a soft as he meets company, or four
times in every mile. 2. EVery Post thus furnished, shall at all hours receive
and carry, or send away, all Packets or Letters brought unto him, directed for
Our special affairs, dated on the outside, with the time and place of their
first delivery, and subscribed by the hands of Our Principal Secretaries, and
Master and Comptroller general of the Posts: and for matters of the Navy, or
to the Maritime Forts upon the Sea coasts, or principal Port Towns, by Our
Admiral of England: For matters of the Cinque Ports, by Our Warden: For
matters of Scotland. by Our Treasurer and Secretary of Scotland: And for
Ireland, by Our Lieutenant there, Or addressed to them in the proper business
of their places, or to the body of Our Council, from what persons or places
whatsoever: Of whose names, and address only, the Posts shall take notice,
according to the first Institution, and original use of their service, and of
none other. 3. EVery Post receiving Our Packets, directed and subscribed as
abouesaid, shall within one quarter of an hour at the most after they come to
his hands, dispatch them away in Post, and shall run therewith in Summer
(that is, from the first of April to the last of September) after seven miles
the hour: and in Winter (which shall be esteemed the rest of the year) after
five miles the hour at the least, as the ways afford and the weather fall
out. 4. ANd that it may appear from time to time (when, and as often as it
shall be required) with what care and diligence the service is at all hands
applied and performed, Cuery Post shall keep a large and fair ledger paper
book to enter Our Packets in, as they shall be brought unto him, with the day
of the month, hour of the day or night, that they came first to his hands,
together with the name of him or them, by whom or unto whom they were
subscribed and directed, taking and entering only such for Our Packets, as come
warranted as aforesaid, and all others to pass as by-Letters. 5. LAstly, to
the end that the Posts generally may the better attend their several
Services, and perform their duties in that behaife, Our pleasure is, that
they and every of them shall brook and enjoy the benefit of all former
favors allowed them, Namely, That they and their servants be holden free and
exempted from all Prests and attendances at Assizes, Sessions, Inquests, and
Musters.
Signed by his Majesty, and subscribed by Charles Stanhop Knight of the Bath,
Lord Stanhop of Harington, Master and Comptroller general of his Highness
Posts.


Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL. Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXI.


