I R

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for the prorogation of the Parliament, from the sixteent^ of
January next coming, to the three and twentieth of the same month.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for certain^ great and urgent
causes concerning his Highness, and the state and (...) of his Realm and Church
of England, has ordained a Pa^^^ament to be begun and holden at the City of
Westminster the sixteent^ day of January next coming: For which cause diverse
Writts ar^ ^lready directed forth for all Prelates, Noblemen, and States of
thi^ Realm: And also for all Knights, Citizens, and Burgesse^ chosen or to be
chosen for the said Parliament, personally to appear and be present at the day
and place aforesaid in such sort and order, (...) like cases has been
heretofore used and accustomed: Yet notwithstanding, his Highness for diverse
good causes and consid^^ations him moving, and with the advice of his Privy
Council, has thought good and necessary to prorogue the said Parliament,
until the three and twentieth day of the same month o^ January next coming;
And therefore his Majesty by this his Proclamation, does pu^^^sh and notify
the same to all the said Prelates, Noblemen, and States, and also to all (...)
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, so that they or any of them are not bound or
com^^lled to appear the said sixteenth day of January at the City aforesaid,
but that they and every of them thereby are discharged thereof against his
Highness: Willing nevertheless, and charg^ ng and commanding all and every
the said Prelates, Noblemen, and States, and all the said (...) Citizens, and
Burgesses and all others to whom in this case it shall appertain, that they
and every of them do personally appear, and be present at the said three and
twentieth da^ of January, at the City of Westminster aforesaid, to Treat,
Consent, and Conclude upon s;u^h matters, which in the said Parliament then and
there of the Common Council of the said (...) (by Gods favor) shall happen to
be ordained: And further his Highness charge and commands all Sheriffs,
and other Officers appointed, for, or concerning the choice of the (...)
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, that they and every of them do proceed,
touching the choice of the same Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in such sort
and order as ought ^o have been done, if the said Parliament were not
prorogued as aforesaid: And further to keep their day of appearance, at the
said three and twentieth day of January, at the City of Westminster
aforesaid, in all points as to them in this case appertains.

Given at his Majesty's Palace of Westminster the xxviij. day of December, in
the eighteenth ^e^re of his Highness Reign of England, France and Ireland,
and of Scotland the four and fiftieth ^^^^
Imprinted at London by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. M.DC.XX.


