I R

royal blazon or coat of arms
An Abstract of His Majesty's Royal Privilege, Granted under the Great Seal
of ENGLAND, to GEORGE WITHER Master of Arts, concerning his Book entitled,
The Hymns and Songs of the Church.
WHEREAS the Kings most excellent Majesty, having perused and taken particular
notice of the said Book, conceiueth the same, tending to the glory of God, and
helpefull toward the increase of Christian knowledge and Devotion in His
Dominions: It has please His Majesty in consideration thereof (and to
recompense, and to encourage the said George Wither in pious endeauours) by His
Letters Patents, bearing Date the 17. of. February, in the twentieth year of
His Reign of England, etc. to Graut unto the said George Wither, during the
Term of 51. years, full License and Authority to imprint the said Book,
either with, or without Arguments and Musical notes (and to utter and sell the
same in any of His Dominions:) with a prohibition also, that no other
whosoever, shall directly nor indirectly in place Privileged or not Priuilei
ged, within His Majesty's Dominons, imprint during the said Term, or transport
from beyond the Seas the said Book or any part thereof; nor utter, put to
Sale, or dispose of any of the said Books so imprinted or transported, on
pain of His Majesty's heavy displeasure, and such pains, penalties, and
imprisonments, as by the Laws of this Kingdom may be inflicted on the
offenders for contemning and disobeying of His Majesty's Prerogative Royal;
And upon the penalty of forfeiting all such Book and Books, etc. and forty
shillings for every Book, etc.

Moreover, that the said Book might be the more conveniently dispersed, for
the instruction and private devotion of His Majesty's loving subjects; It has
pleased His Highness to command also in the same Letters Patents, that no
English Psalme-Booke in Meeter, shall be bound up alone, or with any other
Book or Books, unless the said Hymns and Song of the Church be annexed
thereunto, after the said Book is imprinted to that purpose; upon pain of
forfeiting all Books so bound up, etc. And for the better execution of the
said Grant, the said George Wither or his Assigns, etc. are authorized,
taking with him or them a lawful Officer, to enter into such Dwellings, Shops,
and Warehouses, etc. wherein they shall suspect any offense made contrary to
the said Grant, and to take, ceaze, and carry away, etc. all Books imprinted
or bound up contrary to the meaning of the said Letters Patents, etc. And the
Masters, Wardens, etc. of the Company of Stationers are commanded also to be
assistant in the execution of the said Grant, as appears more at large in
the said Letters Patents, among other Grations Privileges vouchsafed.

The Hymns aforenamed, are to be sold at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in Saint
Paul's Churchyard, over against Saint Gregoies Church, and in these several
Volumes following; In folio Roman. In quarto Pica. In quarto Breuier common. In
quarto Breuier English. In octauo Middleborough. In octauo Nonparel. In octauo
common. In twelues for Bibles. In sixteen Middleborough. In sixteen common.
In 24. In 32.


God save the King.

