I R
DIEV ET MON DROIT. HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE royal blazon surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion, Tudor rose, and Irish harp on one
side and the Scottish unicorn, thistle, and French fleur-de-lis on the other
The Copy of the Kings Majesty's Letters Patents, concerning the reformation of
the Abuses used in melting and making up of Lead, And the Sealing of the same.
JAMES, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland;
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting.
Whereas We are given to understand, that by the diggers and getters of
Lead-Oare out of the Mines within this Kingdom of England and the Dominion of
Wales, the said Oar is carried and conveyed unto diverse Melting or Smelting
houses, where the said Oar is melted and made into great Lumpes or pieces of
Lead, commonly called Pigges or Sowes of Lead: And that diverse abuses,
deceipts, frauds, practices and devices are there daily used and committed in
the melting and making up of the said Sowes or Pigges of Lead, by putting
therein great lumpes of Scindars and other unprofitable stuff, not only to the
disgrace and viliflyng of that commodity, but also to the manifest wrong and
prejudice as well of Us and of the Subjects of our own Kingdoms, as of all
other Nations and Countries which buy and use the same; For our better
satisfaction wherein, we referred the examination and consideration thereof to
certain our Commissioners. And whereas the said Commissioners have certified
in writing under their hands, that it appears as well upon conference with the
Plombers that have the greatest dealing in Lead, as with sundry Merchants of
this our Realm, That the said Information given to Us is true, and that a
reformation heerin is desired, and that it is a great disgrace to the Lead of
this Realm in Foreign parts, that the same abuses are not reformed; and that
the same abuse appeared also, not only by approbation upon melting of diverse
Sowes and Pigges, or quantities of Lead, in which there was found extraordinary
waste that was good for nothing; But also by several Certificates from
Merchants in Foreign parts which have bought of the said English-Lead, and
have certified that there is great deceit used in the said Lead that comes
into Foreign parts out of this our Realm of England. And that those that do
melt the said Lead in Foreign parts, do always find great heavy pieces of
unprofitable stuff in the midst of the Pigges which can be put to no use, and
that oftentimes they find great stones in the midst thereof, to the great
loss of those that deal with the same, and for which they could never get
restitution; the said Merchants shall be forced to give over their dealing with
English-Lead, unless the abuses were reformed. And the said Commissioners has
likewise certified unto Us, that forasmuch ^^^eared unto them, that there is
Abuse and deceit used in making up of Lead, whereof both the Plombars and
Merchants desire reformation; They hold it fit and convenient, that some course
should (...) therein, so as neither the Plombar that deals with the commodity
at home, nor the Merchant that ventureth the same abroad in Foreign parts,
might have cause to complain as heertofore (...) done.

(...) having had consideration of the premises, and being very desirous, and
holding it in our Princely Judgment a thing most fit, and properly belonging to
our Regal Office, by the best and most speedy (...) We may to prevent,
subvert and extinguish frauds and practices attempted and put in ure for
unjust and private ends, and for particular lucre and gain, to the general
detriment and prejudice (...) ^^mmon-wealth of this our Kingdom; attended with
the disgrace and discredit of the Marchandizes of the same, and the hindrance
of the trade and Traffic of our Subjects in Foraigne parts; (...) ^^th been
famous throughout all Nations. And finding no better way for the effecting
thereof, then by ymploying some person or persons of trust and skill, who may
survey and see to the melting and making (...) said Lead into Pigges or Sowes
of Lead before it be sent from the melting houses, or by other convenient
means may try and prove the goodness and well making of the said Pigges and
Sowes of Lead, (...) ^^her Lead by what name soever melted or made, and
thereupon set a Mark or Stamp on them for the better understanding of the true
making up thereof. Of Our certain Knowledge and mere (...) have willed,
ordained, constituted and appointed, and by these presents, for Us, our Heirs
and Successors, Do will, ordain, constitute and appoint, that for ever
hereafter there shall be an (...) which shall be, and shall be called the
Office of Surueyor of Us, our Heirs and Successors of Lead. And that there
shall be for ever hereafter, one or more person or persons, by Us, our Heirs
(...) ^^^^^ssors to be nominated and appointed, which shall be, and shall be
called the Surueyor and Surueyors of Us, our Heirs and Successors of Lead.
Unto which Officer and Officers, We do hereby (...) ^ur Heirs and
Successors, give and grant full power, and authority by himself or themselves,
or his or their sufficient Deputy or Deputies, assign or assigns, from time
to time to repair unto all (...) the melting or smelting houses, which now be,
or hereafter shall be, within our said Realm of England, and Dominion of
Wales, or any part of them, or either of them, where Lead is, or shall (...) or
made up, and there to have and take a diligent veiw and Survey of all Lead so
melted or made up within our said Realm and Dominion. And also to ouersee the
melting and making up thereof. (...) ^^vise by all good ways and means He or
they may, to search and try the said Pigges and Sowes, and other quantities or
lumpes of Lead so to be made, and upon approbation thereof, to be good and Mar^
(...) Lead, to set a Mark or Stamp upon it, whereby the buyer of the same
Lead may be assured of the goodness and well making up and melting of the same.
And to that end and purpose Our will and plea^^^^ (...) we do heerby for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, grant that the said Officer or Officers, shall and
may have a Seal or stamp to be used by him, or them, or his or their Deputy
or Deputies, (...) may alter, break, or make a new at his, and their pleasure.

^^d further, We do heerby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, give power and
authority unto to said Officer and Officers so as aforesaid to be nominated and
appointed, by himself or themselves, (...) their Deputy or Deputies, to do
any other lawful acts tending to the reformation of the abuses, practices and
deceipts aforesaid, according to our true intent and meaning in these presents
expressed. (...) the end that such persons as shall hereafter offend in any the
premises, may be left without excuse, and receive some condign punishment for
such their offenses, We do by these presents also for (...) Heirs and
Successors, straightly charge, prohibit and forbid all, and all manner of
persons whatsoever, that they or any of them do not at any time or times
hereafter attempt or presume to take (...) way any Lead from, or out of any
melting or smelting house within this our Realm of England, or the Dominion of
Wales, or any part of them or either of them, before ye same Lead be duly
tri^hed and Sealed by the said Officer of Officers, or his or their assigns,
Deputies or servants, or some or one of them, who for that purpose at all times
convenient shall attend the same, upon pain (...) ^^^^^^ture of all such Lead
so taken, or carried away from the said melting or smelting houses contrary to
the true meaning of these presents, and also upon pain of our heavy
indignation and displeasure, (...) further pains, penalties, punishments, and
ymprisonments, as by any of the Laws or Statutes of this Realm can or may be
inflicted upon the offenders heerin for their contempt or disobedi^^^^ ^heaking
or contemning this our Royal Commandment.

(...) for the better help and assissance of the said Officer and Officers,
and his and their assigns, Deputies and servants in this service, for the
better discovery of the frauds and abuses aforesaid, We do (...) Us, our
Heirs and Successors, give full power and authority unto the said Officer and
Officers, and his and their assigns, Deputies, and servants, or any of them,
from time to time, and at all (...) ^^^rafter at his and their and every or any
of their will and pleasure, as well by night as by day, to go on Board, view,
and search, and survey every Ship, vessel or bottom ryding or lying or lying
within (...), Haven or Creek of this Realm of England, or the Dominion of
Wales, or any part thereof, and by day time with the assistance of a Constable,
or other Officer, to go and enter into any (...) Uawlt, Warehouse, shop, or
other place, to see if there shall be any Lead taken or carried from the
melting or smelting houses aforesaid, before the same has been veiwed,
weighed, tried and (...) according to the true meaning of these presents; and
there in due and lawful manner to seize, take and carry away all such Lead as
he or they, or any of them shall find to be so taken and carried from the
(...) houses vnweighed and unmarked, contrary to our pleasure herein
expressed, The moitie or one half of all which forfeitures, we do for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, give and grant to the (...) ^ficer and Officers, and
his and their Deputies and assigns: And the other moytie thereof, we will
shall be reserved and answered to the use of Us, our Heirs and Successors.

(...) because the well managing of this business tends to the great benefit
of all persons that shall be occasioned to use any of the said Lead, and that
the same cannot be undergone without great and daily (...) for the maintenance
of fit and able Deputies, Ministers, and other persons to attend the execution
of the service incident to the aforesaid Office; We do heerby for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, ^e and ordain, that it shall and may be lawful for,
and also give power and authority unto the said Officer and Officers, from time
to time hereafter by himself, or themselves, or his or their assgnes ^s or
servants, to ask, demand, receive and take of every Owner and Owners, Maker
and Makers up of Lead, for the viewing, surueying, trying and marking of every
Hundred weight of Lead at any (...) ^^^rafter to be melted and made up within
this our Kingdom of England, and the Dominion of Wales, or either of them, and
which by the said Officer or Officers, or their, or any of their assigns, ^es,
and servants, or some, or any of them shall be viewed, surueyed, weighed and
marked according to the true meaning of these presents, the Sum of Two pence of
current money of England, which said (...) Two pence upon every Hundred weight
of the said Lead, Our pleasure likewise is, shall be taken, received and paid
at the melting or smelting houses before the said Lead be sold, uttered or dis^
out of the same; And that the said Two pence upon every Hundred weight of the
said Lead appointed to be received and taken as aforesaid, be for ever
hereafter united and annexed to the said Office (...) or duty to be taken and
received for the surueying, viewing, trying and marking the said Lead; And that
the said fee or duty be taken and received by the said Officer or Officers, or
his or their depu^^^^ (...) ^ssignes in manner aforesaid, without the let or
contradiction of Us, our Heirs or Successors, or any of our, or their Officers
or Ministers, or other persons whatsoever.

(...) for the better effecting of Our will and pleasure heerin, KNOW, ye,
that we reposing assured trust and cofidence in the understanding, fidelity
and circumspection of our wel-beloued Henry Bell Es^^^^^ of Our especial Grace
and certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given and granted, and by these
presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, We do give and grant unto the
said Henry Bell, (...) assigns the foresaid Office of Surueyor, of Us, our
Heirs and Successors of Lead, with the appurtenances, And him the said Henry
Bell, and his assigns, the Surueyor and Surueyors of Us, our ^ant Successors
of Lead, to do, perform, and execute all and singular the premises by the
Officer or Officers aforesaid, according to the true meaning hereof to be
performed, We do for Us, (...) ^^ires and Successors, make, ordain, create
and constitute, by these presents.

(...) have and to hold the said Office, together with all and singular the
powers, privileges, Fees, duties, forfeitures, and premises to the said Henry
Bell, and his assigns, by himself, or themselves (...) their sufficient
Deputy or Deputies, for and during the term, and unto the full end and term
of Thirty and One years from the day of the Date of these presents, next
ensuing, and fully to be (...) and ended.


