By the King.
A Proclamation prohibiting the bringing in of any Commodities traded by the
Eastland Merchants into this Kingdom, as well by subjects as strangers, not
free of that Company; with a publication of certain Statutes for the restraint
of all His Majesty's subjects from shipping any commodities in strangers
bottomes, either into, or out of this Kingdom.
IT is a great part of our Princely care, to maintain and increase the trade
of Our Merchants, and the strength of Our navy, The one being as the Veins
whereby wealth is imported into Our estate, and the other as principal sinews
for the strength and service of Our Crown and kingdom. Whereas therefore the
society and Company of Our Castland Merchants, trading the Balticke Seas, have
by the space of forty years past, at the least, had a settled and constant
possession of trade in those parts, and have had the sole bringing in of all
the commodities of those countries, as namely, Hemp, Flax, Dot-ashes, Soape
ashes, Poloma wool, Cordage, Yearne, Eastland linen cloth, Pitch, Tar and
Wood, whereby Our Kingdom has been much enriched, Our ships and Matriners
set on work, and the honor and fame of Our Nation and Kingdom spread and
enlarged in those parts: And whereas, for further encouragement, the said
Company have had and enjoyed by Letters Patents, under the great Seal of
England, in the time of the late Queen Elizabeth, privilege for the sole
bringing in of the said commodities, with general prohibitions and restraints
of others not licensed and authorized by the said Letters Patents, to traffic
or trade contrary to the tenor of the same letters Patents; We, minding the
upholding and continuance of the said trade, and not to suffer that the said
society shall sustain any violation or diminution of their liberties and
privileges, Have thought good to ratify and publish unto all persons, as well
subjects as strangers, the said privileges and restraints, to the end that
none of them presume to attempt any thing against the same: And do hereby
straitely charge and command all Our Customers, Comptrollers, and all other Our
Officers at the Ports, and also the Farmers of Our Customs and their Deputies
and Wayters, That they suffer not any hemp, flax, potashes, soape-ashes,
Poloma wool, cordage, yarne, Eastland Imnen cloth, pitch, carre, or wood, nor
any other commodities whatsoever, brought from any the foreign parts or
regions wherein the said Company have used to trade, to be landed, except only
such as shall be brought in by such as are free of the said Company: Provided
always, that the importation of corn and grain be left free and without
restraint: Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Furthermore, whereas there has been in ancient time diverse good and
politic Laws, made against the shipping of merchandises in strangers
bottomes, either inward or outward, as namely the Statutes of 5. Richardi 2.4.
Henrici 7.32. Henrici 8. etc. which Laws of latter years have been much
neglected, to the great prejudice of the navigations of Our kingdom; We do
straitely charge and command, that the said Laws be from henceforth duly put
in execution, upon the pains therein contained, and upon pain of Our high
indignation and displeasure toward all Our Officers and Ministers, which shall
be found slack and remiss in procuring and assisting the due execution of the
said Laws.

Given at Our Court at Theobalds, the one and twentieth day of July, in the
twentieth year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland
the six and fiftieth.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXII.


