By the King.
Orders decreed upon for the furtherance of our service, as well in writing, as
riding in Post; specially set down, and commanded to be observed, where our
Posts are established within our County of Kent.
FOrasmuch as amongst the sundry consultations and provident cares taken for
the maintenance of the quiet peace of the State, The Motive of these Orders.
it has not been the least that our Predecessors heretofore, and the Counsel
of this Realm have had, to meet with the dangerous and secret intelligences
of ill affected persons both at home and abroad, by the ouer-great liberty
taken both in writing and riding in Post, specially in and through our County
of Kent, for the usual and frequent passage that way, falling out to and from
all foreign parts beyond the Seas, Security to the State, by preventing
Intelligence between the ill affected.
the ground whereof still rising from disorders offered by certain persons
called Hackney-men, Tapsters, Hostlers and others in hiring out their horses,
to the hinderance of public service, danger to our State, and wrong to our
standing and settled Posts in their several Stages: We have now thought it
meet, with the advice of our right trusty and well-beloved Cosins and
Counselors, Robert Earl of Salisbury, our high Treasurer of England, Henry
Earl of Northampton our Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Warden of our Cinque
Ports, and of our trusty and right well-beloved Counselor, John Lord Stanhope
of Harrington, our Vice-Chamberlaine, and Master of our Posts, to set down
and establish certain Orders as well for the Packet as Thorough-Postes, the
due execution whereof we likewise command and recommend to all Mayors,
Portreeues, Bayliffes and other Head officers in the Cities, Towns and Ports
of our said County of Kent, And his Majesty's special service.
where the Stages of our standing Posts are now established and appointed, and
to the Justices of our Peace next residing, as they or any of them do tender
our Service, the safety of our State, and will answer the neglect or contempt
hereof at their perils.

Orders for the Packet.
FIrst, that no Pacquets or Letters shall be sent by Post, or bind any Post
to ride therewith in post, but such as shall be directed first for our
special affairs, and subscribed by the Writers name or Sender thereof: What
Packets shall run in Post. From the Court. To the Court.
neither shall it be holden for our affairs, but as the same shall be directed
and subscribed by our High Treasurer, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Lord
Admiral, Principal Secretary of State, Lord Lieutenant of the said County, or
Master of our Posts writing from the Court, or otherwise to the Court,
subscribed by any Admiral, or Vice Admiral from the narrow Seas, Lieutenant
of Dover Castle, or Mayor or his Deputy of any Port Town, Ambassadors, or
Agents beyond the Seas for the time being, or Deputy Lieutenant of our said
County, writing to any of these personages aforenamed, or to the body of our
Privy Counsel.

2 All Pacquets or Letters so directed shall be carried by the Posts in post
from Stage to Stage only, The Posts to run from Stage to Stage only.
and not otherwise nor further, being dated first on the outside by the Sender
or writer, and afterward by the Posts themselves, as they come to their
hands, with the hour and place of their delivery, who shall run therewith in
Summer, In Summer after 7. miles the hour, and in Winter after the rate of
five.
viz. from the first of April, to the last of September, after 7, miles the
hour, and 5. miles the hour in Winter, which is the rest of the year, as the
ways and weather affoard.

3 And that it may appear from time to time (as often as shall be needful) with
what expedition the service is by our Posts performed, every Post shall keep
a fair paper book to enter the Pacquets in, being so brought unto him, with
the day, month and hour they came to his hands, two leather bags lined with
cotton or bays, The Posts to have books of Entries, bags and horns.
to carry the Packet in, and horns to sound, as often as he meets and sees
company coming, or 4. times in every mile.

4 And to the end our Posts attending thus our special service, may perform
their several duties in that behalf, our pleasure is, that they and every of
them shall brook and enjoy the benefit of all former favors and immunities by
our Predecessor allowed them: Namely that they and their servants be holden
free and exempted from all Summons, The Posts exemption and freedom.
Prests, and personal attendances at Assizes. Sessions, Inquests, and Musters.

Orders for the Thorough-Postes.
The Posts to horse all riding with horn or guide.
FIrst, as the service of the Packet, so the horsing of all Thorough-Postes,
and persons riding in post, with horn or guide, by Commission or otherwise,
shall be performed by our standing Posts in their several Stages, who to that
end shall keep, and have in a readiness under their directions a sufficient
number of Poste-horses, with saddles, bridles and furniture convenient: and if
it shall fall out, that by the repair of Ambassadors, or other accidents of
service, To be assisted by Magistrates, if need require.
men riding in post, that is to say, with horn or guide, come so thick, or
in such numbers, that their ordinary provision will not suffice, then the
Constables of the places where they dwell, with the aid and assistance of the
chief Magistrates there, and the Countries adjoining, (being required in our
name) shall take up, No man's freedom being impeached.
bring in and supply the Posts with horses and with cariages, where they may
be had or hired.

2 And that it be not any way a let or impeachment to the liberty of any man
riding on his own or ordinary affairs, within the Realm at his or their
pleasure: Who are to be horsed by the Posts, and at what rate the mile.
it is hereby meant that all Strangers, specially riding with horn or guide by
themselves, or in company of our ordinary messengers or Posts for the Low
Countries, or France, all Ambassadors, riding or sending in their Princes
affairs, and all other whatsoever, riding with horn or guide, shall take and
change their horse only of the Posts of that place, or with his consent and
appointment, they taking for each horse after the rate of iij.d. the mile
beside the guide groat.

Abuses to strangers not riding in post, how prevented by coming to the
Posts.
3 And to prevent all advantages of unconscionable dealing, by such as keep
horses to hire, in the horsing of strangers beyond the ordinary Stages, to the
wronging of our Posts, and injury of the beast, as the Rider: It is found
expedient, and our will and pleasure is, that all Strangers borne, as well going
forth of the Realm, as coming into the same, through our shire of Kent,
although it be about their own and private affairs, without horn or guide,
shall likewise be horsed by our ordinary Posts from Stage to Stage, The rate
by the mile.
or with the Posts knowledge and consent, not taking for each horse above ij.
d. ob. the mile.

The hire to be first paid down.
4 It shall not be lawful for any so riding in post, to take and ride away
the horse or horses of any man, not having first and aforehand fully paid and
satisfied the hire, The horse not to be hired beyound the next Stage.
nor ride them further then the next Stage, without the knowledge and consent
of the Post of that Stage, not charge any horse taken, to ride post with any
male or burden (besides the rider) that exceeds the weight of 30. pound. And if
it shall happen, any to disobey these our commandments, and orders, to the
manifest wrong of any our Posts, injury of any owner, or hurt of his beast:
the Officers or Magistrates of the place, upon complaint thereof made, The
Burden of 30. pounds besides the Rider.
shall stay the party offending, till satisfaction be made, or sufficient
security given to repay the damage. But if it so fall out, that the obstinacy
of any herein offending, require further punishment then the ordinary power of
the Magistrate of the place can or may conveniently inflict: Then we require
our said Master and Comptroller of the Posts, The contempt of these Orders to
be punished by Magistrates, or the Lords of the Counsel.
upon notice thereof given him, to send for the party or parties to answer
their contempt before our Privy Counsel.

5 This being in general our Will and command, for the speedy, safe, and
orderly expedition of our public dispatches and occurrents, as well in writing
for our affairs, as riding in post, whatsoever besides shall fall out more
particularly to the behoof of our said Posts, or ease of their horses, that in
these kind of services are most subject to abuses, our like care is to be
specially respected: The Posts relief and care of their horses are specially
recommended in these Orders, for his Highness better Service.
and to that end we do hereby eftsoons recommend both the one and the other
to the wisdom and protection of our said Master of the Posts, and the aid
of all Magistrates and others that love the furtherance of our service, or
regard our safety or pleasure.

Given at our Manor of Greenwich, the 15. day of May, in the seventh year of
our Reign of great Britain, France and Ireland. Signed by his Majesty, and
subscribed by Charles Stanhop Knight of the Bath, Lord Stanhop of Harrington,
Master and Comptroller general of his Highness Posts.

Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. 1621.


