By the King.
WHereas in November, last, by Our Proclamation We commanded from Court all
idle persons, 'and other vnnessarie Dependants, as much tending to the
dishonor of Our house; Which evil We finding not yet redressed, have now
taken knowledge, and allowed of a meet number of Artificers, and others to
follow our house in the several places, and trades whereto they are assigned,
upon Recognizance first entered to Us with condition for their good behavior,
and performing such other Articles as therein shall be contained; whose rooms
and places becoming void, Our pleasure is, shall be supplied by others
thereunto named by Our Knight Marshall for the time being. We do therefore
straightly charge and command, That all Tent Keepers, Artificers, and other idle
persons, and hangers on Our house (other then such whose particular names are
entered in the Roll by Us signed, as allowed to follow Our house) shall within
four and twenty hours after this Our Proclamation depart from Our Court, and
not return thither again, upon pain of Imprisonment, and other corporal
punishments, and penalties to be inflicted for their contempt in this behalf.
And We require, and straightly charge Our knight Marshall, and all Officers, and
Ministers under him, that he and they do take a daily, and constant survey of
offenders of this kind, to the end that they may be condignely punished; and
that they take care that Our pleasure herein be from time to time strictly
observed, by restrayning all others (save such as are licenced and allowed as
aforesaid) to follow, or have dependence upon Our house. And for such Tents as
are allowed to follow Us, We will that they be appointed and placed by the
direction of Our Knight Marshall or his Deputy, in such manner as they may be
no offense, or annoyance to Our person or household.

And whereas great inconveniences daily happen by Our own servants, and
followers, by their entertayning of persons to follow them in times of Our
Iourneyes and Progress, which afterward being turned off, do nevertheless
loyter, and linger about Our Court, to the great dishonor of the same: For
redress whereof, We like wise straightly prohibit, and forbid all and every our
servants, and followers, and others of what degree soever, That they
henceforth presume not to offend in that kind, as they tender Our displeasure.

And also, that no chamber-keeper, Groom of the Stable, or other Officer shall
give entertainment to any person whatsoever to follow, or depend upon him, or
them, but only such as shall be allowed and entered in the Roll for Our house.

And the better to suppress the disorders, and abuses happening in Our Court
by reason of landry women, having daily access into Our house; We do
therefore straightly charge and Command, that no laundresse shall have recourse
to any office, or lodging within Our house; But that the Offices, and Chambers
unto which they wash, do send their servants out unto them with and for their
Linen: And that all such Laundresses as are allowed to follow Our house,
as well the Laundresse to Our body, as others, shall follow themselves in
person, and not supply their places by their servants, and maids, who living
without government, are the cause and occasion of so great disorder amongst
them that follow Us. And to that end, We will and command our Porters at our
gate, to see this Our pleasure to be duly observed and kept.

And lastly, We straightly require, charge and command all Majors, Justices of
Peace, Shiriffes, Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughes, and all other Our
Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to be ayding and assisting, to the execution
of this Our Royal Will and commandment, as they will give account to us
thereof, and tender Our High displeasure for neglect of this service so
acceptable unto us.

Given at Our Manor of Greenwich, the last day of June, in the seventeenth
year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the two
and fiftieth.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
excellent Majesty.

Anno. M.DC.XIX.


