The assise of bread and ale, and diverse other things, as appears on the
other side of the leaf.

The contents of this book beside the assise of breadde and ale.
First of forstallers and forstallynge.

Of regratours and regratynge.

Of vitayles and vitaylours.

Of weyghtes and measures. And how much vessels of wine, oil, bonye, yeles,
Salmon, and bearrynge shall bold and conteyne.

Of pourueyours, buyers, and takers of vitayles and other things.

Of the statute of wynchester and diverse other statutes concerning the same.

The cyse of breadde and ale.
IT Was enacted / anno li. Henrici.iij. that when the quarter of whete is
sold for.xij.d. than the farthynge wastell loffe shall weye.vi.li.xvi.s. And
the farthynge loffe Lokette of the same corn, and of the same bultell shall wey
more than the wastel by.ij.s. And the farthyng loffe cokette of corn of less
price, shall weye more than the wastelle by.v.s. The farthyng sym nell shall
wey.ii.s. less than the wastelle. The farthyng loss of clean wheat shall wey
the coket and an half: that is to say, the cokette that weyeth.v.s. more than
the wastell. The farthyng loffe of treite shall wey.ii. wastelles. And the
farthynge loffe of common sort of corn shall wey two greatter cokettes.

wha^ the quarter of where is sold for.xviii.d. than

the farthi^g wastel loffe shall wey.iiii.li.x.s.viii.d.

when the quarter of wheat is sold. for.ii.s. than the farthyng wastell loffe
shall wey.iii.li.viii.s.

when it is sold for.iii.s.vi.d. than the loffe shall wey.liiii.s.iiii.d.ob.q.

when it is sold for.iii.s. than it shall wey.xlviii.s.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.iii.s.vi.d.

than it shall wey.xlii.s.

when it is sold for.iiii.s. tha^ it shall wey.xxxvi.s.

when it is sold for.iiii.s.vi.d. than the farthyng loffe shall weye.xxx.s.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.v.s. than bit shall
weye.xxviii.s.ii.d.ob.

when it is sold for.v.s.vi.d. than the farthynge loffe shall
weye.xxiiii.s.viii.d.q.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.vi.s. than bit shall
weye.xxii.s.viii.d.

when bit is sold for.vi.s.vi.d. than the farthyng loffe shall weye.xix.s.xi.d.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.vii.s. tha^ bit shall weye.xix.s.i.d.

when it is sold for.vii.s.vi.d. than the farthynge loffe shall
weye.xviii.s.i.ob.

when it is sold for.viii.s. than it shall weye.xvii.s.

when it is sold for.viii.s. than it shall weye.xvii.s.

when the quarter of where is sold for.viii.s.vi.d.

than bit shall wey.xvi.s.

when it is sold for.ix.s. than the farthynge loffe shall weye.xv.s.q^;.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.ix.s.vi.d.

than bit shall weye.xiiii.s.iiii.d.ob.q^.

when bit is sold for.x.s. than the farthinge loffe shall weye.xiii.s.vii.d.ob.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.x.s.vi.d.

than bit shall weye.xii.s.xi.d.q^.

when bit is sold for.xi.s. than the farthynge loffe shall
weye.xii.s.iiii.d.q^.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.xi.s.vi.d.

than bit shall weye.xi.s.x.d.

when it is sold for.xii.s. than the farthinge loffe shall weye.xi.s.vi.d.

when the quarter of wheat is sold for.xii.s.vi.d.

than it shall weye.ix.s.ix.d.ob.q^.

And ye shall understand that the baker (as hit has been proved by the baker
of our sovereign lord the king) may gain on every quarter of wheat.iii.d.
and his branne, and.ij. loves for surnage, for.iiii. servants.i.d.ob. for.ii.
boys q. for salt.ob. for costo.ob. for candell. q^ for wodde iii.d. for
bultell ob. allowed.

when the quarter of whete is sold. for.iii.s. or for.iii.s.iiii.d. and barley
for.xx.d. or for.ii.s. and ootes for.xviii.d. than the brewers in cities may
selle.ii. galons of good ale for.i.d. and in the boroughes.iii. gallons
for.i.d. And without, they ought to selle.iiii. for.i.d. and so they may
well. And wytteth well, that this cyse ronneth through all England by the
commandment of our sovereign lord the king. And this is the cyse of bread
and ale, according as it is contained in the wrytynges of the Marsalsie of our
souerayn lord the king, after the price of the best wheat, the second, and
third sort. And as well the wastelle as other bread, of what sort so ever
they be, shall weye after the price of mean wheat.

And this cyse of bread ought not to be changed, but when the quarter of
wheat ryseth or falls vi.d. in the price. And every baker ought to have his
propre mark on every sort of bread. etc.

And that no brewer reyse nor fall a farthynge in the gallon, but when the
quarter of malte ryseth or falls.xii.d. in the price.

And they that break the cyse of breadde or ale, shall be amerced for the first,
the second, and third time. And the fourth time, the baker shall have the
judgment of the pyllorye, and the brewer of the Tumbrelle.

If there be any that by false means uses to sell meal, for the first time
be shall be grievously punyssbed, the second time be shall lose his meal, the
third time be shall have the judgment of the pillory: The fourth time be
shall forswere the town. etc. And so likewise the bakers that offend.

Also bouchers that selle meselle porke or moryn fless he, for the first time
they shall be greuouslye amerced: for the second time so offendynge, they shall
have the judgment of the pyllory: for the third time they shall be committed to
prison, and be ransomed: And the fourth time they shall forswere the town. And
thus ought other transgressors to be punyss head: as cooks, forstallers, and
regratours of the market. when the cooks sith, roste, bake, or any otherwise
dress fyssbe or fless be unwholesome for man's body.

Of forstallers and forstallynge.
ANd ye shall understand / that a forstaller is be, that lyethe by the way,
as vitayle or corn comes to the markette, and byeth bit, to the intent to
make the vytayle or corn derer in the markette, in burte and prejudice of the
kings people. And bit was enacted, anno.xv.E.iii. the iii. chapter, and
confyrmed the.ij. year of R. the ij. the.ij chapter, that vitayle and corn
forstalled should be forfayted to the king, and if it be sold, the king
ought to have the value thereof, and if the offendour have not where with to
pay, he shall be committed to prison, there to remayn the space of.ii. year or
longer at the kings pleasure, without lettynge to baylle, or otherwise to be
delivered. And if the forstaller be atteynted at the suit of the party, than
the party shall have the half of the thing that is forstalled and forfayted,
and the king the other half.

It was also enacted, by statute of the staple, anno.xxvij.E.iii.ca.xi. that no
man should go by water nor land to forstall wynes nor other marchandises,
before they come to the staple or other port where they should be discharged,
nor enter within the ships for that entente before the merchandise were laid
on land, on pain of their life and forfayt of their lands to the lord. But
the peine of life and forfayture of lands and tenementes was repelled,
anno.xxxvij. eiusdem regis, ca.xvi.

Of regratours and regratynge.
And by cause I spoke of regratours, wytteth well that a regratour is he, that
byeth corn or vytayle brought to the market at his own price, and sells it
again derer in the market, in hurt of the kings people. which thing so
regrated is forfayted, and if it be sold the value thereof is forfaited etc.
Now because it so comes to pass, I will speak somewhat of vitayle and
vitaylours.

Of vitayle and vitayllours.
IT was defended by the statute of york, anno.xii.Ed.ii. that no mynister in
cite, or borowe, which by reason of his office ought to se the cyse of wine
and vytayle kept, should being in office / marchaunte wynes or vytayles in
gross or at retayle, on pain to forfayte the same. But our most gracious
sovereign, king Henry the.viii. the.iii. year of his most nobull reygne, in
his perlyament bolden at westmystre, the.iiii. day of Fabruary / has repelled
the same statute, and enacted by authorite of the same parlyament, for many
high considerations, that when any vytayler is chosen to bear office in any
city, town, or borowe corporate, which for the time being in office, should
have the assisynge and correction for vitayle, that than.ij. discrete and
boneste men of the same cite, town, or borowe corporate, neither of both being
a vitayler, shall be chosen by the co^mynaltie, like wise as the said officer
is, which.ij. or one, the other being absent, with the said officer shall set
the cyse and prices of vitayles, for the time the said vitayler shall abide in
his said office. And after the prices and cyses so set, it is lefull for the
said officers, to merchant and sell wynes and all other vytayles in gross, or
at retayle, without any forfaytinge.

Also bit was enacted the.xxiij. year of Edward the third, the syxte chapter,
that bouchers, fyss he mongers, inholders, brewers, bakers, poulters, and all
other syllers of what so ever vitayles, should sylle for reasonable price,
respect had to the far or nere carriage of the same vitayles, and he that
does otherwise, and is conuicte thereof, shall pay the double that he received
to the parti damaged, or in his defaut, to who that will sue in this behalf.

And the mayres, and baillyes of cities, towns, borowghes, portis, and other
places, have power to enquere of the premises, and to levy the foresaid
penalty to their use, at whose suit the transgressors were conuicte. And in
case the mayres and baylyffes be conuicte before the kings Justyces, as
negligente in executynge of the premysses, they shall be compelled by the same
justices, to pay thries the worth of the thing sold to him, that is dammaged,
or else in his defaute, to an other that sueth. And yet farther, they shall be
punysshed at the kings pleasure.

It was also enacted, anno xxxi.E.iij.ca.x. that who that brings vitayles to
London, either oy land or water, may freely sylle the same to whom be will,
without distourbance of fysshemonger, boucher, pulter, or other. And that the
mayre and aldermen should redress the defautes of fysshmongers, bouchers, and
pulters, like wy se as of them that sylle palled wine or ale: not withstanding
chartre of liberty, customs, or other pryuileges, made or used to the
contrary: on pain of.M. mark for the first defaute: for the second.ij.M.
and for the third defaute to lose their franchise.

It was enacted anno.vi.R.ii.cap.ix. that vitaylcrs in no cite nor town
through England sbulde occupy the office of a judge / except for lack of
other sufficient: and than while be is in that office of a judge, be nor none
of his shall sylle no vitayles on pain of forfayture thereof.

And the.vii. year of the said king.R.ca.xi. the statutes made the.v. and.vi.
year of his reygne, touching fysshemongers / vinteners, and other vitaylers of
London, are repelled.

It was also enacted, anno.xiii.R.ii.ca.viii. that Justices of the peace in
every shere at their cessyons holden between Ester and Wichaelmas, shall do
proclayme by their discretions, according to the derthe of vitayles, what a
mason, a carpenter, a tyler, and also laborers / as well in Auguste as other
times of the year shall take by the day, with and without meat and drink.
And that cuerye parsone obey this proclamation. And vitaylers to have
reasonable gain, after the discretion of the said Justices of peace.

It is also straytely defended, anno.vii.R.ca.xv. that no person, alien,
denizin, nor other, carry vytayles, nor do to be conveyed, in to any parties of
Scotland out of England, by land or see, on pain to forfayte the same
vitayles, or other things of relief, with the ships / vessels, carts, or
borses that carye them, except the king give special license to the
contrary. And be that spieth this, to have the third part of the forfayte.
But Berwycke is excepted out of this statute by act made anno.xv.R.ca.vii.

It is enacted, anno i.H.iiii.ca.xvii. that the statute made, anno.vi.R.ii.
how foreyns and alyens not being the kings ennemies, bringynge fisshe or any
other vitayles to any cite or town within England, franchesed or not
franchesed / might frelye sylle the same by great or at retayle at their
pleasure / without any let or gain saying, should be duelye observed and put
in execution. And also again, anno.xiiii.h.vi.ca.vi. the same is confyrmed,
and there unto added / that if any distourbe foreyne or alyen to sylle their
fyssbe contrary to these ordinances, and thereof is duly atteynted at the
kings or at the parties suit, be shall forfayte xl.li. And be that will sue
for the king / or for him self, shall have the one half, and the king the
other.

Of weyghtes and measures.
IT is ordained / anno.li.H.iii. that an englissh sterling penny, round without
clipinge, shall wey.xxxii. wheat corns dry, taken out in the mids of the
ear: And.xx.d. make an ounce: and.xii. ounces make a li. and.viii.li. make a
gallon of wine: and.viii. galons of wine wake a London busshelle, which is
the.viii. part of a quarter. And the same year hit was ordained, that the
standerdes, bussbels, galo^s and yerdes should be sealed with the kings iron
scale / and safelye kept on pain of an.C.li. And that no measure be made in a
town, except bit agree with the measure of our sovereign lord the king, and
sealedde with the common seal of the towneshyppe. And if any man bye or syll
by measures not sealed and examined by the meyre or bailyffes, be shall be
greuouslye amerced. And by the statute made the.xi. year of Henry the.vii.
the.iiii. chap. all weyghtes and measures both great and small of every cite,
borowgh, and market town, should be dilygentlye seen and examyned twyse in the
year: and oftener if need be, by the mayres, bayllies, and other beed officers.

And if any man be convicted to use.ii. measures, to bye by the more and fylle
by the less, be shall as a false disceyuer, be put in prison, and greuouslye
punysshed. The standerde, busshels, galons, and yardes / shall remain in the
custody of the maire, or baylics, and.vi. bonest men of the town sworn,
before whom al measures shall be sealed. And that no manner grain be sold by
heap or cantell / except ootes, malte, and meal.

And by the statute made anno.xi.H.vii.cap.iiii. beed officers of towns may
sign weyghtes and measures with an.H. crowned: and take for the markynge of
every busshell.i.d. And all weyghtes and measures found defectyue upon
examynation, shall immediately be bourned: and the trespasour to forfayte for the
first time.vi.s.viii.d. the second time.xiii.s.iiii.d. the third time.xx.s.
to the mayre, bailey / or other having jurisdiction there: and for farther
punysshement to be set upon the pillorye.

And by the statute made anno.xij.H.vii. the busshelle shall conteyne.viii.
galons of wheat: and every galon.viii. pound of wheat: and every
pound.xii. ounces, and all Troy weyghte.

It was enacted, anno.xiiii.E.iii.cap.xi. that the Treasorer of England should
make standerdes of busshels, gallons / and weyghtes, and send them in to every
shere: and to assygne.ii. in every shere to here / determyne, and punysshe
such as sylle by other measures: and for there expenses they sihal have the
fourth part of the fynes levied in such cases. And that none sylle by
busshell not sealed with the kings seal. Not withstandinge this act the
clerk of the market shall not let to do his office: Nor lords lose their
francheses.

The weyghte of woulle shall be according to the standerde of the escheker
anno.xxv.E.iii.cap.iiii.

And bit is defended by statute of the staple made anno.xxvii.E.iii.cap.x. that
none weye any marchandyse with false weyghtes, on pain to forfaite to the
king the value of that that is sold, and treble damages to the party: And
Justices assygned have power to enquere thereof as well at the kings as the
the parties suit: and to do execution.

And anno.xxxi.E.iii.cap.ii. bit is ordained that certain balances and
weyghtes of sack, di.sack. ii. and quarter / according to the standerde of
the escheker should be sent unto all shereffes of England, and that each
should prove their weyghtes / without any thing gyuinge to the sheriff.

And that none bye nor sylle by other measure, on pain to be at the kings
pleasure.

And the same year the.v.chap. the weight called Ancell was clean fordone.

And the.xxxiiii. year. the.vi.chap. it was ordained, that the busshel, pecke,
gallon, pottell, quarte through all England within francheses and without,
should be occordynge to the kings standerde.

And the.xiii. year of.R. the.ii.cap.ix. bit was ordained that one measure and
one weyghte should be used through all England, except Lancastre shere,
because a greatter measure has always ben used there than in any other part of
the realm. And be that is conuicte for using false weyghtes or measures,
shall have balfe years prisonement, and gree with the party to the double of
his loss. And the act made the.xv. year of the same king R.cap.iiii. will
that none on pain of forfayture thereof, bye more for the quarter, than.viii.
busshels stricken in London or else where. And the.xvi. year of the said. R. and
the xi. year of.H. the.vi. rent service due to lords is excepted, which shall
be measured, as it has been used. And by the statute made
anno.xi.H.vii.ca.iiii. no man is prebyted to bye within the ship bourde by
water measure: which water measure shall conteyne.v. peckes according to the
standerde, raised and stryke^. And also it is provided, that the acts of
weightes and measures shall not extend nor be burtefull to Lornewall and
Deuonshere.

It is enacted anno.i.H.v.cap.vii. and confyrmed the.xi. year of H.
the.vi.cap.viii. that all statutes touching measures should fyrmelye be
observed and kept: and no puruciour for the king to bye corn but by measure
stryken, and.viii. busshels to the quarter / and pay for the carriage of the
same forth with. And as often as any purueiour or other person shall be
atteynted to bye or puruey corn other wise, to have a holle years prisonement,
and pay.C.s. to the king, and.C.s. to the party grieved. And the mayre of
London to be sworn in the escheker / to execute the statutes of weyghtes and
measures. And like wise all other mayres and baylliffes to be sworn, when they
take their charges. And as well they as Justices of the peace have power to put
the same in execution, as well at the kings as the parties suit.

And according as it is enacted anno.viii.H.vi.cap.v. that every cite on
pain of.x.li every borowe on pain of.C.s. and every village, where a
constable is on pain of.xl.s. should have a common balance, with weyghtes
according to the standerde: and all thinbabitantes of the same towns frelye
to weye without any thing gyuynge: and foreyns to pay for every draughte of
weight xl.li.q. and for every draught between.xl.li. and C.li.ob. and for every
draughte between.C.li. and M.li.i.d. So like wise it is ordained by his
present statute, that upon like pain every town, borowghe, and village shall
have a common busshell sealed according to the standerde, and nothing to be
taken for measurynge of corn. And that Justices of peace, mayres, bayliffes,
and stewardes of francheses, aue power to examyn trespasours in the premises:
and them to punyss be upon examination or enquest. But the.xi. year of Henry
the.vij. the fourth chaptre, bit was provided that the penalty contained in
the statutes for none bauyng of weyghtes and measures sealed, shall not extend
to any town, that is not a city or a market town.

It is also enacted the fourth year of our most gracious sovereign, Henry
the.viij. the.vij. chapter, that who that uses to bye or syll pewter or
brass, and uses false beam or weyghte, shall forfayt.xx.s. the one half to
the king, andthe other half to him that will sue: in which action protection
nor effoen lies not. And the party shall: forfayte his beam to him that will
seyse hit. And if the party be not able to pay the some that is forfaited, than
the mayres, baylyffes, or other beed officers of the place where be is found,
shall put him in the stocks till the next market day, and than to be on the
pyllorie all the market time.

The statute made anno.xvij.E.iiij.ca.iiij. will, that tyles should be well
blanched and anuled, and the tyle earth to be dygged and cast before the first
day of Nouembre: and that the same earth be styred and turned before the
first day of Februarye, than next ensuyng, and not wrought before the first
day of March next following, and that therth be well tried er bit be wrought.
And every plain tyle conteyneth.x. inches and an balfe in length, and.vi. and
a quarter in bread, and.iij. quarters of an ynche in thyckenes. And every
roffe or crest tyle to conteyne in length.xiii. inches, and.iii. quarters of an
ynche in thyckenes with convenient depenes. And every gutter or couerte tyle
to conteyne in length.x. inches and a half.

And who that sylleth any tyle not according to this ordinance, shall forfayt
to the byer the double value, and make fine and ransom to the king, and be
that will sue shall have such process as is used in action of debt at the
common law: in which action protection nor essoen lies not. And Justices of
the peace have power to enquere hereof. And by due infourmation to cesse for
every.M. plain tyle, set to sale contrary to this ordyna^ce v.s. and for
every.C. roffe tyle.vi.s.viii.d. and for every.C. corner or gutter tyle.ii.s.
And the.ii. serchours of tyles may present the defautes before Justices of
peace, and that presentement is as strong as of.xij. men.

It is ordained, that.iii. barlye corns, dry and round, make an ynche:
and.xii. inches make a foot: and.iii. foot make a yerde: and.v. yerdes and a
balfe make a perch: and.xl. perches in length and.iiii. in bread make an
acre.

Hit appears in the treatise De compositione pond. that thirtye formels make a
carre of lead: and six stone save.ii. pound make a formell: and.xii. pound
make a stone: and.xxv.s. in weyghte makes one pound. Some say, that.xii.
weyes after Troy weight, make a carre of lead. The weye, as well of lead as
of flacce, salt, oynions, and chese shall wey.xiiii. stone: and.ii weyes of
wolle make a sack: and.x. sackes make a last.

And it was enacted the.xiiii. year of E. the third, the third chapter, and
anno.xi.H.vii. the fourth chapter, that the sack of woulle should wey.xxvi.
stone: and every stone fourtene pound.

And bit was defended the.xiii. year of R. the second the.ix. chaptre, that no
merchant nor other should bye woull by those words, good packyng.

The last of hearrynge conteyneth.x. thousand / and every thousand.x.
bundred: and every hundred six times.xx.

XX. dickers make a last of leather: and.x. hydes make a dycker. And.x. peyre
of gloves make a dicker. And.x. borse shows make a dycker. But.xii. peyre of
gloves make a dosen: and.xij. skyns of parchement make a dosen.

Also the hundred of wax, fysshe, almons, and alome conteyneth.xii. stone and
a balfe: and every stone.viii. pound, and the bundred is five times xx. and
the pound.xxv.s. And wytteth, that.xx.s. weyghte of pence makes a pound in
confections of spices, as in weyeng of lectuaries: but the pound of all other
things shall wey.xxv.s. Also in lectuarie confections the pound
contains.xii. ounces and the ounce of this weight peyseth.xx.d.

The hundred of bourde, canuas, and lynnen clothe conteyneth an hundred else
and bourde: and every hundred conteyneth.vi. times.xx. But the hundred of iron
conteyneth.v. times.xx. and the dosen conteyneth.vi. pieces.

The Garb of stele conteyneth.xxx. stone.

The Seem of glass is.xxiiii. stone: and every stone five pound, and so the
Seem conteynethe six times.xx. pound.

X. sticks make a bind of yeles.xxv. yeles make a stycke. Three and thyrty
fell make a bind.

The timber of Cony skyns and gryffons is.xl.

The Shefe of fustayne is.xiii. yardes.

The Shefe of sandell is.x. yardes.

How much vessels of wine / oil, honey, yeles, salmon, and hearringe shall
bold and conteyne.
THe second year of Henri the syxte the.xi. chaptre it was ordained, that the
tounne of wine should conteyne.xii. times.xx. and.xii. gallons, the pype six
times.xx. and six gallons, the tertian, and hoggeshed of Gascoyne wine after
the same rate, on pain to forfayte the same wine to the king.

And the.xviii. year of the said kings rain, cap.xvii. bit was ordained /
that tounnes, pypes, tertians, and boggesheedes of wine, oil, and honye /
should conteyne, the tounne.xii. times.xx. and.xii. gallons: the pype.vi.
times.xx. and six gallons: the tertian.iiii. times.xx. and.iiii. gallons the
boggesheed.iij. times.xx. and.iij. gallone. And that neither tounne, pype,
tertian, nor boggesbeed of wine, oil, nor bonye be sold before they be
gauged, on pain to forfayt the wine, oyleor honye so sold, or the value
thereof. And what country man so ever he be that syllethe tounne, pype,
tertian, or boggesbeed of wine, oil, or bonye, to any of the kings subjects
for a certain price, and lacks of the measure, be shall rebate so much to
the byer as the lacking a monteth toon pyne to sforfaite to the king the value
of all the wine, oil, or bony, sold to the contrary: not with standing any
priuey covenant or contracte made or to be made between the byer and the
syller.

The same is enacted / anno.i.R.iii.cap.xiii. And farther defended, that no
person bring in to this realm any Butte of maluesey to be sold, except it
conteyne.vi. times.xx. and.vi. galons: Every barell to conteyne.xxxi. gallons
and.di. And the rounlet.xviii. gallons and a half.

And anno.iiii.R.ii.cap.i. bit is enacted, that all wynes, oil, bonye,
vinegre, and all licours should be gauged, on pain of forfaiture.

It was ordained anno.xxii.E.iiii.ca.ii. that no strange merchant, denizin nor
other, should sylle nor put to sale any butte of salmon, except it
contained.lxxx. and.iiii. galons: the barell.xlii. galons: the balfe
barell.xxi. galons well and truly packed, on pain to forfayte for every
butte, barel, and half barell, lackinge of the said measure.vi.s.viii.d. And
that no marchaunte being under the kings obeisance, should put to sale any
vessel of salmon, except bit were well and truly packed, the great salmon
by bit self without medlyng of grylles or broken bealed salmon there with.
And that al grilles should be packed by them self alone on pain to forfayte
for every butte, barel, and half barell.vi.s.viii.d. And that no person put
hearrynge to sale, by barell, balfe barell or fyrkyn, except the barell
conteyne.xxxij. galons, and the half barell and fyrkyn after the same rate /
on pain to forfayte and lose for every barel, half barel, and firkin,
lacking of the said measure.iii.s.iiii.d. And that the same bearryng should be
well and truly packed, of one time taking and saltynge. And that it be as
well packed in the mids, as at the ends, on pain to forfayte for every
barell, half barell, and fyrkin sorted, couched and packed contrary to this
act.iii.s.iiii.d. And that no merchant nor palyngman sylle nor put to sale
yeles by barell / half barell / or fyrkyn, except the barell conteyne.xlij.
gallons: and the half barell and fyrkin after the same rate, on pain to
forfayte for every barell, half barell and fyrkyn, so fautynge of their said
measure x.s. Nor to medell the galbytten, storuen, pylled, nor red yeles with
the good yeles: But the good to be well and justly packed and sold by them
self, on pain to forfayte for every barell, half barell and fyrkin, mingled,
packed, and put to sale contrary to this act.x.s. And that meyres, baillyffes,
and other governors of cytes, towns, borowghes, and other places, have power
to chose discrete and expert persons to search and gauge all such vessels.

The same act and every thing therein comprised is confyrmed and ratified
the.xi. year of henry the.vii.cap.xxiiii.

Of purueyours.
IT is ordained among other things conteynedde in Magna Larts, the.xix.chap.
that no constable of castle nor his bailye shall take any man's corn or other
cataile, that dwell not in the town where the castle stands, except be pay
forth with, or may have respyte with good will of the syller: And if they
dwell within the said town, to pay within fortye days.

And bit is ordained the.xxi. chaptre folowinge that no lords carte, of any
person of holy church, of knygbte, or lady, shall be taken by the kings
baylies. Nor no chief bayllye nor other, to take any man's borses or carts to
make caryage, except he yield the lyberation of old ordained, that is for.ii.
borses and a carte.x. pens a day: for.iii. horses and a carte.xiiii. pens a
day.

It was defended.w.i.ca.i. that none should take vitayle or carte against the
owners will, if any did, to yield double damages. And if the party would not
/ the king should have the suit: and the indicted shall be attached and
distrayned by grande distres, that conteyneth one months space in the kings
court, swhere him pleases. And if they come not at the day, they shall be
distrayned by other distress containing six weeks space: and than if they
come not, to be atteynted, and yield double damages to the damaged / at the
kings suit: and make fine with the king.

It is provided. w.i.ca.xxxi. if any take vitayle, or other things to the
kings use, for garryson or castle, and after they have received paymente at
the eschcker, ward robe / or other place, will not pay the creditours, but to
their great damage and sklandre of the king withholde their duty / that than
forth with the duty shall be levied on their lands and goods (if they have
any) and pay there with the credytours, with damages / that they had thereby,
and to be rayned for the trespass. If they have no lands nor tenementes, to
remain in prison at the kings pleasure. And bit is also provided, if any take
part of the dettes or any other lowaunce of the kings credytours for paymente
of the same dettes / they shall yield the double, and be greuouslye punysshed
at the kings pleasure.

Also it is provided if any being of the court, take moo horses or carts for
the kings caryage than needs: and takes lowance to let them go again, be
shall be greuouslye chastysed by the marshals. And if it be done out of the
court by any of the court or other / be shall yield treble damages, and
have.xl. days prisonment.

It is ordained, anno.iiii.E.iii.cap.iii. that no pouruey our should make price
of any thing, nor take corn but by common measure stryken, nor take any
thing, but according to the very value set by the constables or other good
folks, and pay or the king depart the verge. And none to have pourueyours
but the king, the queen, and their children. Nor the kings pourueyours to
take nothing, except they show their warantye under the kings greatte
seal. And if any take ought without warantie, and caryeth hit away against
his will that owes the said goods, to be forth with arested by the village
where hit is, and committed to the next geale: And if he be atteynted and the
quantite of the thing demand, to suffer as a felon.

It was enacted anno.v.E.iii.ca.ii. that constables and.iiii. honest: men of
the village thereto sworn, should set the price of that that is purueyed for
the kings house, the queen's, and their childrens. And that in the presence of
the constables and praysours, tails be made between the pourueyours and the
owners of the things taken, and sealed with the pourueyours seals: by which
tails gree shall be made with them, of whom the pourueyunce was taken. And if
any taker or purueyour for the foresaid houses do otherwise, to be forth with
arrested by the village where hit is, and committed to the next geale: And if
he be atteynted thereof, and the quantite of the thing require, to suffer as a
felon. And from henseforthe the form and pain contained in this estatute, to
be contained in the commissyons of such takers, and purueyours, whether they
be under the kings small seal or great seal.

It was provided anno.xiiii.E.iii.cap.xviii. that pourueyours should take
nothing without the syllers agree thereto. And merchants and other houest men
to be deputed by the treasorer to make purueance for the kings wars, and for
castelles and towns in Scotland, England, and other places. And commissions
to be sent to the shereffe to make purueyance of the issues of his bailiwyke
for the kings horses where they lie at liuere. And if there be any moo found,
but a boy for every horse, and an backeney for the keeper, they should be put
in prison, there to remain at the kings pleasure. And to pay or they depart
the verge. And likewise the shereffes to be commanded, to make purueyaunce for
the kings dogs, of the issues of their baillywekes where they dwell / that
the country be not charged with them. If any in this case be grieved, he shall
have his recouerye against the shereffe.

It was enacted anno.xiiii.E.iii.ca.i. And anno xviii.E.iii.ca.iiii.pro clero,
that goods and fees of boly church should be forprised out of purueyours
commissions, in what place so ever they be found.

It was enacted, anno.xxv.E.iii.ca.i. that pourueyours commyssyons should not
be obeyed, except they were under the kings greatte seal, or small seal,
and conteyne the pain of the same statute, as is before said, anno.v.E.iii.
And the same year.ca.vi. hit was ordained, that no pourueyour, that purueyeth
wodde and timber for the kings busynes, should cut down the trees that
grew in or about any man's house, on pain to pay treble damages to the party
grieved, a year imprisonment, and to forgo his office.

The same year the.xv. chaptre it was ordained, that no pourueyour should take
mo sheep before the sherynge time, but as will reasonably suffice till sherynge
time: and after sherynge time to take none but shorn, as many as shall suffyce
for the time to come. And he that does otherwise, and is thereof atteynted at
the kings or the parties suit, to be done with as a thief or a robber. And
this pain to be contained in every commission of such pourueyours.

It is ordained the.xxviii. year of the same king E.ca.xii. that purueyours
should pay forth with for purueyance taken under the some of.xx.s. and for
purueyances made to the value of.xx.s. and above / to pay within a quarter of
a year after the purueyance made, at a certain day and place for most ease
and travail of the people.

The act made anno.xxxiiii.E.iii.ca.iii. wylleth, that purueyours for pultry,
and other small things should pay in hand, and for great purueyances within
a month or.vi. wekes after.

It is ordained anno.xxxvi.E.iii.ca.ii. that only the king and the queen
shall have takers, and to pay for what vitayles as they take in hand, as the
price of the markette is: and if they can not so accord, the purueyance to be
rated, by the bailiffes, constables, and.iiii. honest men: and that they take
in conuenyent wise: and not more than shall suffyce the.ii. houscholdes. And
the beynous name of purueiours to be changed and called buyers: and the same
buyers to be suffycient to answer to the king and the people: and none of them
to have a deputy: and each commyssyon to be sealed with the great seal, and
every half year restored in to the chancery and new made, containing all the
matter and manner of their takynges and byenges: and no buyers save the kings
and the queen's to be obeyed / nor theyrs, without they pay as is before said.
And to take all manner grain by measure stryken according to the standerde.
And for caryage thereof to pay in hand, and to take no mo than shall suffice
for the carriage: no byer nor taker of caryage to do contrary on pain of his
life.

And in the.iii.chap. following hit is defended, that no byer of vitayles, nor
taker of carriage take no gift nor other good turn to spare any man, nor
charge nor grieve any with such takynges, byenges, and caryages, through bate,
envy, or ill will: on pain to yield treble damages, and ii. years
emprisonement, and farther to be punysshed at the kings pleasure: and after
forswere the court. And if the party will not, who so ever will sue for the
king shall have the third penye recovered for his travail: And yet never the
less the byer and taker shall have the pain in the article before said. And
every byer to beclare severally in his account all takynges and byenges of
every shere- town, village, and person.

And it is ordained the.iiii.chap. following, that commyssyons should be made
and send down in to every shere to enquere of the said buyers and takers
demeanor. And if hit be evidently proved, that they took more than came to the
use of the.ii. forsaide householdes, or paid not for all that they took, they
shall have judgment of life and membre. And this ordynance extends as well to
the purueiours for the great borses of both the forsaid householdes, as to the
forsayde buyers and takers.

And it is defended on like pain the.v.chap. following, that none of the
kings or the queen's house, of what astate so ever he be, shall have a
purueyour, nor take no thing, but with the good will of the syller / and pay
therefore forth with.

And hunters, faukeners, and scriantes of arms and other officers perteynynge
to the said householdes to have like pain, if they offend.

It is ordenyed anno.i.R.n.ca.iii. that prelates and clerks grieved by
purueyours, shall recover treble damage by action of trespass.

It is defended the.xx. year of.R. the.ii.ca.v. that none take horse or beast
of any man's without be have sufficient authorite of the king, if any do, to
be taken and laid in prison, there to remain, till he have agreed with the
party.

It is ordained anno.i.H.vi.ca.ii. that all statutes and ordinances, made for
purueiours and not repelled should be kept and executed in all points, and
every sheriff of the realm of England, to cause them.iiii. times in the year
to be proclaimed through his bayllyewyke, on pain to pay a.C.s. to the king
for every time that he fauteth. And the commandment from the king to him
sent, to deliver to his successoure by endenture between them made: who shall
on like pain make like proclamation.

And also where it was enacted anno.ii.H.iii.ca.xiiii. that no purueyour on
pain to lose his office, and pay as much to the party grieved, should take
any purueyance for the kings house, to the value of.xl.s. and within, except
he paid forth with: it is ordained anno.ii.H.vi.ca.viii. that if any
purueyour, byer, or taker did other wise, it should be lefull for any the kings
subjects to resyst them, and in no wise suffer them to make such purueyances:
and the coustables / tythyngman, and chief pledge of villages to be assistyng
to the possessour or syller of such things, if they be required thereto, on
pain to yield the value of the things taken, to the party grieved. And that
no officer of the kings, on pain to lose.xx.li. half to the king, and half
to him that will sue, cause to arrest, vex, or emplede any of the kings
subjects, in any of the kings courts, for such reteininges. And Justices of
peace in every shere have power to enquere, here, and determyne any thing done
against this act, as well at the kings suit as others, and do due punishment
and execution, and awarde damages ges to the party playntife, if the
defendaunt be duly conuicte: and the defendant shall answer without aid of
the king. And in sucbe actions process to be made as in writ of trespass
against the peace. And this ordynance to be expressed in pourueyours
commyssyons. And this ordynance among other statutes of pourueyours, buyers,
and takers, to be sent down in to every sbere of England / to be proclaimed
by the sheresses.

It is ordained anno.xxiii.H.vi.ca.ii. that the act touching pourueyours,
made anno.xxxvi.E.iii. sbulde be duly kept and put in execution: and over
that, that every purueyour and byer (before they had their commyffyons) should
be sworn in the Chancerye: to take nothing contrary to the ordynances made
the forsayde year. And farther bit is ordained, because the pour people be not
able, nor darre not resist nor sue at the law the said purueyours and buyers,
that the prisours, the village, and all the villages adioynyng / shall do their
deuoirs to resist the buyers and purueyours, that do contrary to the statutes,
and in all that they may to execute the forsayde statutes against the
purueyours, if they be required. And be that is grieved, may chose whether be
will take an action of debt against the preysours, the village, or vyllages,
and either of them, that do not their deuoir when they are required, to resist
(in form before said) the purueiours or buyers: or else against the said
purueyours and buyers, and either of them: to recover the value of his goods so
taken: and over that his costs and damages treble. Nor that no purueyour, nor
other offycer of the kings in no manner wise trouble nor vex in any of the
kings courts, any of the kings subjects, for executyng of the forsay de
ordynances / on pain to pay xx.li. to the party grieved above his costs and
damages sustained in that behalf. And that here upon he shall have a wryt of
debt. And every issue triable in this actio^ shall be tried in the shyre / where
the goods were taken.

And the sergeant of the Thatery shall satisfy all damages, dettes, and
executions / recovered against any purueyour or byer under him, in case the
puruey our or byer be not sufficient. And in this case the party plaintyfe
shall have Scire fac. to have execution against the said sergante. And these
ordynaunces and statutes to be sent to Justices of peace, in to every shire to
be proclaimed every year and the people enfourmed.

And it is defended the.xiiii.chap. following that no bier or other officer of
any lord or other estate, except the kings and the queen's, presume to take
vitayle, corn, baye, carriage, or any other thing of any of the kings
subjects against their wylles, if they do, to be arrested by the maire,
shireffe, bailey, constable, or other officer of the place where it is, and put
in prison, there to remain without baylle or maynprise / tylle the time they
have yielded again all the said vitayles, cariages, and other things taken,
or the value thereof.

And if the said mayre, shireffes, bayllyes, constables, and other officers
before named do the contrary, that than they shall forfayte.xx. si. the one
half to the king, and the other half to the party, of whom such things were
taken, if he will sue for hit by action of debt, in which suit the defendant
shall not wage his law. But in case the party will not sue, than who that will
sue for the king and him self, shall have the one half of that that is
recovered. And if the defendant be duelye conuicte, he shall yield the treble
value of that that is taken to the party that sueth, with double costis, and
to make fine and ransom to the king. And in all such actions and suits,
there shall no protection for the defendant be allowed.

It is also ordained the.xxviii. year of Henry the syxte, the second chaptre,
that all letters patentes or grauntes that are made or to be made unto any
person or persons holdyng bostries, brewhouse, or house of retayle of
vitayles; to be purueyours for term of their lives, should be void and of no
value or effect. And that no person or persons; should take horse or carte,
except he agree with the owner thereof: and be to him delivered by the mayre,
shireffe, baillysse, or constable, where as such takynges is. And that he or
they that find him or them self grened contrary to this ordynance, shall
recover treble damages by action of trespass at the common law. The kings
prerogatyue and prehemynence, of and in the prentysses always saved.

London in edibus Tho. Bertheleti. Cum priuilegio.

Of the statute of wynchester and diverse other statutes concerning the same.
FOr to avoid robbynges / theftes, murders, and manslaughters, hit was
ordained by the statute of wynchestre, the first chaptre, and in more ample
wise, the.xxviii. year of E. the.iii. the.xi. chaptre, that cry should be
made, in all sheres, bundredes markettes, fayres, and all other places, where
solemn assemblynge of people should be, to the end that none should excuse
him through ignorance, that every countreye from benseforthe should in such
wise be kept, that forth with after robberies and felonyes were done fress he
suit should be made / from town to town, and from country to country. And
also if need be, enquestes to be taken in towns / by the sovereign of the
town: and after in hundredes, frauncheses / and in shires, and other while
in.ii.iii. or.iiii. sheres, in case when felonies are committed and done, in
the marches of the sheres, so that the mysdoers may be atteynted: And if the
counntreys answer not the bodies of such mysdoers, the pain shall be such,
that each country, that is to wit, the people dwelling in the country shall
answer for the robberies and hurtes done: so that all the hundred, where such
robberye shall be done, with the frauncheses that be within the precinct of
the same hundredes, shall answer for the robbery done. And if the robbery be
done between.ii. bundredes, both the hundredes to gether with the francheses
that be withinne the precinct of the said hundredes shall answer therefore.
And the country after the robberye and felonye done, shall have no longer time
than.xl. days: within the which space it behooves them to agree for the
robbery, and misdeeds done, orels they must answer the bodies of the mysdoers.

And for the more suertie of the country it is ordained the third chaptre
following, that the gates of great walled towns should be shut from son
going down to son rysynge. And that no man in suburb or foreyne part of
the town lodge but from noone tylle the next day, except the ooste will
answer for him. And the baillyes of towns shall every weke, or at the least
every.xv. days enquere of such persons herbouring in suburbs, and foreyne
boroughes, and if they find any herborers that receive strangers in other
manner, or suspecious persons, or and if they find such as herbourc folks
against the peace, the bayllyes shall punyss be them. And hit is commanded by
the king / that in towns from benseforthe watches should be kept as they
were accustomed of old time: that is to say, from the Ascension day till
Michaelmas, in every cite.vi. men at eucrye gate, in every borough.xii. men: in
every vyllage entier.vi. men or.iiii. or less as the nombre of the
inhabitants requires: and they shall watch the town continually all the
nygbte, from son going down to son rysynge. And if any stranger pass
forbye them, to arrest him tylle the morning: and if he be not found
suspecious to let him go quite: and if they find him suspecious forth with
to deliver him to the sheriff: and the shereffe without damage shall resceyue
and safely keep him tylle such time that he in due manner shall be delyueredde.
And if they will not suffer them self to be arrested / than to raise shoute
and cry upon them, and the watch men with all the town and towns nere
ioynnynge about with shoute and cry to poursue them from town to town,
tylle such time they be taken and delivered to the shereffe, as is before
said. And for the arrestyng of such strangers none to be enchesoned. And
the.iiii. Chaptre following / hit is also commanded, that the byghe ways from
markette towns to market towns should from benseforth be enlarged, there as
are wodde, bedges, or dytches, so that there be no dytche, shrubbes, or busshes
within.CC. foot of each side of the high way, whereby a felon, wha^ he has
done a shrowde turn, may escape: but this estatute extendethe not unto the
greatte ookes and byches: And if through the lord of the soyles defaute
(which will not cut and cast down such dytches, shrubbes, and busshes
(after the form as is before said) robberyes are committed and done, the
lord shall answer therefore. And there be murder done, the lord shall be
reynted at the kings pleasure. And if the lord be not able to cut down the
shrubbes, the country shall help him to do it.

And the king will that in his demayne lands and woddes, within forest and
without, the high ways should be enlarged, as is before said. And if hit be
so that there be any Park nere unto the high way, hit behooves, that the
lord dymynyss he his park unto the largeness of.CC. foot nere of the high
way, as is before said, or else to make such a wall / dytche, or hedge, that
the misdoers can not pass nor return to do shrowde tournes.

Also bit is commanded, that every man shall have armoure in his house for the
keeping of the peace, according as hit is of old time limytted, that is to
say every man between.xv. years and lx. years, to be lymytted and sworn to
have harneys after the quantyte of his lands and goods, that is to wit, a
man of.xv.li. lyuelode, and having goods to the value of.xl. mark, an haber
gynne, a salette, a spear, a sword, and an horse. A man of.x.li. lyuelode,
and having goods to the value of.xx. mark, an habergynne, a salette, a
spear, and a sword: A man of an.C.s. lyuelode, a doublette, a salette, a
spear, and a sword. A man of.xl.s. lyuelode, and above to the value of a.C.s.
a spear, bow, arowes, and a sword.

And he that has not to the value of.xl.s. lyuelode, shall be sworn to have
faux gysarmes, a sword, and other small weapons. And he that has not to the
value of.xx. marks in goods / a spear, a sword, and other small weapons.
And all other that may have, shall have bows and arowes. Out of the foreste
and within the foreste bows and pillettis. And that the said armours and
weapons be seen and viewed every year twyse. And in every hundred and
fraunchese to chose.ii. constables to make the view of the said armours and
weapons: and the forsayde counstables shall present before the Justices
assygned (when they come in to the con^tre) the defautes of the armours and
weapons, the suits of the towns, and of the ways: And also they shall present
such as lodge strangers in vplandyss he towns, for whom they will not
answer. And the Justices assigned shall present in every parliament to the
king the defautes, which they have found / and the king shall se a remedy.
And that shereffes and baillies within francheses and without, great or small,
which have baillywicke or forest in fee or in other manner, take good head from
henseforth, that they follow the cry with the country. And after as they be,
to have horse and harneis for that intent. And if there be any that does the
contrary, the constables shall present their defautes to the Justices
assygned, and the Justices shall after ward present them to the king, and
the king shall se hit remedyed as is before laid. And the king, for the
honor of holy church commands and defends, that from henseforth no
feyres nor markettes shall be kept in churcheyardes.

Also in the time of the same king Edward the first, that made the statute
of wynchester the.xiii. year of his reygne, there were articles made
containing the manner of inquery, when the said statute was kept and when not:
and who would obscrue it, and who would not: where, how, and by whom robberies
were done: and whether the sheryffes answered the bodies of the ill doers:
whether the gates of cites and towns were closed from son to son: whether
any herbored strangers in subburbes and foreyne parts of towns / whether the
bayllyes enquered thereof: bow the watch was kept: bow and where bygh ways
were enlarged and where not: whether all between.xv. and lx. year were sworn
to keep the piece: whether they had armours and weapons in their houses after
the stent of their lands and goods: whether the constables in due manner
viewed the said armours or not: and lastely whether the sheryffe, bayllyes, and
foresters, followed the shoutte and cry according to the foresaid statute.

The second year of.E. the.iii. the.vi. chaptre, it is enacted that the said
statute of wynchestre, with all other concerning the peace / should in all
points be observed and kept, and Justices assygned have power to punyss he
such as disobey and go against the same statute.

It is also ordained the.v. year of Henry the.iiii. that watch on the sea
cooste over all the realm of England, should be kept with such noumbre of
people, in places, form / and manner, as hit was wont to be in times paste /
and that in this case the statute of wynchester should be observed and kept.
And that in the commyssions of the peace from henseforth to be made, this
article should be put: and the Justices of the peace have power to make
inquisitions in their ceffyons from time to time / and them that be found in
defaut to punisshe after the tenure of the same statute.

Also hit is ordained and enacted the.vii. year of the raygne of king Richard
the second, the.vi. chaptre, that the statute of wynchestre should be observed
and kept in all points, and well and hastylye put in execution at the
complaynte and pursuyte of any that felethe him self grieved against the
tenure of the same. And to the end that none from hensefourthe should excuse
him self through ignorance, bit is accorded that every sheryffe of England,
shall in his own person do proclayme the same statute.iiii. times in the year
/ in every hundred of his bayllywyke, and by his bayllyes in every markette,
as well within lyberties as without.

And hit is enacted and ordained. the.xxvij. year of the reygne of the most
noble king Edward the third, the.xiii. chaptre, that if any merchant
stranger or other that is robbed on the sea, and the same goods so robbed
come in to any parties of England or other the kings lands, will sue to
recover the said goods, he shall be resceyued to prove the said goods to be
his by his marks, carte, cokette, or else by good and loyal marchates
strangers or other, and upon such proffes the self same goods to be
delivered unto the merchant, without making of other suit at the common law.

Thus ends the statute of wynchestre, with the other concerning the same
statute. Imprynted at London in Fletestrete / in the house of Thomas Berthelet,
nere the Cundite, at the sign of Lucrece. Cum priuilegio a rege indulto.

printer's device of Thomas Berthelet, featuring a dragon and a dog rampant
flanking a crowned portcullis, with three flowers in the foreground (not in
McKerrow)


