CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. TO all to whom these Presents shall come, greeting.
WHEREAS the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, now assembled in Parliament upon
the sixth day of this instant month of August, entering into a due and Christian
consideration of the Wants and Extremities, which many poor people inhabiting
in or near the Cities and Suburbs of London, and Westminster do undergo by
reason of the grievous visitation of the Plague, and the want of necessary
relief; made an order, the tenor whereof follows in these words, viz. In
Parliament, Oxon. 6. of August, Anno primo Regis Caroli. The Lords having this
day taken into their charitable consideration the lamentable distress of the
poor people, Inhabiting in the Cities and Suburbs of London, and Westminster,
and in the Out parishes adjoining, and in the Parish of Stepney, who in this
time of the great contagion of the Plague now rageing in those parts, are less
subject to good orders, being left destiture of convenient relief, in respect
that the rich and able Citizens, and other Inhabitants of all sorts, being
departed thence for avoiding the infection, have not taken sufficient order,
for relief of the poor people remaining behind, have thought fit, and do
now order, advise, and direct, that over and besides all provision already
made, there be this further added for their better relief, viz. That all
persons taxed or taxable in the limits and places aforesaid, either for houses,
lands, goods, or otherwise toward the relief of the poor, ^eing not to
impouerished themselves by this visitation as they shall be forborne to be
taxed, shall by the proper Officers be taxed to bear a double proportion of
tax (...) the least, during the times of this Visitation, and more if it shall
be found requisite by the Magistrates, Justices of Peace, or other Officers
there abiding for the time: and after notice given to any person so taxed, or
left at his house, wheresoever he shall be remaining, he is hereby ordered to
make due payment, weekly, or monthly ^s shall be required: And because it is
conceived, they very many are remooved so far from London, as that notice
cannot be conveniently given with such speed as (...) presently supply the
necessity of the poor; Their Lordships do desire the Chamber, or
Bridge-house of London, to lend and disburse a thousand pounds at the (...) for
this purpose. And it is ordered that they, or any charitable and able
Inhabitants, laying out that sum, or any farther sums which shall be
wanting, shall ^e ^ly repayed whatsoever they shall disburse, out of the sum
so taxed, so soon as they may be levied, and out of a general Collection
which His Majesty at (...) Lordships humble suite, has to recommend
throughout the whole Kindome for the relief of the said Poor: Wherein their
Lordships now assembled, will ^^^^selues set an example for encouragement of
others. And to the intent, that the Moneys to be raised by way of taxation (as
is first aboue-mentioned) may be the (...) truly and speedily levied, their
Lordships during the time while they shall sit, will be pleased to take
knowledge of all Complaints against such as shall refuse to (...) the said
Taxation, and punish them so exemplarily, as shall be a terror to others. And
they do further order, that after the sitting shall end, the Lords of His
^^^esties Privy Council upon complaint to them, and the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England upon complaint to him, shall do the like. And their
Lordships ^^^ing been informed of the good and charitable course held by some
Companies and others within the City, in forbearing the Companies and
Hall-dinners, and tur^^^g them unto the relief of the poor, do highly
commend those that have so done; and do with their example may be followed by
the Lord Major, Sheriffs, and (...) ^^e rest (...) a thing much pleasing to
God, and agreeable to the time. Exam. H. Elsing: Cler. Pa^liament. AND WHEREAS
the said Lords have freely of them^^^^^s paid down presently every of them
above the state of a Baron, sorty shillings apiece, and every other of the
state of a Baron, being Spiritual or Temporal Lords, twenty shillings into
the hands of the right Reverend Father in God, George Lord Bishop of London, to
be disposed of as the rest of the Moneys to be collected ^or the use
aboue-mentioned:

KNOWYE therefore that We also above all other, most grieved at the pitiful
and woeful estate of our said poor Subjects, and much commiserating the same,
(...) much rejoicing in the forwardness of our said Lords, toward the
performance of so Christian and charitable an action, whose good example we
earnestly desire (...) all other our loving Subjects of quality would follow
in this behalf, according to their degrees; Of our Princely Grace, do ratify
and much approve their (...) Order so set down: And in confirmation, and for
the execution thereof, so grant, that according to the said Order, Collection
may be made of the charitable de^on and liberality of all our loving Subjects,
throughout our Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, in all places
whatsoever, toward the relief of our said poor ^^^^ects, to be executed in
manner and form following. That is to say, We will, grant, appoint, and
require, That. Arthur Ducke Doctor of Law, Chancellor, and (...) Christian
Esquire, Principal Register to the said Bishop of London, or his, or their
Deputy or Deputies, named and appointed by him or them, in writing under or
their hands and seals, shall and may procure to be printed so many Briefes of
these our Letters Patents, as may suffice for the accomplishing and performance
(...) good Work: And shall carry and show these our Letters Patents to the said
Lord Bishop of London, and shall also leave with his Lordship so many of these
^ed Briefes, as there are Churches or Chapels wherein divine Service is
usually said, within his Diocese of London, And shall send to every other
Archbishop (...) Bishop, so many of the said Briefes, as may serve to be
dispersed within their several Diocesses

AND We also require the Lords Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and all and
every Lord Bishop within this our Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales,
(...) receive so many of the said Briefes, as may serve to be dispersed within
their several Diocesses, the said Briefes to be sent by the Archbishops and
Bishops to the Mi^^^ter and Curate of every Parish Church or ^^appell within
their several Diocesses. And We also will and require every Minister and
Curate of any Church or Chapel, to whom such printed Briefes shall be
delivered, that without any long delay upon some Sunday or Holy Day, when the
Parishioners be fully assembled to (...) divine Service, they publicly declare
in their several Church or Chapel, unto the Congregation there assembled,
the tenure of these Briefes, with an especial ^^^^tation to them, to yield
their liberal and extraordinary contribution to so charitable a work. And
we also will and require, you the Churchwardens and ouer^ of the poor, to
make diligent collection of the charitable devotion of the people in the sai
Church or Chapel so assembled: And that after collection so made, (...) do
publicly declare in the Church, the whole sum of money so by them collected;
and then procure the same sum to be set down upon the backeside of (...)
Brief under their own hand, and the hand of the Minister of the said Church
or Chapel: And then the said Churchwardens or Overseers, or one of them,
af^^^ the receipt of the said money collected, shall deliver the sum
collected, with the said Brief, unto such Minister of the Deanery where the
said collection shall be ^ade, as the Lord Bishop of the Diocese shall assign
and appoint to receive the same: And the Bishop of every Diocese is hereby
authorized, to name and appoint a ^inister in every Deanery to receive the said
collections accordingly. And We also require the said Minister which shall be
so appointed, to receive the said money ^^om the said Overseers, that he
receive the same, with the aforesaid Brief: And that within ten days after
the receipt thereof, he pay and deliver the same, with the ^^^efe whereby the
same has been collected, unto the Lord Bishop to the Diocese, where such
collection is made. And we also require, the Archbishops and Bi^^ops of every
Diocese respectively, that they require of the said Minister the said money,
with the Brief whereby the same has been collected, and deliver over (...)
the said collections, made within their several and respective Diocesses, with
the aforesaid Briefes, to the said Bishop of London or his Deputies, all the
said money (...) be disposed of, by the said Lord Bishop of London, with the
advice of any two or more Lords of Parliament, to the satisfaction of the money
to be deposited, and ^de out, according to the said order, and to the relief
of the poor and distressed people in the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and in the Parishes and places ^^jacent and near thereunto, in
the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, where it is and shall be most needful:
And therein We will the Out-parishes, as being most ^biect to poverty,
infection, and necessity, be specially regarded: Any Statute, Law, Ordinance
or Provision, heretofore made to the contrary, in any wise not^^thstanding.

IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents for
the space of one whole year, next after the date hereof to endure,

WITNESS Our Self at Our City of Oxford, the eleventh day of August, in the
first year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. Steward.

Printed at Oxford.


