I R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A Publication, or a Declaration of the Lords of the Counsels Order for the
Needle-makers in his Majesty's Dominions.
At Whitehall the XX. of January. Anno. 1623.
Presents, Lord Keeper, etc. Lord President. Lord Marquis Hamilton. Earl
Marshall. Lord Chamberlain. Lord Viscount Grandison. Lord Carew. Lord
Chichester. Master Treasurer. Master Secretary Caluert. The Master of the
Rolls.

FOrasmuch as certificate has bin made unto the Boarde, subscribed by the Lord
Mayor of the Littie of London and the Aldermen his Brethren, whereby it
appears that an Engine has lately been set up for the making of Needles,
which has proved very dangerous to be wrought with all, for the spoiling and
maming of the kings liege Subjects, and that the use thereof is very dangerous,
and has deprived great numbers of poor people of their means and liuelyhood
in these late times of scarcity, who formerly could get their living by the
Art of Needle-making: and lastly, that those who work with the said Engine,
do employ much bad stuff, to the defrauding of all such as buy the Needles
made therewith.

In regard whereof, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen having used all means to cause
the parties working with the said Engine and bad stuff, to appear before them
to answer these several points: they notwithstanding withdraw themselves into
unknown places, or else vteerly refuse to make answer to what may be objected
against them.

Their Lordships upon due consideration of the premises have thought fit, and
accordingly ordered that the said Engine, with such deceitful Needles, shall
from benceforth be utterly suppressed, not only in the Littie of London, but
in all his Majesty's Dominions, in whose hands soever they be found, to be
seized and defaced, if no cause be showed to the contrary by Wednesday next,
which will be the twenty eight of this present January. Ind what is thought
meet, and ordered by their Lordships that the prices of Needles shall be no
greater then they have been sold these last twenty years, nor the Needles,
workmanship, or stuff, be of no less goodness, but of Steel. And lastly it is
ordered, that if notwithstanding the prohibition of the foresaid Engine and bad
Needles, if any person shall presume to use the said Engine or base stuff, or
in any other manner disobay this Order, the party or parties so offending may
be apprehended and carried before the next Justice, in whose hands soever they
be found, to have such punishment as their contempt shall be found to descrue.

I. Dickenson.


