By the King.
A Proclamation against imbezelling of Armor, Munition, and Victual, and
other Military provisions.
DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
WHereas by an Act of Parliament, made in the one and thirtieth year of the
Reign of Our dear Sister, the late Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory, it
was enacted, That if any person or persons, having at any time, after the said
Parliament, the Charge or Custody of any Armor, Ordnance, Munition, Shot,
Powder, or habiliments of War, of the Queens Majesty's, Her Heirs or
Successors, or of any Uictuals provided for the Uictualling of any Soldiers,
Gunners, Mariners, or Pioners, shall for any lucre or gain, wittingly,
advisedly, or of purpose to hinder, or impeach Her Majesty's Service, imbezell,
purloine, or carry away any the said Armor, Ordnance, Munition, Shot, Powder,
Habiliments of War or Uictuals, to the value of twenty shillings, at one or
several times; That then every such offense shall be judged Felony, and the
Offender or Offenders therein, to be tried, proceeded in, and suffer, as in
case of Felony.

Forasmuch as it has been found by late experience, That, notwithstanding the
Penalty provided for such offenses, diverse persons, to whose trust and charge,
Armor, Munition, Shot, Powder, Habiliments of War, Provisions of Uictuals,
and incidents thereunto, were committed, have, both before the Ships going
forth, in the time of Our Service, and in their return homewards, (out of a
greedy desire of gain and lucre to themselves) Imbezelled, Purloyned, Conveyed
away, and Sold, a good part of the Provisions and Remains, of such Armor,
Munition, Powder, etc. Uictuals, Biscuit, Bags, Caske, and other Provisions to
them entrusted, to the great hinderance and impeachment of so important a
Service in hand, and such other Our Service, as hereafter may fall out.

We do therefore signify Our Royal Will and Pleasure; and do hereby
straightly charge and command all Officers, Ministers, and others now employed,
or hereafter to be employed in Our service, by Land or at Sea, that they
presume not to imbezell, purloine, or carry a shore, at their arrival at any
of Our Ports, or sell any Armor, Munition, Powder, etc. or Uictuals, Iron
hoopes, Caske, Biscuit, Bags, or other provisions, which, either are, or
hereafter shall be in their charge and custody, as they will avoid the
penalty of the Law provided against such offenders, which they are to expect
shall be severely inflicted upon them, and such further punishments as the case
shall require.

And We do further charge and command all, and every person and persons, to
take notice, That if any of them shall buy, receive, or take into his or their
possession, any Armor, Munition, Uictuals, or other provisions, which have
been, or hereafter shall be committed to the custody and charge of any the
Pursers, Stewards, Gunners, or other Officers or Ministers, now employed, or
hereafter to be employed in Our service, either by Land or Sea, he, or they
shall severely suffer such condign punishment, as by the Laws of this Our
Realm is ordained, and otherwise, as shall be just and fit. And We do
hereby signify Our further will and pleasure, That, what person soever of Our
well affected Subjects, or others, can find out, or justly inform of any
purloynings, or imbezelments, in kind, as before, and give notice thereof to
the principal Officers of Our Navy, Ordnance, and Munition, shall be well
rewarded for his, or their pains so taken therein.

Dated at Our Manor of Hampton, the 25. of December. 1625. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M. DC. XXV.


