royal blazon or coat of armsBy the Council Board, at White Hall, the 24. of
May. 1625.
This to be proclaimed by sound of Drum aboard the Kings Ships, and the rest
of the Navy, as likewise, in all such other places, as the Commissioners for
the Navy shall think fit.
THeir Lordships having received Information from the Commissioners of the
Navy, that through the wilful negligence of such Seamen, as are entered upon
the Ships now preparing in the River of Thames for his Majesty's Service, the
victuals and other provisions brought unto them are not taken aboard, whereby
the said Victuals are in danger to be spoiled by lying in open Lighters, and
the Service otherwise prejudiced, and delayed; For redress of this intolerable
abuse and contempt, do in His Majesty's name, according to His Royal pleasure
signified on that behalf, hereby straightly require all Masters, Pursers,
Boatswaines, and Officers of the said Ships to attend aboard at all
seasonable times for taking in the said Provisions, and to cause their
Companies to give like diligent attendance, and to do their duty in all
necessary works belonging unto them.

And their Lordships do further require and charge, in His Majesty's name, all
Mariners and Seamen, prested for his Service in any of the said Ships, upon
pain of death, to give their attendance aboard, and not to absent themselves
from their Ships, whilst such necessary works are performed; And do withal
require as well the Commissioners of the Navy, as all other Officers of the
Admiraltie, and all Justices of Peace, Bailiffes, Constables, and Prest-masters
to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended all such Mariners or Sea-faring-men,
as being Pressed, and receiving pay in his Majesty's Service are found ashore,
or otherwise negligent in performing their due services in the said Ships, and
to commit them to the next prison to answer their abuses and contempts in the
Admiralty Court, or otherwise according to Justice, and severity of the Laws
in that behalf provided.

G. Cant. Jo. Lincoln, C. S. James Ley. H. Mandeuille. Ol. Grandisone. E.
Conwey.

Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1625.


