By the King.
A Proclamation for the well manning and arming of the Ships, of, or belonging
to this Realm, upon their setting forth to Sea.
HIs Majesty, in His Princely Wisdom, well weighing what a great encouragement
it is, both to his enemies, and the enemies of this State, and unto Pirates and
Robbers the common Enemies of all Nations, and what an apparent danger it will
be to His own Subjects, if they shall adventure to set to Sea in these
perilous times, being weakly manned, and ill furnished with Arms, to resist
and repel such as shall assail them; in His providence and care for the
common safety of His people; Does hereby straightly charge and command, That
none of His Highness Subjects, do at any time hereafter, presume to put to
Sea any Ship or Pinnace, of the burden of Threescore Tons or upwards, out of
any Port or Creek, of or belonging to this Realm of England, unless they
furnish the same with serviceable Muskets and Bandeliers, sufficient for the
arming at once, of half the number of all the Persons or Company, of, and in
those Ships: And that they be also provided aboard every such Ship, of a
sufficient quantity of Match, and Powder, and Bullets for those Shot,
according to the length of their Voyage intended to be made by them. And His
Majesty does further straightly charge and command, That all such as shall have
the command, of, and in every such Ship or Pinnace, do cause their Company
whilst they are aboard, to exercise themselves with the said Muskets, upon
such days, and at such times, as shall be fit and seasonable for the same;
that so by practice they may learn the perfect use of their Arms. And this to
be buely and carefully observed, upon pain of His Majesty's high displeasure,
and such other penalties and punishments as can or may be inflicted upon such
as shall presume to contemn His Majesty's Royal Command, intended for the
safety of His people.

Given at His Majesty's Honor of Hampton Court, this 24. of December, 1625.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO DOM. M.DC.XXV.


