I R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
An Abstract of his Majesty's Letters Patents, granted unto ROGER WOOD and
THOMAS SYMCOCKE.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Matie. has been graciously pleased, by his
Highness Letters Patents, to grant unto Roger Wood, and Thomas Symcocke, their
Assigns and Deputies for the Term of One and Thirty years, full and sole
power and Privilege, to Imprint, Impresse, Role, Stamp, work, publish,
utter, sell distribute and disperse, within his Majesty's Realm of England,
and Dominion of Wales, all Briefes for Collections, and other things
whatsoever upon one side only, of one or more Sheet or Sheets of Paper,
Skinue or Skins of Parchment, or any part thereof, as by the said Letters
Patents more atlarge may appear.

His Majesty by the said Letters Patents has also prohibited all manner of
persons whatsoever (other then the said Roger Wood, and Thomas Symcocke, their
Executors, Administrators, Deputies and Assigns) to Imprint, or Impresse,
Role, Stamp, or work, or to utter, sell, distribute, publish abroad, or
disperse within England and Wales any of the things granted, upon pain of
Forseyture of all such matters and things, as they shall Imprint, Role,
Stamp, or work, or shall utter, sell, distribute, publish abroad, or
disperse, contrary to the said Inhibition: the same to be seized upon and taken
by the said Roger Wood and Thomas Symcocke, or either of them, their or either
of their Executors, administrators, Deputies, Factors, or Assigns, to and for
their only use and uses, and upon other pains and Penalties, in the said
Letters Patents expressed.

And also has further inhibited all manner of persons during the said Term,
from bringing or importing into the said Realm of England, or Dominion of
Wales, or any other his Majesty's Dominions, or any oher the parts beyond the
Seas any of the things granted, or to put the same or any part thereof so
transported (as aforesaid) to sale, or to be uttered, published or dispersed
within the said Realm of England or Dominion of Wales, upon pain of
Forseyture for every such offense, to the uses of his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, the sum of Forty shillings over and be sides the said things
imported or put to sale, (as foresaid) contrary to the said Letters Patents.

And also his Majesty has further by the said Letters Patents, charged and
commanded all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Baylisses, Constables,
and all other Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever, and also the
Master, keepers, Wardens, and Commonalty of the Art and mystery of Stationers
of the City of London, that they and every of them shall at all times, during
the said Term, (being thereunto required) be ayding and assisting unto the
said Roger Wood and Thomas Symcocke, their Executors, Administrators, Deputies,
Factors, and Assigns, in the viewing, searching, finding out, seazing and
taking away of all such matters and things, as shall be Imprinted, Roled,
Stamped wrought, published or done, or be uttered, sold or imported, into any
part of the said Dominions (as aforesaid) contrary to the meaning of the said
Letters Patents.

And also be ayding and assisting as aforesaid, in the taking, seazing,
carrying away, Defacing and making unserviceable, of all such Printing presses,
Roling-presses, Stampes, and other Instruments or things whatsoever, which
shall be found to be used in or about the Imprinting, Roling, Stamping, working
or doing of any the things granted, contrary to the true meaning of the said
Letters Patents and Decree in the Star Chamber concerning Printing.

And has also inhibited, that no person do presume to Imprint, Work, Role,
Stamp upon both sides of the Paper or Parchment, or utter, sell or dispose of
any the things granted, which has not heretofore beens usually Printed upon
both sides of Paper or Parchment, or to use any other fraud or sinister
practice whatsoever, tending to the hinderance or prejudice of the said Roger
Wood and Thomas Symcocke, their Exetors, Administrators, or Assigns,
concerning the things granted, upon pain of Forfeyture of the same.

The things belonging to this Grant, viz.
All Briefes for Collections. All Publications concerning any Letters Patents.
Indentures for Apprentises, Water-workes, Drayning of Lands, and other things.
All Bonds and Recognizances for Victualers, Alehouse-keepers and others.
Licenses to Collect or gather by. Licenses for Victualers. Licenses for the
selling of Wines. And all other Licenses. All Bonds, Bills, and Acquittances
for payments, or receipts of money. Articles concerning the Visitation of
Bishops, Archdeacons, or their Officials. Bills for teaching of Scholars.
Bills concerning Physicians, Chyrurgions, or others. All Bills for Plays,
Challenges, Prizes, Sportes, or Shows whatsoever. All Epitaphes, Inscriptions
or other Copies, either in Prose or Verse. All Portratures, and Pictures
whatsoever. Ballads. Bills of Lading. Mappes. Damask paper. Borders. Printed
paper for Silks, Fustians, and other Wares. Writs and Warrants for Sheriffs,
and Justices of Peace. Letters Patents texed. Indentures texed. Bills for the
Court of Conscience. Pariters Bills. Bills of Sickness. And all other Coppies,
Chartes, and things whatsoever, to be Imprinted, Roled, or done upon the one
side of Paper or Parchment, in Secretary hand or otherwise.
And if any shall have occasion to use the Premises, let them repayne to the
House of Edward All-de. Printer, dwelling in Penticost-Lane near
Butchers-Hall, at the East end of Christ-Church, where they shall be reasonably
dealt with for the same.

AT LONDON. Printed by Roger Wood and Thomas Symcocke. Cum Priuilegio. 1623.

God save the King.

