BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the adjournament of part of Michaelmas Term.
THE King our Sovereign Lord considering the great and general infection of
the Plague which at this present is in the Cities of London and Westminster,
and other places near adjoining, and how perilous it might be to His loving
Subjects, if they should be enforced to repair thither for their suites and
causes before such time as it shall please Almighty God of his goodness and
mercy to remove or ease that heavy visitation. His Majesty therefore of His
especial grace and favor to His people and for their better safety and
preservation, is pleased to adjourne part of the Term of Saint Michael now
next coming. That is to say, from the Vtas thereof unto the fourth Return of
the same Term called Mense Michaelis, which His Majesty signifies to all
and singular His loving Subjects of this His Realm, to the intent that they
and every of them which has cause or commandment to appear in any of His
Highness Courts at Westminster, in or at any day or time, from and after the
said Vtas of Saint Michael, may tarry at their dwellings, or where their
business otherwise shall lie, without resorting to any of the said Courts for
that cause, before the said Mense Michaelis next coming, and that without
danger of forfeiture penalty, or contempt to incur toward His Highness in
that behalf. And nevertheless His Majesty's pleasure is, that two of His
Justices, That is to say, of either Bench one, shall the first day of
Michaelmaas Term next, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient
order of the Laws, keep the Essoines of the said Octabis Michaelis, at which
Vtas of Saint Michael, Writs of adjournament (which His Majesty hereby
commands the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England to make forth, shall be
directed to the said Justices, giving them authority to adjourne the said
Term of Saint Michael, (That is to say) from the Vtas thereof, until the
fourth Return, as before is said: And the said adjournament shall be made in
the first day of the said Vtas, commonly called the day of Essoines. And
further His Majesty's pleasure is, That all matters, causes, and suits
depending in any of His other Courts between party and party, as in his
Highness Courts of Chauncery, Star Chamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wards and
Liveries, Duchy of Lancaster, and Court of Requests shall have continuance,
and the parties shall have day from the date of these presents, until the said
fourth Return as before is said. Provided always and His Majesty's pleasure
and commandment is, That all Collectours, Receivers, Sheriffs, and other
Accomptants, and all other persons that should, or ought to account, or pay any
sum, or sums of money in any of His Majesty's Courts of Exchequer, Courts of
Wards and Liveries, and of His Dut hie of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to
ent^r into any account in any of the said Courts, shall repair unto His
Majesty's House of Richmond, where His Highness has appointed such Officers
and Ministers, as for that purpose His Majesty has thought expedient, and
there to pay and do in every behalf, as though no such Proclamation of
adjournment had been had or made. And His Majesty's further pleasure and
commandment is, that all Sheriffs shall return their Writs and Proce^
against all such Accomptants and Debtors at the days therein appointed. And if
any person or persons, who ought to account, or pay any sum or summe^ of money
to His Majesty in any of the Courts and places aforesaid do make default
therein, that then His Highness Writs and Process shall be awarded and sent forth
against every such person and persons, and the same to be duly and orderly
served, and returned by the Sheriffs and Officers thereunto appointed in such
like manner and form as the same should have been if this present
Proclamation had not been made. And if any Sheriff or other Officer shall
make default, or be negligent in serving executing, or returning of any the
Writs and Process aforesaid, that then every such Sheriff and other Officer
shall incur such pains and penalties as by the said Courts or any of them
shall be taxed and assessed, willing and commanding all and every His Majesty's
Sheriffs, Officers, Ministers and Subjects, to whom it does, or shall
appertain to observe and keep their assemblies and apparances with all their
Returns and Cer ificats in His Highness said Courts at Westminster in Mense
Michaelis next coming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there to do
their Offices and duties in every behalf in like manner and form as they
should, or ought to have done if this present Proclamation had not been had or
made, as they will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Court at Tichfeld, the fourth day of September, and in the first
year of His Majesty's Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1625.


