royal blazon or coat of arms By the King.
A Proclamation to declare His Majesty's pleasure, that a former restraint
enjoined to the Citizens of London, for repairing to Faires for a time, is now
set at liberty.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, out of His Princely and Christian
care of His loving Subjects, by His Royal Proclamation, bearing date the
fourth day of August last, to prevent the further spreading of the great
Infection of the Plague, as much as by all good means He might, did, by the
advice of His Majesty's Privy Council, forbid the holding and resorting unto
the two great Faires of special note, then by course of time near approaching,
the one usually kept in Smithfield, near the City of London, called
Bartholomew Fair, and the other near Cambridge, called Sturbridge Fair; and
did thereby also further charge and enjoin, all Citizens and Inhabitants of
the said City of London, that none of them should repair to any Fair, held
within any part of this Kingdom, until it should please God to cease the
Infection then reigning amongst them: Now, seeing it has pleased Almighty God,
of his great mercy and goodness, to stay his hand from further punishing that
City, and the places adjacent, and that, that Contagion and dangerous
Sickness is now ceased there, His Majesty, taking into His Princely
consideration, that in the mutual Commerce of His Subjects stands their very
subsistence, at least, their well-being; by the like advice of His Majesty's
Privy Council, does hereby publish and declare His Will and Pleasure to be,
That seeing God, of his mercy, has graciously removed the Cause of the former
restraint, that now the Citizens, and Inhabitants of the Cities of London and
Westminster, and places adjoining, may freely repair to any Fair, hereafter
to be held in this Kingdom, and that any other of His Highness loving
Subjects, may freely buy of them, any Wares or Merchandise, coming from those
Cities or places, the said Proclamation, bearing date the said fourth day of
August, and one other Proclamation, bearing date the eleventh day of October
now last past, or any other Proclamation or Restraint whatsoever to the
contrary. And His Majesty, does hereby straightly charge and command, that no
Majors, Bailifes, Justices of Peace, or any other of His Majesty's Officers,
Ministers, or loving Subjects whatsoever, do presume, under color of the said
former Proclamations, or of any other Restraint whatsoever, to interrupt or
hinder the Citizens or Inhabitants of the said Cities of London or Westminster,
or places near adjoining, to repair to any Faires, and to utter, sell,
barter, or dispose of their Wares or Merchandise there, at their free will and
pleasure.

Given at Our Honor of Hampton Court, the 30. of December. 1625. God save the
King.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. ANNO DOM. M.DC.XXV.


