HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation commanding persons of quality to reside in their Countries.
WHereas, by three former Proclamations, one dated the twentieth of November,
another, the two and twentieth of December, in the twentieth year of Our
Reign, and the third, the six and twentieth day of March, in the one and
twentieth year of Our Reign; We did publish Our Royal pleasure, concerning
the repair of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of other persons of
quality, from our Cities of London and Westminster, and the parts adjacent,
and from other Cities and Towns, unto their Country dwellings: In all which
was so fully declared Our constant and settled resolution, as. We presumed,
would have cut off all hopes of change or alteration therein: Yet finding by
experience, that such as are addicted unto that course, of withdrawing
themselves from their Countries, are prone to flatter themselves in their vain
humor; We have thought good (once more) to publish Our absolute and
peremptory command, That Our said Proclamations be in all points dutifully
obeyed. And to the intent, that all such, as shall presume to contemn Our
Royal commandments, (so often iterated) may feel the severity of Our
justice; We do hereby straightly charge all Majors, Aldermen, Justices of
peace, and other head-Officers, as well of Our said Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts adjacent, as of other Cities and Towns, That they
from time to time, cause diligent survey and inquiry to be made within their
several precincts, limits, and jurisdictions, of all offenders in this
behalf, and make speedy certificate of their names, without partiality or
conniuence, unto the Lords of Our privy Council, or to Our Attorney
general, that they may be proceeded against in Our Court of Star Chamber, or
otherwise, according to their demerits. And Our will and pleasure is, That
as well the Lords of Our privy Council, as Our Attorney general, use all
care and diligence, to punish with severity, as well the partiality,
negligence, and remissness of the said Majors, Aldermen, Justices of peace,
and other head-Officers, in not making due survey or certificate, as aforesaid,
as the contemptuous behavior of such, as shall presume to violate this, or any
other Our said former Proclamations.

Given at Our Court at Royston, the nineteenth day of October, in the two and
twentieth year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. ANNO DOM. M.DC.XXIIII.


