THese are to certify you that the Bearer hereof, by name Angelus Iacobi, a
Merchant of Cyprus, sailing out of Egypt into Creet, fell most unfortunately
into the hands of Turkish Pirates, who not only robbed and spoiled him of his
Goods and Merchandises, but also took from him his Wife and Children, and as
yet keep them in Slavery and bondage, not to be redeemed till the said
Angelus Iacobi pay their several Ransomes. Wherefore, We out of our Princely
compassion, taking pity o^ the miserable estate and condition of this poor
Christian, as also being moved thereunto by the example of other Princes, who
by their Letters witnessed unto us the truth hereof, which cause we deferred
unto the Right Reverend Father in God, George, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Metropolitan of all England, who did approve of the same, having granted and
permitted him by Our Letttrs Pattents, to ask, collect, and gather the
charitable Alms and Benevolence of Our well disposed Subjects, during the time
of his continuance in these Our Realms. And for that he now desires to
return into Cyprus, his own Country, We have granted him these Our Letters
for his safe conduct in his Journey both by Sea and Land, as shall be most
convenient, as also that you by whom he shall pass, might the rather be moved
to relieve him by your Christian Charity: So shall you lay up your Treasure in
heaven, and bind this poor man to pray for your safety continually.

Given at Our Palace at Westminster, the thirteenth day of September. God save
the King. Having perused of late his Majesty's Letters Patents, on the behalf
of this Bearer, Angelus Iacobi: These are to desire, as well the Prebendaries,
Residensaries at York, upon some Sunday in the Metropoliticall Church there:
As also to require all Parsons, Vicars, Curates and Churchwardens throughout
my Diocese of York, to be ayding and assisting unto him, in receiving the
free and Charitable benevolence of all well affected Subjects, in their
several Chruches and Chapels, according to the tenor of the said Letters
Patents, signified in that behalf.

At Bishopthorpe the eleventh of April 1625. Tobias Eboracen.
and in our Diocese of Peterborough. 28. October. 1625. Tho. Peterbor. Fr.
Heref. Miles Gloucester. John Wigorn. Tho. Couen. and Lichf. Theophilus
Landauensis Ric. Assaphen. Sa. Noruicen. Tho. Park Procan. Cantrbrig. Gu.
Peirs Uicecan. Oxon.





