THE MILITARY GARDEN, OR INSTRVCTIONS FOR ALL YOUNG SOVLDIERS AND SVCH WHO ARE
DISPOSED TO LEARN, AND HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE MILITARY DISCIPLINE. Wherein are
set down the conditions and qualities which are required in every several
officer of a private company.

Observed and set in order according to the best Military practice by JAMES
ACHESONE Gentleman at Arms, Burges of EDINBVRGH.

EDINBVRGH Printed by JOHN WREITTOUN Anno DOM. 1629. Cum privilegio REGALI.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND WORSHIPFVL DAVID AKENHEAD, PROVEST, JOHN SINCLAIRE,
ARCHBALD TOD, EDWARD FORKER, ALEXANDER HERIOT BALLIES; JOHN MAKNATH Dane of
Guild; DAVID MAKALL Treasurer: and to all the remnant of the Council of the
Town of EDINBVRGH.
RIght virtuous and worthshipfull, having by your direction trained up and
practiced in the military discipline, the youth of this most flourishing
Town, and now for the common good being to publish to the World those precepts
which I had privatlie taught all them that would learn of me; I thought I
could not more deservedly present the fruits of my labors to any than unto
that Town to which I was so much oblished, and to you which were so careful
to have your Burgesses made able, as well for War as Peace. As the Governor
of this World has appointed Life and Death, Summer and Winter, Day and Night,
and almost given evrie thing a contrary, so has he made Peace and War to
have an interchanging course on the face of this earth. Though Peace be
always to be desired, yet War is to be provided for, and the youth when it
should fall forth (for the chasticement of People) is to be trained thereunto.
All civil laws and orders, if there were no defense prepared to maintain
them, were no better than beautiful Palaces destitute of Roofes to hold out
the violence of storm. What have the most peaceful Comonwealths been without
trained Soldiers, but a pray to some stronger? It is set down as a blemish in
Constantin the great, that at the desire of some (too peaceful) subjects, he
cassired the ancient Legions, and in them overthrew the Military discipline
of Rome, leaving a breach for barbarous nations to invade the Empire; not
considering how laws, justice, subjects, and the whole Body of the estate lie
under the protection of Arms, as by a mighty forteresse. (...) cap. ^ 25.
Solomon in time of Peace prepared arms and chariots: None dare do wrong to
that nation which they know it ready prepared, Chron. 2. cap. 1. 14. cap. 9. 25.
and promptlie furnished for War. If GOD shall move the posterity to
continue this noble exercise, which ye in this time have so happily begun,
there are fair hopes, that as this Town is the chief of this laend, so shall
it be far: above many, and equal if not exceed the brave number of
Souldeours, that have with loss of time and blood followed the Wars in
foreign parts of the earth. To which they may be stirred up, if there were
some plot of ground alloted to be a military Garden for the training up of
the rude youth: which the Kings M. desired most earnestly to be done, knowing
how the youth of Scotland is not inferior to any living in courage: To which
worthy purpose I found the most and best of the commons most willing and well
affected. By this means, of weak citizens ye shall have strong, of timorous
courageous, of idle laborious, and for a People which scarce are able to
sustain a desensiue War against invaders, a Nation reddie to offend any
stranger kingdoms abroad. Thus hoping ye will accept of this tractise with
the same mind that it is presented unto you, I pray Almighty GOD to prospere,
and make ever flowrish this Town with a race of such Worthy and Virtuous
Magistrates and Councillors as ye are, which now this present year govern it.

Yours ever to command. JAMES ACHESONE.

THE MILITARY GARDEN.
AS natural things are conserved by comely disposition, so ART which
follows nature is most maintained by the same: Confusion is the mother of
mischief, and nothing can be strong where disorder is admitted either to give
counsel or to command. So long every commonwealth and policy has been able
to stand, as it has found Citizens submit themselves to the authority of the
laws and the power of Magistrates; and so long may we hope to have happy
success in the exercise of Arms, as these who profess to follow the same,
shall be ready and willing to keep that station wherein their merits has
placed them: but that it may be known what is required of every one in his
office, I shall touch alittle their several duties according to the order and
place they carry; first,

A CAPTAIN.
A Captain should consider that he has the charge of men's lives committed to
his hands over the which he should watch, least any of them be lost under his
conduct either by rashness or want of knowledge, which should be more easily
performed if skillful and sufficient men were chosen to bear rule, and such as
either had passed* or at least did understand the degrees of all the inferior
officers, whereby he may be able to discharge a place of such importance,
that he may presently redress any thing amiss, and give ininstructions, and
orders upon every new accident, either in marching, encamping, or fighting,
what the said officers have to do, for no man is able to teach that which he
has not himself before learned: for if he have not experience (by his
ignorance) a whole company may be overthrown, he must diligently use his
Soldiers to the often using of their arms, which shall be more profitable
unto them than the asistance of the Physicians, for daily practice and exercise
makes them both perfect and healthful, and at last victorious in the fields in
time of battle.

LEIVETENANT.
HE that is elected unto this office, ought to be a man of great experience,
fidelity, and valor, who in the absence of his Captain carries his place,
charge, and command, unto whom the Soldiers and under officers are to obey for
the time, as unto the Captain himself.

His place of March, his Captain being present, is in the rear of the
Company, but in retiring or marching out of the Field, he is to march in the
Front, and the Captain in the Rear.

THE HANDSIGNE.
THE Handsigne is the foundation of the Company, wherein consists the honor
and reputation of the Captain and Soldiers, he ought not only to be a good
Soldier, bold and valiant, but as near as may be the Captains equal, in
valor, discretion, and counsel.

His place of march is upon the head of the Pickes, the same place he must
observe in set Battles, but rather betuixt the third and fourth Ranks.

THE SERGEANT.
IN this officer consists the principal parts of the observation of
military discipline, and for that the execution of the supperiour officers
orders, and commands, do concern his charge and duty, it imports that he
be a skillfull and valiant Soldier, and well experienced in Military
discipline, yea of so great importance, that more tolerable it were for all the
officers of the company (were it the Captain himself) to be unskilled men
and of little experience, rather than the Sergeant, who of necessity ought to
be an expert Soldier, and of great spirit and diligence.

He is to rank the Soldiers as he shall think good, not suffering them to
contend or fall out amongst themselves for the Front or best places.

THE CORPORAL.
AS he is a degree above the private Soldier, so ought he in skill, let no man
that is a Soldier, seek to come to preferment in any office in the Field,
except he know himself fit to discharge the same, or else he shall become a
laughingstock to others, and be contemned of all men, as he justly deserves,
that takes upon him more than he is able to perform.

I thought to have written more at large of every officer but for brevities
sake I have but only touched every one apart, hoping God-willing my self to
show it more at large by my self unto them in exercise which I hope will
work more in them than writting. So wishing all to take this in good part, not
set forth for the well experimented Soldier, but for such as yet have not
tasted thereof.

Hereafter follows how a Company should march, as lykewayes the several
words of Commands for exercising a Company, with their reasons.

The order how a company should march of 200 men, 100 Picks, and 100 Muskets.
C M M M M M Leaders. M M M M M First division Muskets. M M M M M D M M M M M
M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M Bringers up. H P P
P P P Leaders...... First division Pickes...... D..............................
P... P Bringers up. 1. S P... P Leaders...... 2 division
Picks.................................... P... P Bringers up. 2. S M... M
Leaders...... 2 division Muskets...... D.............................. M... M
Bringers up. L

The Company brought up in battle for the exercising.
200 in Company Front. Left division. Right division. left wing M M M M M P P P
P P * P P P P P M M M M M right wing M........ P P........
M........................................ M.... P... P P... P.... M * * 6 Rank
or Rear division. M.... P... P P... P.... M 6 Rank or Rear
division............................................................. M....
P... P * P... P.... M The Rear.

Next follows the handling of Musket and Pick* with the several words for
every posture.

The words for the Musket. The Musket shouldered. The posturs of the Musket.

1. Sink your Musket. Charge.
2 Handell your Musket with your right hand. 3 Vnshoulder your Musket and
hold her up. 4 Fall back with your right leg and hand. 5 Bring your rest to
your Musket. 6 Join both in your left hand. 7 Hold your Musket mouth over
your leaders right shoulder. 8 Open your pan with right finger and thumb. 9
Take your pryming wyre and cleanse your touchholl. 10 Blow your pan. 11 Morse
with powder. 12 Clese your pan. 13 Grip the but-end of your Musket and rest
with your right hand and shake off the loose powder. 14 Bring about your
Musket to your left side. 15 Discharge your measure into your barrel. 16 Draw
forth your scrow or ramming stick with the middle finger and thumb of the
right hand. 17 Shorten the same at your right pappe within a handful. 18 Ram
in your powlder, furring, and bullet. 19 Draw forth your scrow and shorten it
as before. 20 Put up your scrow in its place. 21 Recover your Musket and hold
it up with your left hand. 22 Take it be the butt hard at the pan and shoulder
it. 23 Your rest being in your left hand with your thumb upon it above the
butt. 24 Sink your Musket. Discharge.
25 Handell your Musket. 26 Vnshoulder your Musket. 27 Hold up your Musket.
28 Bring your rest to your Musket. 29 Join both in your left hand. 30 Take
forth your match with the finger and thumb of the right hand. 31 Blow your
match under your right arm. 32 Cock your match. 33 Try your match to your
pan. 34 Guard your pan with the first two fingers of the right hand and the
thumb at the back of the pan. 35 Blow your match again. 36 Take off your pan.
37 Present your Musket upon your rest, your left foot being at the rest upon
the ground. 38 Give fire. 39 Fall off either be the right or left hand, as the
Command is given. 40 In going off take forth your match, and return it in
your left hand again, betwixt your little finger and middle finger, or in
both, having two ends lighted.
In service all this being learned and practiced in exercise, there is but only
three words of Command, viz. make reddie. 2. present. 3. give fire.

The postures of the Pick.
Your Pick lying upon the ground going to list it up.

1 PVt your toe of your right foot first to it. 2 Then your right hand with
your thumb at the but-end of it. 3 In lifting step forward with your left foot
and left hand and so lift it up. 4 Then your Pick is mounted. 5 Ordour your
Pick at 3. 6 Mount your Pick at 3. 7 Shoulder your Pick at 3. 8 Mount your
Pick at 3. 9 Port your Pick at 1. 10 Traile your Pick at 4. 11 Cheek your
Pick at 1* 12 Recover your Pick at 4. 13 Port your Pick at 1. 14 Mount your
Pick at 3. 15 Sink your Pick at 1. The but-end being at halfefoote to the
ground. 16 Hold your Pick upon your right shoulder with your right hand, and
your thumb upon your shoulder, the palm of your hand up, and your four
fingers lying above the Pick. 17 Upon a long march and upon double distance in
ranks, you may carry your Pick levill upon your shoulder but not so comely as
sinked. 18 Your Pick being ordoured at close ordour the but-end of it must be
betwixt your feet, holding the same with your left hand, being ready to
present to charge horse, and your right hand to draw your sword, setting
forward your left foot laying your Pick, and left hand upon your left knee
the butt being close at the right foot and your sword in your right hand. 19
Your Pick being ordered at open ordour your feet must be a foot a sundry
and your Pick in your right hand, with thumb up, and the Pick a foot from
your right foot. 20 Your Pick being ordered at order your feet may be close
at half a foot, and the butt of your Pick at the toe of your right foot a
little distance from it.
When you come to understand distances of Ranks and strings these Will be
more clearer.

AS for the presenting and charging of your Pick when we come to the
exercising of the Pickes, the whole form shall be shown God willing, which
can not be done but by practice and use of exercise.

The first principal in Military instructions, binds every one that minds
to practice in Military discipline, after the handling of his arms, to
understand the several soundes of the Drum, without the which no Soldier is
able to know his commanders pleasure when to march, charge or make a retreat
etc. for when the commanders voice can not extend to the hearing of the
company, the Drum denunceth and expresses the same.

The soundes especially to be learned are these. viz.

A Gathering. A March. A Troop. A Charge. A Retreat etc.
THE second principal is to know how to offend and and defend after the
learning of his Arms, the readiest and easiest way with skill.

The third principal to be learned, is the distance and order of standing and
marching that is to be observed between strings and ranks, which is a
special point of discipline, some make five sort, but I content me only with
three most in use.

Distance in Strings.
Order is three foot. Open order is six foot. Close order is a foot and
half.
Distance in Ranks.
Order is six foot. Open order is tuelue foot. Close order is three foot.
Great is the necessity of the learning of this principal, for if order and
perfect form be not observed, it can be termed no other thing but a
disordered company.

In the next place, let the Soldier know how to distinguish betwixt every
several place in the company, as follows.

The Front.
The Front is always where the faces of the company are directed all one way.

The Rear.
The Rear is ever where the backs of the whole company are turned.

A String.
A String is a sequence of men standing one behind another, back to belly, and
consists commonly of 10, or 8, or sometime 6 depth.

A Rank.
A Rank is a raw of men, standing one by another, shoulder to shoulder, their
faces being directed all one way.

Leaders of Strings.
Leaders of Strings are these that are in the first rank; every one in the
same rank is a leader of a string.

Bringers up.
Bringers up, these that are in the last rank are called bringers up, every
one being a bringer up of a string.

Rear division, half strings, or sixth rank, all these three names may be
given to this division.
The Leaders of the rear division are the sixth rank, if their be ten depth,
if but eight, the fifth rank. Also this division is called by some middle-men,
but the most sure being what depth they will, rear division separats best, and
is soon known.

The wing.
The wing is the side of the company from the front to the rear, the right
side being called the right wing, and the left side the left wing.

Hereafter follows certain general observations.
Let every Soldier know that in marching they are to follow their leaders in
strings, as also keep even with their right hand man, which is their leader in
rank, the like must be done upon a stand, to stand right after their leaders
in string, and rank even with their right hand man in rank, observing true
distance and form according unto such order as shall be enjoined by the
commander. Let the Pickeman know that in a march he must always shoulder his
pick, either just or sinking, as the word shall be given; and coming through
any port or gate, he is to port his pick, upon a troop he must carry his
pick mounted, and upon a stand let him always set down or order his pick,
unless he have command to the contrary. Let the Pickeman further know and
observe that in charging (being ten depth) half the ranks or front division are
to charge or present their pickes, the other half or rear division are to
carry their pickes mounted or ported over the heads of their leaders, that they
be no hinderance to them, either in charging or in retiring.

Observe likewayes that when they present standing to fall back with the right
foot, and marching to present the left foot being stopped fordward.

The Musquetier must observe upon a march to shoulder his Musket, and carry
the rest in his right hand except he prepare to give fire, then is he bound to
carry his rest in his left hand: the like also in a troop, but in a stand let
him ever rest his musket, except he have command to the contrary.

In exercising of the company, first cause the body to stand in good order,
and being in such order as they are enjoined to, let them face to the right or
left hand, and so look upon them round, seeing them stand right in strings, and
ranks.

Ten ranks and five strings face them to either hand, and then their is as many
strings as ranks were before; the strings being become ranks, and the ranks
being converted into strings.

When you double your strings to any hand, by doubling of ranks to the contrary
hand, they are brought to their first form: likewayes having doubled ranks to
any hand, by doubling of strings to the contrary hand, they become to their
first order, or as they were.

Now the next for the fifth principal shall be expressed, the most usual
words of command, especially used in the exercising of a company, with the
reasons thereof, which every Soldier must be well acquented with all,
otherwise they can never rise unto any preferment.

The words of Command following.
1. Strings double to the right.

Doubling of strings to the right is after this manner, the utmost string
moves not, but stands fast: the next string unto the right string moves
into the right string, so that of ten in deep it is now become twenty,
accordingly every second string moves into their next string on their right
hand.

2. Strings double to the left.

The left string must stand fast, and every second string is to move into their
next string on their left hand.

The use. Thus you strengthen your wings.

3. Ranks double to the right.

In doubling of ranks you must know the foremost rank stands fast, the second
moves into the first, to the right hand (for that is commounlie first done in
exercising) the third rank stands fast, the fourth moves into the third,
and so of the rest, every second rank moves into the rank before them, that
of five in rank they are doubled and become ten in rank.

4. Ranks double to the left.

Doubling of ranks to the left, every second rank moves, passing up by their
leaders left hand, and so stand in the rank with them, beginning at the front
first, and so take it one from another. Note that in doubling to any hand, in
going to your first order that you fall out with the contrare foot.

The use. Thus you strengthen your front.

5. Strings close

Being in open order, the word is strings close without nameing to any hand,
which is thus performed, the two middle leaders close first, the one to the
right, the other to the left, till they are in the distance commanded, the rest
of of the company to take their distance from them, on either wing closing to
the middle leaders.

6. Strings close to the right.

The right hand string moves not but stands fast, all the rest close to the
right string, taking their distance one from another, from the right hand.

7. Strings close to the left.

Strings closing to the left, then the left string stands fast, the rest of the
strings close, and take their distance from the left hand.

Their is great use in closing of strings for many causes.

8. Strings close to the right and left by division.

Strings closing to the right and left by division, the one half of the strings
close to the right string, the other half to the left string, leaving a space
between, which is done upon some special use best known to the Commander.

9. Strings open.

Being in close order, the word is, strings open (not naming to whether hand)
and is thus to be done, the middle leaders press upon their wingers, first
taking the distance commanded, having then opened both ways, the rest of the
company on both wings take their distance from them.

10. Strings open to the right.

The left string is not to move but stands fast, the next to the left string
first takes the distance, pressing upon the right, until the distance
commanded be obtained, the rest of the strings do the like pressing upon
their right, still opening by the righ until they have all done it.

11. Strings open to the left.

The right string stands fast, the rest open to the left, still pressing upon
their left string until they are all in distance commanded.

This word of command is ever given to that hand where there is most ground, or
fittest ground for conveniencie.

12. Ranks close from the front to the Rear.

After this manner, the rear (or last rank) moves not but stands fast, the
rest of the ranks fall back to the rear.

13. Ranks close from the rear to the front.

To do this, the first rank moves not, but stands fast, all the rest of
the ranks close up, taking their distance commanded, rank after rank from the
front, (or first rank) the second rank to the front beginning first, the rest
consequently one after another, till all have done it.

14. Ranks open from the front to the rear.

The first rank moves not, the rest of the ranks fall back, till they have
gained the ground to the distance commanded, then stand, the second rank
takes the distance first, the rest in like manner one from another, until
they have all effected it.

15. Ranks open from the rear to the front.

Which is thus done, all the body advances ford-ward, the last rank only
stands fast, the second to the last takes the distance first, then the rest
advancing fordward till they have done it.

16. Strings and ranks close.

The whole body being at open order, the word is strings and ranks close, to
do the which your middle leaders of strings close first, the rest of the
strings close to them, the ranks close all up to the front, or the first rank
to such distance as is commanded.

17. Strings and ranks open.

The whole body being close in rank and string, the word is, strings and ranks
open after this manner: the middle leaders of strings open, and take the
distance first, the rest of the strings on either wing from them, the ranks
fall back, the second to the front takes the distance first, the rest in like
manner from the front to the rear backwards.

18. Strings countermarch and maintain ground.

To countermarch and maintain ground, the leaders of every string, having
turned to the hand directed (which is specially to be observed) pass through
the company, their followers march up to the leaders ground, making the same
good, then turn and pass through the company after their leaders, till they
have all done the same.

19. Countermarch and lose ground.

To countermarch and lose ground, the leaders of every string, turn to the
hand directed, passing through the company, the followers move not till their
leaders are passed by them, then they turn and pass after their leaders, the
ranks do the same one after another, not moving till their leaders are passed
by them, then they turn in the same ground.

By countermarch the rear may become the front, in the same ground that the
front stood in, having brought them up, and face about.

Note. The strings must be in their open order when they countermarch.

20. Ranks countermarch from the right to the left.

The right hand man passes between the first and second rank, all the rest
of the same rank follow, the right hand man of the second rank passes
between the second and third ranks, passing to the left wing the rest of the
rank follow him, all the rest of the ranks do the like, bringing the right to
the left.

21. Ranks countermarch from the left unto the right.

The left hand man of every rank turns first, passing to the right, all the
rank follows him, the rest of the ranks do the like, so bringing the left
wing to the right.

This is done upon some politic respect of the commander to change the wing,
doubting the courage of the one by the other, or otherwise best known to the
Commander.

22. Strings rank 3. 5. 7. or 9.

The right hand string first executs the same, advancing fordward, and fall in
rank to such number as shall be enjoined, the next string does the like,
advancing fordward fall in rank after the former string, the rest of the
strings keep the same form and order, unto they are all ranked.

23. Strings rank 3. 5. or 7.

The left string first advances, falling in rank, the rest of the strings
observe the like form, till the words of command be fully executed.

24. Ranks rank 4. 6 or 8.

The first rank executes the same beginning at the right hand man, the first
rank having ended, the right hand man of the second rank begins, the rest
of the ranks do the like, till all have done it.

25. Ranks rank 2. 4 or 6.

The left hand man first begins here, the rest of the ranks join with him,
making so many in rank as shall be commanded, every rank passing up till they
have all done it.

26. Ranks string to the right.

The right hand man of every rank stirs not, but the next to the right hand
man falls behind his right hand man: the rest of the ranks follow: all the
ranks do the same, falling behind their right hand man, making one string of
the whole company.

27. Ranks string to the left.

Every left hand man stands fast, the rest fall behind one another to the left
hand, and so are converted into one string.

The use. Thus you give a strong charge upon the wing by facing to any hand:
this serves also for a narrow passage, to do this let the ranks be in open
order, and the strings in close order.

28. Ranks turn to the right.

The right hand man turns in the same ground he stands, not moving forth of
the same: the rest of the same rank turns altogether and become all above
him, the left hand man being uppermost, all the ranks do this.

29. Ranks turn to the left.

The left hand man turns in the same ground he stands in, the rest become all
above him, the right hand man being uppermost, all the ranks do this.

The use. By this you may give a charge by either wing very easily.

Note. To perform this easily and shortly, let the strings be in their close
order, and the ranks in such open order as shall be requisite according to the
number of men in rank.

30. Ranks and strings turn to the right, the great turn.

This word of command is spoken to the whole body, know that the right hand man
moves not but alittle and slowly, the left wing somewhat faster, but all the
whole body together till such time as the left wing be brought about, and then
halt, their faces being all one way.

31. The great turn to the left.

Then the left hand man moves but little and slowly, all the rest of the body
turn together, the right wing being brought to the left.

32. The great turn right about to the rear.

The right hand man moves but little and slowly, as it is said before, until
his face be at the rear, then stands.

33. The great turn left about to the rear.

The like does the left hand man as the right did before, until all be
turned.

The use. Thus the front is brought to either of the wings, or to the rear,
being strongest and best armed.

Note. For turning of this great turn, the whole body must be at their close
order, both in ranks and strings.

34. Rear division, half strings, sixth rank, or middle-men double the front
to the right.

I have showed you before of these four words of command, but tend all to one
purpose.

Therefore I say rear division double the front to the right, the leaders of
this division are according to the deepnesse, the just half of the number, and
they pass up every man of the rank by the right hand of his leader, until
they have all done, and then stand in the front or first rank, the next rank
follows and stands in the second rank, and so the rest, till all have done
it.

35. Rear division double the front to the left.

The leaders of this division or first rank of it passes up upon the left
hand of their leaders unto the front or first rank of the front, and so
consequently all the rest, until all be doubled.

The use. There is a special use of this motion, for by this the same order in
distance of ranks is still observed, which can not be in doubling of ranks.

The second use. Again they bring sufficient men into the front and rear.

The third use. Thirdly it makes the company to show fair upon a march through
a City, or place of note, for faces to any hand being thus doubled and then
march, and you shall be bravely winged.

36. Rear division double the front to the right and left by division.

The rear division divide themselves, the one half of them face to the right
hand, the other half face to the left hand, then march out both to the wing of
the company, then face again to the right and left, then march up to the
front, and stand there.

The use. Thus the front is doubled on either wing, and the same distance
between strings and ranks still observed.

37. Rear division double the front to the right enteare.

The rear division face to the right hand altogether, then march forth, then
face to the left hand and march up to the front, joining rank by rank and
their stand.

38. Rear division double the front to the left enteare

The rear division face to the left and then pass out, then face to the right
and march up to the front, joining rank by rank to the wing and stand.

The use. Thus the front is enlarged by such wing as the commander thinks
fit, and shall be most useful.

39. Bringers up double the front to the right.

The last rank (as formerly is shown) are bringers up* who pass through the
body by the right hand to the front, and there stand the second to the rear,
follow the bringers up, and stand in the second rank to the front, and so the
rest till they have all done it.

40. Bringers up double the front to the left.

The last rank passes up by their leaders left hand to the first rank and
their stand, the second rank to the rear follow and stand in the second rank
to the front, all the ranks do the like until they have all done it.

The use. This is another manner of doubling the front, and not the worst: for
by this, their is sufficient men brought to the front to the strengthening of
the same.

By this word of command you may alter the front, and bring the rear to the
front, by causing the rear or last rank which are bringers up to pass through
the company* the rest of the ranks following them.

41. Ranks string by inversion.

After this manner the whole body standing in open order, especial in ranks,
one half of the ranks fall into the right string the other half into the left
hand string, becoming two strings only, wherein you must note that the two
uttermost strings, which are called the right and left hand strings, they stand
fast, the rest of the strings invert to them.

The use. This serves for the avoiding of cannon shot upon the maine body, or
for a gaird for some great commander to pass through, it is used also at the
lodging of the Handseigne.

42 To your first order, or as you were.

These words are words which bring the company to their first station or order:
after every motion foresaid we say, either to your first order, or else as you
were, which tends both to one use.

But because I use this first word in my own practice, I would wish all those
that uses this book to follow it, so that there be no diversity.

To your first order.

This word of command is often used to perfect the body after doubling of ranks
or strings, when the rear division has doubled the front, or bringers up have
doubled the front, after ranks turning the great turn, ranks stringing either
by conversion or inversion, and at other times to bring them to their first
form.

The use. The use of this is so necessary, that when the company can not
understand by any other word of command, they can more easily fall to their
first order.

There be diverse other words of command generally to be observed by the
whole company in time of service, or upon any sudden assault to cause face to
any hand, or charge to any hand.

The company standing in battle orderly, both in ranks and strings, and true
distance in both the words of exercising are these, viz.
Faces to the right. To your first order. Faces to the left. To your first
order. Faces right about to the rear. To your first order. Faces left about to
the rear. To your first order. PRESENTING. Present to the right. To your first
order. Present to the left. To your first order. Present right about to the
rear. To your first order. Present left about to the rear. To your first
order. Faces to the right and left by division. To your first order. Faces to
the front and rear by division. To your first order. PRESENTING. Present to
the right and left by division. To your first order. Present to the front and
rear by division. To your first order.

There is diverse sorts of exercising of Musketeers by themselves apart, which
cannot well be set down but in action.

The first is to win ground upon the enemy.

The second is to lose ground, or making a retreat, and yet offend the enemy.

The third is, in marching by the enemy, and discharging upon them by strings
as they march.

The fourth sort is by divyding the front and rear by divisions, six foot
distant, and marching away by the enemy, and discharging upon them half
strings, the first half string marching through the division from the right to
the left: the second half string discharging upon the enemy, and falling by
the rear or last rank unto the left half string.

The fifth sort is by divyding the right and left division six foot distant one
from another, the first half ranks discharging upon the enemy, and falling
off from the right hand unto the rear, the one half rank falls off by the
right division to the rear, the left division falls down through between
the divisions upon the right hand unto the rear.

For brevities sake I defer all or most kynds of frames and motions, until I
come to the practice and exercise my self, which Godwilling will be more
profitable to the young Soldier, than many tables of motions, which are
hinderance to the mind.

Heretofore I have set forth briefly and shortly the duties and parts that
every particular officer ought to be endued with, that he may be found
qualified for the fulfilling of his place, and discharging the commandment he
has over a private company. Now my discourse draws me a little higher to
the heads, and chiefest officers in an army, by whom the whole body of the
inferior companies are to be directed; for as the senses of our body have
residence in the head to govern the rest of the body, and the sense of
touching and feeing only is spread abroad through the rest of the parts thereof,
that every particular member may have functions for the execution of these
offices whereunto they are appointed by nature, even so it is in the body of an
army, from whose chiftane, as from the head should be deryved all sort of
sense, and in the rest of the inferior members should be found a ready
obedience to be disposed upon according to the influence and government that
he shall think most expedient: Now as the health and good order of the body
depend so upon the constitution of the head, that if it be distempered, or the
senses troubled, the actions of the whole man are of that same kind confuted
and perverted, so the proceedings of an army receive their beginning and
success, according to the sense and understanding of those who govern
therein, and therefore I have thought it expedient to speak alittle of them
lykewayes, that every one at his first entry into a camp may know how all
things ought to be rightly governed, and to whom he ought obedience if any
thing should fall amiss, so that from the lowest degree to the highest they
be not ignorant how the rule of perfection may be aimed at and obtained.

THE GENERAL.
THE highest office of all is that of a General, who as he is above the rest
in authority and power, so ought he not only to know perfectly the duties of
every officer, but also to excel them all in religion, wisdom, experience,
policy, gravitie, secrecy, counsel, modesty, temperance, valor,
magnanimity, vigilancie, care constancy, liberality, and resolution, with
all other good parts incident to a perfect man of war: and how much all
these good parts, and many more ought to be in the personage elected to this
high and careful dignity, you may easily conceive and gather, because he is
set over the rest, to the end that he being their chiftane and head, may not
only know how to govern them both in actions, but also in his virtuous life
and carriage be a pattern, light, and lantern unto the whole numbers of the
companies to imitate, for it is an old proverb, such master such man, such
General such officers and followers: for commonly a wise, valiant and virtuous
general will choose wise valiant, and virtuous captains and officers: good and
virtuous captains will as near as they can choose good, honest, sober, and
virtuous officers under them, intertaine their Soldiers with good and fair
speeches, to command with all allurements to bring them to the due form of
martial discipline.

THE CROWNER.
THE Crowners place and office is to be commander over the Captains, and all
other inferior officers of his regiment, having jurisdiction and dominion over
them all, whereby may be inferred and gathered the parts and qualities which
ought to be in him, and the great skill and experience in war, as one who
ought to exceed them all, for to know how to command, rule, and govern them
with prudencie, and valor: And forasmuch as in many occurrants and occasions
growing and presented in war he should know to perform the parts and office
of a general, being alone with the companies of his own regiment, as when his
general commands him to the battery, or seige of any fort or city, or to
defend any fort or town, or to war in any open campania, to give battle to
the enemy, to make incursions, to retire and withdraw skirmishers, to frame
brigs over rivers, to fortify himself in camp, to conduct artillirie, and
many other pieces of service to be performed in him, he is greatly to respect
and honor his general, obeying and performing his commands and orders with
great care and diligence, as he would be obeyed himself and reverenced by
his Captains and other officers of his regiment.

THE SERGEANT MAYOR.
HIS office is to be the general minister or officer of a whole regiment of
sundry companyes, and superintendent of all the Sergeants of the same, by
whose hand and industry, the crowner does give the orders convenient to the
due government of his regiment; as in marching, encamping imbattelling, and in
such other matters concerning hereunto, whereby may be gathered the parts,
the qulities, the valor, the great skill, experience, and great diligence
which ought to be in him, who is chosen to this degree of office, being of
such importance: the Sergeant majors office is of much higher degree than any
ordinary Captiane; for every Captain do receive his directions from the
Sergeant major, and the Sergeant major from the Crowner or General if he be
in place: the ordinary place where the Crowner marches is in the Vangard, and
so the Sergeant major being his officer, by whom he sends his commands unto
the Captains. Leiuetennents, Handseignes, and Sergeants, and other (...) (...)
always to be near unto his person, for (...) (...) major is guide of the
battle.

Admonitions for a (...) Soldier
HAving said somewhat concerni^^ ^he conditions and qualities which are
required in (...) several officer of a private company. Now let us see (...)
manner of men are worthy the name of Soldiers.

First the Soldier of all men (...) the fear of God before his eyes, to have
a clear (...), and to be of honest conversation, least in running up (...) he
fall into hellfire.

Secondly he that loves right and Justice, is sit to be the defender of
the same.

Thirdly he that pitieth the poor and afflicted, is a meet man to succor
his country and town against the violence of oppressors.

Fourthly he that tendereth the wedow and fatherless* he that delyteth to see
virtue floorish in his country, honor advanced, faith and equity to abide in
every fellowship.

Fifthly he that hates covetousness, thift, extortion, murder, fornication,
idleness; and drunkenness, these and such like men are fit to be, and bear
the name of Soldiers or martialists.

For the first foundation and use of arms was erected of necessity to
restrain and repress the disorders of lewd and wicked men, and to settle and
establish peace and justice upon earth, so then as the armed host is the
remedy to chastise and repress the offenses of others, it is convenient that
the same host be free from the like offenses, and every vice in a Soldier
ought to be strongly bridled, and punished with extremity.

A company drawn up in form of a triangle battle.
200 men. M... M H M... M.............................. M... M M... M M... M
M... M.............................. M... M M... M P... P P...
P.............................. P... P P... P P... P P...
P.............................. P... P P... P

A company drawn up with the picks upon the right hand.
200 men. M... M M... M P... P P...
P............................................................ M... M M... M
P... P P... P M... M M... M P... P P...
P............................................................ M... M M... M
P........ P

A company drawn up and winged upon both the wings with Musketeers.
200 men.

M... M P... P P... P M...
M............................................................ M... M P... P
P... P M... M M... M P... P P... P M...
M............................................................ M... M P... P
P... P M... M

This company having their Musketeers upon the left wing, has now doubled the
right division of Pickes.
200 men.

P... P P... P M... M M... M P... P P... P M... M M... M P... P P... P M... M
M... M P........ P M........ M P........ P M........ M P........ P M........ M
P........ P M........ M P........ P M........ M P........ P M........ M
P........ P M........ M

This makes a strong battle for defending and offending an horse troop, by
facing to any hand, either to the right or to the left.

A Company presenting to all quarters, being 200. 100 Picks, 100 Musketeers.
Front.

Front. M........ M P P P P P P P P P P Front. M........ M P P P P P P P P P
P......... M. P.. P P P P P P......... M. P.. P P P P P P M... M M... M P P P P
P P P P P P Front. P P. P P P... P M........ M P P.................. P
P.................. P P.................. P P. P P P.. P P M... M M... M Front.

Because I am in opinion that there be sundry who will be desirous to know
the manner how to draw up companies, and placing them in battle rank, this
being a most difficle and pleasant peace of all the exercise, I have now for
their contentment and satisfaction set down in a table under their view
diverse sorts and fashions of this kind, out of the which they may be able
easily by their own industry, according to the occurrences to frame other
forms as the number of the companies and occasions that they shall find shall
permit.

Here is placed the handling of Pick and Musket, with your left hand because
there is sundry of this Town who are left handed and desirous to learn to
handle both Pickes and Muskets therewith.
The postures of the Pick.

Your Pick lying upon the ground going to lift it up.

1 PVt your toe of your left foot first to it. 2 Then your left hand with your
thumb at the but-end of it. 3 In lifting step forward with your right foot,
and right hand and so lift it up. 4 Then your Pick is mounted. 5 Ordour your
Pick at 3. Mo^ion. 6 Mount your Pick at 3. Mo^ion. 7 Shoulder your Pick at
3. Mo^ion. Which must be done this way, first fall back with your left foot
and your left hand, receaving your Pick upon your left shoulder, so you step
up again with your left foot upon your station to the right foot. 8 Mount
your Pick at 3. 9 Port your Pick at 1. 10 Traile your Pick at 4. 11 Cheek
your Pick at 1. 12 Recover your Pick at 4. 13 Port your Pick at 1. 14
Shoulder your Pick at 3. 15 Sink your Pick, putting the but-end of it within
half foot to the ground. 16 Hold your Pick upon your left shoulder with your
left hand, and your thumb upon your shoulder, the palm of your hand up and
your four fingers lying upon the Pick about. 17 Your Pick being ordered at
close order, the but-end of it must be betwixt your feet, holding the same
with your right hand being ready to present to charge horse, and your left hand
to draw your sword, setting forward your right foot, laying your Pick and
right hand upon your right knee, the butt being close at the left foot and
your sword in your left hand. 18 Your Pick being ordered at open order, your
feet must be a foot asunder and your Pick in your left hand, with your thumb
up toward the point, and the Pick a foot from the left foot. 19 Your Pick
ordered at order, your feet may be close at half a foot asunder, and the
but-end of your Pick standing a little from your left toe of that foot. 20
Presenting your Pick being shouldred to any quarter, observe that if he be a
right handed man* that his right foot go always back to one place, and if
left handed, his left foot always back to one place, at the exercising of
these Postures I shall show the reasons, but now it were too tedious.
The words for the handling of the Musket for a left handed man.
The posturs of the Musket.
The Musket shouldered upon the right shoulder.

1 Sink your Musket. Charging.
2 Handle your Musket with your left hand. 3 Vnshoulder your Musket and hold
her up in your left hand. 4 Fall back with your left leg and left hand. 5
Bring your rest to your Musket with your right hand. 6 Join both Musket and
rest in your right hand. 7 Be sure to have the mouth of your Musket higher
then any of your leaders shoulders head, and so no harm can be done. 8 Open
your pan with the middle finger and thumb of the left hana, your thumb being at
the back of the pan. 9 Take your pryming wyre and cleanse your touchholl, and
blow it. 10 Morse with powder. 11 Close your pan. 12 Grip the but-end of your
Musket in your left hand with the rest also and shake off the loose powder. 13
Bring about your Musket to your right side. 14 Discharge your measure into
your barrel of your Musket. 15 Draw forth your scrow with the middle finger
and thumb of the left hand. 16 Shorten your scrow wand at your left pappe
within a handful. 17 Ram in your charge. 18 Draw forth your scrow wand again
and shortenit, as before. 19 Put up your scrow wand or raming stick again in
its place. 20 Recover your Musket alittle before you lift it up. 21 Hold up
your Musket in your right hand. 22 Take it by the but-end hard under the pan
with your left hand and shoulder it. 23 Put your rest in your right hand at the
inside of your Musket, and your hand at the back of the pan.Your Musket is
now charged ready to do service and execution upon the enemy. 24 Sink your
Musket. 25 Handle your Musket with your left hand. Discharging*
26 Vnshoulder your Musket. 27 Hold up your Musket in your left hand. 28
Bring your rest to your Musket. 29 Join both in your right hand. 30 Take
forth your match with the middle finger and thumb of the left hand. 31 Blow
your match under your left arm. 32 Cock your match. 33 Try your match. 34
Guard your pan with the first two fingers of the left hand, and the thumb at
the back of the pan. 35 Blow your match again. 36 Take off your pan or put of
the cover of your pan. 37. Present your Musket upon the rest, your right foot
being at the rest upon the ground. 38 Give fire. 39 Fall off either be the
right or left hand, as the word of Command is given 40 In going off take forth
your match, or lunte, and return it in your right handagaine, betwixt your
little finger and second finger, having two ends lighted.
Note that when you handle your Musket with your right hand that your
bandelier be over the left shoulder and under the right arm.

Also when you handle with the left hand that your bandeleirs be over the right
shoulder and under the left arm.

A Company drawn up with the Musketeers in the front.
Front. Left wing. M M M M M M M M M M Right
wing............................... M... M M... M P... P P...
P.............................. P... P P... P The Rear.

Here the rear division of Pickes, has doubled the front division of
Musketeers to the right hand.
Front. Left wing. M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P Right wing. M P M P
M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P
M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M P M
P.................................................................................................... The Rear.

A Soldiers resolution to brauo Soldiers.
GEntlemen and brave Soldiers, having now ended all that I have thought
expedient to be set down by writ for the present touching this matter, what
amiss and error I have herein committed, I yield the same to be considred
and reformed by the wisdom of those, whose experience, authority, and good
endeavor may be answerable to the performance thereof: Desiring that the same
may be deemed as proceeding from a Soldier, who more of zeal than of any
desire to offend, not to instruct the expert Soldier, but to endeavor my self
by the observations to make known my goodwill and wishes I have conceaved, to
set forward the inexpert and unskilled sort, which if I have obtained, it is
the hight of all my desires, and I shall esteem this a full recompense of my
travel, if I perceive this discourse of the rudiments of Martial affairs, to
be graciously accepted, though it be roughly drawn, as it were with the
Pick and Musket of a Soldier, and no^ trimmed with the delicate pen of an
orator, for I have ever judged it more becoming a Soldier to utter himself
by works than by words, and in effect, as I shall do declare the affection
and readiness I have

To do you better service. I. A.


