The most notable and excellent discourse of the Christian Philosopher
Athenagoras, as touching the Resurrection of the dead, translated out of Greek
into Latin by Peter Nannius, and out of Latin into English by R. Porder.

A TREATISE. VERY Necessary and profitable for this our last ruinous age of
the world, in the which are such svvarmes of Atheistes and Epicures,
whose pestilent infection is more to be feared then papistrie. Therefore
worthy the consideracion of al men, as well for overthrow of their pernicious
errors, as staying the faith and conscience of the vveake and unlearned.

Imprinted at London in Pavvles Churchyard, by VV. Williamson.

Anno. 1573.

To the right worshipful, his singular good friend M. William Fleetevvood
Esquier, Recorder of the most honorable City of London, his well vviller
Richard Porder wishes felicity in Christ Jesus.
IT is true (right worshipful sir) which the auctor of this work at the
very first entrye thereof does aledge, that some error does as it were cleave
to every treatise or disputacion, for Aristotle contendeth that mu^dus est
aeternus, The Stoickes have assigned two beginninges of all things, to
vveete, Deus, and materia: Democritus and Epicurus say, the world is composed
ex atomis temere and casu concurrentibus, that is: of little motes flying
together in the air, and cleuing one to an other, and so increasing this great
massi lu^pe, or earthy globe of the world. Thales says, water was the
brood mother and beginning of all things. etc. And other acknowledged this
world to have a beginning, and God to be the cause of that beginning, and by
their diligent studies and wisdom, have found out of what diverse elements
mankind was composed: Yea further by their great know ledge in many mighty
vvorckes of God, but specially in the creation of man, they confessed God to be
perfectly wise, perfectly just, and summum bonum, out of which reasonable
knowledge (naturaly graffed in man it seems) the auctour of this treatise
took his ground to prove the resurrection of the dead by reason. First
admonishing all those that doubt or believe not this doctrine, to examine
effectualy by reason the cause of their unbelief or doubting, for he affirms
truly, that to admit doubts, or incredulity without due examination in
reason why, is the part of the prodigal as he calls them, that is, of such
as spend their vvittes vvast fully and careleslye, without reason or
judgment: and as there were many errors about the beginning of things, so
not a fevve errors (touching the repairing of those things, which God made to
be restored after their dissolution) were the cause of this man's vvriting. For
Epicures and the Saduces flatly denied the resurrection, As Sardanapalus last
king of Syria declares in an Epitaphe, which he made for him self a little
before he leaped headlong into the fire, vvherin he was brent as Strabo notes.

Cum te mortalem noris, presentibus exple
Delitiis animum, post mortem nulla voluptas
Namque ego sum puluis, qui nuper tanta tenebam
Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exaturata libido
Hausit: at illa manent multa and preclara relicta
Hoc sapiens vitae mortalibus est documentum
That is, for as much, as thou know thy self to be mortal, glut thy desire
with present delights. After death there is no pleasant solace, for see I am
dust, which of late possessed so great honor and riches. Those things oncly
J have, which I did eat: Yea what greedye lust has devoured, I hold in
possession: But all my gold, magnificient buyldinges, lands, riches and
honor left behind me remain for other. Lo I am an example and wise lesson
for all mortal creatures to consider. It grieved this Epicure that he could
not eat all the world while he lived: Also Philetus and Hymineus said, it
should be spiritual. Some heahten hathbeleeued the soul only should remain
for ever with the Gods. And other thought the soul should survive the body,
and yet could not tell what should become of it, as Aelius Adrianus the
Emperor, who desperately cried in his sickness,

Animula vagula blandula
Que nunc abibis in loca?
Nec vt soles, dabisiocos
Hospes comesque corporis
Pallidula, rigid a nudula.
Oh my little svveete soul, vvhither vvilt thou now depart away from me?
For thou being pale, nomme, and naked, shall not henceforth enjoy thy
pleasures as in times past, being a ghest and companion of the body. Other
thought that soul and body did perish together, and also should rise again
in the last day, of vvho^ Eusebius, says, Exorti sunt autem alij quidam tum
temporis in Arabia. etc. At that time there sprung up an other sect in Arabia,
which held an opinion contrary to the truth, which said that souls perished
together with the bodies, and also should rise with the bodies in the last
day. Other affirmed that men's bodies should rise, but not the self same
bodies, nor the same flesh. All which false opinions contraye to them selves,
and repugnante to the Christian faith, as your worship hears them daily
confuted by authority of scriptures and examples in the same: so here you
shall see the same overthrown by force of reason: and where some grant God
to be able, and yet doubt of his will, Athenagoras shows that the
ommpotencie, Justice, wisdom and will of God are so linked together by an
inviolable decree concerning this matter, that the Epicures may as well deny
that there is a God, as deny the resurrestion of the dead, and last judgment.
And though some have signed reasons (as seemed to them) wherefore they doubted
of this matter, as the transmutacio^ of one substance into an other by
digestion (for so physicians define digestion) namely of men's bodies devoured
of beasts and birds, and the same beasts and birds devoured by men. etc.
And so conclude an impossibility that men should rise again with their own
bodies. The aucthor does phisically make away to loose or unknit those doubts
by these reasons, that all such meat as man and beast eats, is not turned
into the substance of the eater, but only that part which is truly natural
for substanciall food by order of creation or of nature. And that seeing the
creator was able and did know how to compose bodies of sundry severed
substances, he also is able and could not be ignorant how to conserve the
integrity of the nature and substances composed, though they might be
dissolved and scattered into how many so ever thousand parts or places.
Against the heathen he affirms that who so ever has received the law,
must be justified or condemned, but it was not the soul only, but soul and
body, therefore soul and body must be justified or condemned, which cannot be
unless the body rise, ergo the dead must needs rise again. And further as it
is absurd to attribute the affections of the body to the soul, so is it an
unjust thing to say the soul shall be justified or condemned: but it is
absurd to say the soul is a thief, a hooremonger, or murderer, for that
way the soul offends by the instruments of the body, and therefore soul
and body must needs come to judgment, which cannot be unless the dead
rise, and therefore the dead must needs rise again. And though it may be said
these be but arguments probable and not necessaryly strong of them selves, to
confirm or stablish the truth: yet are they of sufficient force to shake
doubts and incredulity in pieces, which is the auctors purpose in this
treatise, and therefore I refer your worship to his arguments, you shall
find him hard, and no marvel, for he vvrote in Greek, which tongue much
abhors our common phrase. There was but one copy in Europe to be
foundvvhen this was first translated into latin, and therefore might be
infected. And besides this Athenagoras does not only play the Philosopher in
matters philosophical, but in the profoundest matter of Religion, so that your
worship taking him in your hand, have to deal as much with a most cunning
divine, as with a most wise philosopher, and in a matter of great
importance: namely the resurrection of the dead, whereon the chiefest part of
our religion depends M. Peter Nannius taught him to speak latin thirty
two years since at the university of Louane in Brabant, and now I have
taught him to speak english in London, made him a free denizen, and brought
him acquainted with your worship, as with a man very meet for wisdom,
learning, and aucthority, to give in the behalf of our whole city honorable
interteignement to so noble a stranger. And as I hartelye desire you to accept
my doings as a token of thankefulnes (though far from a just recompense)
for your manifold friendship to me sundry vvayes shevved: So I humbly
beseech you to make him a free man of London, bring him acquaynted with the
honorable Lord Mayor, and his right worshipful brethren the Aldermen, with
liueries of all compaignies, and their yeomanries, for he was a wise Citezen,
a Religious divine, a prudent philosopher, a great lover of Justice, and a most
faithful Patron to Christ's Church, as appears in that more then thirteen
hundred years ago, he vvrote an Apology or defense in Greek to Antonius and
co^modus Emperors, in the behalf of the Christians. No deuelishe Diagoras can
race the wales of that City where godly Athenagoras dwells: All godless
Atheists, beastly Epicures, scoffing Lucianists, mocking Machiauelists,
reuolting Iulianistes, Hipocrites and abominable workers how soever they
bleare men's eyes, are made afraid by Athenagoras of that just judge, which
cannot be blinded, bribed, out faced, nor entreated, before whom all must
stand, having their deeds naked and bare to aunsvvere for them selves, and
receive sentence of life or death eternallye. And thus fearing lest through
uttering over many waste words, I may be thought rather comberous then
commendable, I beseech the almighty preserve your worship to his will and
pleasure.

At London this 10. of October. Anno. 1573. By yours to his poor power,
Richard Porder.

ATHENAGORAS, A Christian Philosopher of Athenes, of the Resurrection of the
dead.
SOme error does, as it were, grow, and very nearly cleave unto every
determination, and treatise, which depends and is grounded upon the truth
of these things.

But it proceeds not of any principle, and natural inclination of the
things, nor of the causes of their substance, but by the labor, and means,
of them, which do esteem and have in great honor coi^terfeyt seed, to
corrupt ye truth withal.

That this thing is true, you may easily gather. First by the earnest study of
aurcient writers, which bestowed their labor upon this matter, in that they do
dissent, both from them which were long time before the^, as also from those
which lived in their time. But especially you may gather it by the variety of
opinions which were amongst them.

For these men did let no truth pass without some deprauing, no not the
essence, not ye knowledge, not the working, of God, nor many other things,
which do in order follow these. No not so much as speech which is ye painter
of al godliness.

For some of them do utterly despair to atteyne the truth of such things,
other some do writhe away themselves to that which seems to them best, and
other do much doubt in things manifest.

Wherefore I think, that he, which minds to dispute of these matters, had
need to use two manner of treatises, the one to make defense for the truth.
The other to try which is the truth. The first I think must be used against
those, which be doubtful, and hard of belief, the second to them, that
wish well, and be favorers of the truth.

Wherefore it behooves them, which do mind to boolte, and to search the
nature of these matters, to mark diligently, what present commodity
requires, and thereby to direct their discourse, and fitly apply the order of
things to necessity, that whils they do place those things, which be first
according to order in ye first place, they do not against that, which is
seemly, and forsake the respect of necessity, care, and or congruitye.

For like as unto a demonstration, and natural consequence, those things,
which do entreat of the matter, are before those which are spoken in defense
of it: so when we have respect to profit, those things, which are in defense
of the matter, are to be handled before those, which do discourse of the matter.

For like as the husbandman can not conveniently sow his domestical seed,
unless his ground be purged from all wild, and unkindly matter, and such
things as may annoye good seed: neither the physician minister any wholesome
medicine to a sick body, unless he purge him from all his noisome humors,
or stay the affluence of excessive corruption and filthiness: so can not he,
which teaches the truth, speaking of the truth, persuade any thing, as long
as their abides in the minds of men a certain false opinion, which does
gainsaye the reasons of the truth.

Whereupon we having a respect, and regard unto co^gruity, and conuenie^ce,
have preposed our treatise of the defense of the truth, before it, that does
entreat thereof.

Which thing at this time and in this question to do seems not unprofitable,
whilst we have before our eyes that, which necessity requires, especially
in that discourse which handles the resurrection of the dead.

For in this matter we find some, that utterly believe it not, other some
that are very doubtful, and of them, which admit, and assent to the
principles, and grounds of this question, some do yet nevertheless waver in an
uncertain, and inconstant opinion, as much as they, which be doubtful, and,
that is most absurd, they do suffer this wavering of mind without any
occasion of doubting, which they can draw from things them selves.

For they can allege no cause any thing likely, why they either doubt, or
stagger.

That this thing is true you may easily perceive after this manner.

For truly all hardenesse of belief, does proceed not rashly of a vain,
and light opinion, but for some urgent cause, and likelihoode well fortified.

For then incredulity has a reasonable excuse, when the matter it self,
which is not believed, conteyneth some thing, which is incredible.

For not to believe those things which have no cause of doubting, is propre to
such men, as do not use any sound judgment in searching out of the truth.

Therefore it behooves them, which do not believe ye resurrection, or do doubt
of it, not to direct their opinions according to that, which without
consideration seems to them probable, or acceptable to the prodigal, and
those which live in too much riote: but in searching and considering ye truth
of this doctrine, either to ascribe no cause thereof to the creation of man,
which is easy to be refuted, or else to impute all things created to God the
aucthor of all, and thereby to prove that the resurrection in no case is to be
believed.

And they may do this, if either they declare, that God lacks will, or
wants power to restore to life a dead and dissolved body, so that he make it
sound, and join it together, to renew the form of the old man. Which thing
if they can not prove, let them leave of their wicked unbelief, and
detestable blasphemy.

But it shall appear by those things, that follow, that they say falsely,
whether they allege, that God can not, or that he will not. For lack of power
in any man is thereby perceived, if either he know not what must be done, or if
he know it, yet is so weak in strength, that he can not well accomplish the
same.

For he which knows not what must be done, can neither take in hand, nor yet
bring to pass any thing at all, especially of those things, which he has
no knowledge of.

But he that knows what is to be done, and how, and by what means it may
be finished, but yet has either no strength at all, or else not sufficient to
accomplish the matter, ye which he well understands: he, if he be wise, and
will look upon his own abilitye, either will not take it in hand unadvisedly,
or shall be disapointed of the end of his work.

But it is impossible, that God should be ignorant in any point, or parcel of
the bodies, which be appointed for the resurrection.

For it is not possible, that it should be hid from him, whether every one
of the corrupted members be gone, and what putrified, things the parts of ye
elements have received into them, and have admitted into like nature, although
amongst men, yt which is powered again into ye universal nature of the
elements does seem altogether inseparable, and indeprehe^sible.

For to him, which before that any thing was created, was not ignorant of the
nature of the elements, before they were, where of bodies do take their
beginning, neither were the parts of the elements unknown, out of the which
he was minded to gather that, which pleased him for the constitution of man's
body, it is manifest enough, that he would not be ignorant, whether every
thing might depart which he took to make perfect his work withal, when the
composed masses are to be sundered, and severed.

For as touching the order of our affayers, and the judgment of other our
business, it is a greater matter to foreknow those things, which are not,
yet before they come to pass: but as touching the majesty, and wisdom of
God, both these are natural and like easy, both to foreknow those things,
which are not yet created, and also to discern those things, which be resolved.

And truly even the creation of bodies does well declare, that God has power
sufficient to restore dead bodies.

For if he made bodies, when as yet they were not, and brought forth the
principles of them, whence they had their beginning: he can also repair the
same by what mean soever they were dissolved, with the like case.

Neither here shall this reason fail, whether they draw ye beginning of things
from the matter, and stuff of them, or frame bodies of the elements, as the
first principles of all things, or of their seed in procreation.

For in whose power it is to transform matter, which in the beginning was with
out form, and to adorn it with many, and diverse countenaunces, which before
had no shape, and to gather together the parts of the elements, and to divide
into many parts the seed, which was one, and uniform, and to garnish that
with joints which before was without joints, and to give life to a thing
without life: he also is able to unite together that, which is scattered
abroad, and raise up that, which lies, and make that alive, which is dead,
and change that, which was corruptible, into incorruption.

The same workman also, can by his power, and wisdom, when a body is is
toarne in pieces by a multitude of diverse beasts (how many so ever do use to
set upon such bodies, and thereby fill their paunches) separate it from them,
and join it again to his members, and parts, whether they went into one
beast, or mo, or whether they went into diverse, one after another
successiuelye, or whether with them being consumed, they do return again to
their first beginninges, as by natural putrefaction things are accustomed to
do.

This thing truly, does seem to have greatly troubled men of excellent
learning, which thought the doubting of the common people (I know not upon what
occasion) to be weighty, and of great force.

They say that many bodies in shipwreck by sea, and in rivers, have been
meat to fishes, and that bodies, which were slain in war, or upon some
other sharp occasion, and other circumstances of things, when they could not
be buried, were a pray to every beast, as each first could meet therewith.

Seeing therefore that these bodies be devoured in such sort, and the
members, and parts, whereof these bodies did consist, be torn in pieces, and
therefore by the nature of growing together be made the brawnes, sinews, and
inyutes of beasts, they say it is impossible, that they should suffer any
separation, or division one from an other.

Besides this they bring forth another thing, which is more hard, namely,
that seeing those beasts which be nourished with the members of men be eaten
as fit for man's meat, and therefore being put into men's bellyes, be united
together with the body of them, which eat them: it follows necessaryly say
they, that the members of man, which tell before to these beasts, for their
food, do pass into other men's bodies seeing those beasts which did devour
the flesh of man, do transmit their substance into ye brawnes of them, which
receive nourishment of those beasts whom men were eaten.

Then do they here unto tragically exaggerate, the limbs of Children cut of
and eaten either in hunger, or madness, and children denoured of their
parents, through the craft and deceyt of enemies, they add moreover the table
of ye Meads and the tragical banquet of Thiestes, and what so ever mischief
has been committed, either amongst the Greecians, or among the Barbaria^s
upon these grounds they infer well as they suppose, that there can be no
resurrection, seeing it can not be, that the same members should rise again
in diverse bodies together. For either the first bodies can not consist, when
the limbs are gone thither, where they make a furniture, or if they be
restored to the first owner, the bodies of them, which follow, can not be
perfect.

These men do seem to me, first of all to be ignorant of the power, and
wisdom of the creator, and governor of all things, which prepares
nourishinent fit, and agreeable to every nature, and kind of living thing, and
does not ordeyne every nature to concur to the contemperature, and mixture of
every natural body, neither does stagger, and stay in seuering the parts of
things grown together, and suffers all things according to their proper
nature, both to do, and suffer, and sometime contrariewise stops them, and
does conueigh, and take away, what he list, and whether he lists.

Beside this the same men seem to me, not to know thoroughly, the strength and
nature, either of things, which do nourishe, or of those which are nourished.
Otherwise they would have known, that not every thing, which is powered from
one in to another, is made food fit, and agreeable to ye nature of yt thing,
that takes it.

But that some things as soon as they be received into the bellye, do perish,
either by vomiting, or by excrement, or by avoiding, by some other mean, so
that they endure not one little while the first, and natural concoction, or any
other mixture with the things, yt nourishe. As therefore not every thing, which
is co^coct, and has suffered the first alteration, is wholly joined with that,
which nourishes the body, seeing that some things thereof be, as it were,
expelled of the nourishing power and faculty of man, by the belly, and other
some after the second change, and alteration in the liver, are avoided and
severed unto other things, which do exceed ye power of nourishing, and the
very change it self, which is in the liver, does not wholly nourishe, but
strayneth some of it unto accustomed superfluities: so in like manner the liver
does sometime convert that, which it did reteyne to nourishe the parts of the
body with all, into some other thing according to the nature of that, which
bears greatest sway, and does most abound, which is accustomed either to
destroy that which is next unto it, or else to change it into his own nature.

Seeing that there is therefore much natural difference, in all living
creatures, and seeing that food must by nature be aptly applied to every
kind of beast, and changed with the body, which is nourished therewith, and
seeing that in the meat of creatures there be three manners of purifyinges, and
auoydinges thereof, it is requisite that, that meat perish wholly, or be sent
whether it is accustomed, or be changed into some other thing, what soever is
not couenable for the nourishment, and food of any creature, as a thing, which
can not be mingled, and contempered therewith, and the force of the nourishment
of the creature must naturally agree, and descend through natural (as I may
term them) sieues and sarches, and being throughlye purged by these natural
cleansinges be made most pure, that it may be adjoined to the body, the which
only (if you use the terms of things a right) you may call nourishmente, as
that, which has cast away all, which is not agreeable, but hurtful to the
constitution of the creature to be nourished, and has also shaken of that
great infarced, and stuffed weight, which the stomach used to fill it self,
and satisfy appetite withal.

But no man will doubt, that this most pure nourishment is united with the
body, and that it is entangled, and does grow with all the members and joints
thereof, and that it, which is not so, but is contrary to nature, does perish by
and by, if it be mingled with the strongest parts of the body, or does destroy
by little and little the strength of the body, which it overcomes, and does
turn it into naughty, and venomous iuyse, as a thing which brings nothing
agreeable and wholesome to nourishe the body withal.

And the greatest argument of this thing is, because that either grief, or
dangers, or death does thervpo^ invade bodies, if with an eger appetit they
swallowe with their meat some poison, or other thing, which is contrary to
their nature, which without peradventure brings destruction to the whole
body. For truly those things, which are nourished, are nourished with those
things, wherewith they be acquainted and be natural, but are destroyed with
those things, which be repugnant to their nature.

If then by the discord of these things, which do strive with the nature of
living creatures, ye natural nourishment also is corrupted, and does take
neither al those things, which be ministered to the body, nor yet any thing upon
a sudden to the increase of the flesh, but that only, which being purified by
all concoctions comes pure, and therefore shows it self fit to nourishe the
parts: it is plain, enough that nothing which is against natrue, can be
united to those creatures, to whom that meat is not both natural, and
agreeable: but that either it is cast down raw, and corrupt through the belly,
before it be changed into some other joyce, or if it do long continue in the
members it does breed some fault, or disease hard to be cured, corrupting
either the natural nourishment, or else the flesh, which has need of
nourishment.

And if it be driven away with medicines, or overcome with better diet, or
natural strength, yet it will not depart out of the body without some small
hurt, as bringing nothing auaylable for lack of ability to grow, and to be
joined together with it.

To be short if any man grant nourishment to be subministred thereby, and
add, there withal that it is usual, although in deed it be contrary to
nature, that it be digested, and changed into any thing that is moist, or
dry, or hot, or could, yet although these things be granted, it shall not
follow, that any furtherance comes thereby to the bodies of those which rise
again, that they get thereby a fuller number of members, seeing that it is
neither a part of the body, nor yeldeth the likeness, or steed of any part
of the body, nor yet does continue still with the members nourished, or if it
do rise again together with the members rising again, it does profit
nothing to the use of life, whether it be blood, fleame, choler, or spirit.
For then the bodies, which were nourished shall not now have need of that,
which sometime they needed, when hunger, and corruption being past, the
necessitye of taking nourishment shall be taken away.

Now if any man imagine, that such transmitation of meat does extend it
self to the creation of flesh, yet notwithstanding necessitye shall not
compel, that this flesh being newlye created of nourishment, when it comes
to the body of an other, must return again to absolve ye perfection of the
former body, as a part of it: because yt the ^^she which has received this
nourishment from some other body, neither does keep it long, nor that which
comes from another, does long abide there whyther it comes, but to the
contrary suffers a great alteration, when sometime it vanishes away by
grief, sometime it pineth away by care, sorrow, labor, and sickness, and
sometime by reason of the vntemperatnesse of heat and cold, the humors do not
change themselves into flesh and fatness, so that the bodies which have
received these meats, do continue still the same that they are.

Seeing that such things happen in the affections of the flesh, you may
much more easily perceive ye same in the flesh which is nourished with
improper meats, seeing yt it sometime increases to a huge bigness, and
covers it with fat by reason of the meats, which are taken and again
casts it away by some means, and is diminished either for some one, or for
many of those causes which we have before rehearsed, so that that flesh only
remains, which has strength to bind, to thicke^, and to cherish, namely
such as is chosen of nature, and is like and agreeable to those meats,
wherewith according to nature, nature furnishes life, and susteyneth the
labors of life.

But neither, as the right is, whether those things which we have spoken of
be cleansed away, or whether they be received, can that be proved to be true,
which is objected by these men, neither can men's bodies be mingled and coupled
with bodies of the same kind, whether in eating they be beguyled by some ma^s
guyle, so that they feel not ye taste thereof, or else voluntaryly for hunger,
or by reason of madness do pollute themselves with devouring bodies of their
own kind, unless peradventure we know not that there be some beasts
endued with the shape of men, or compounded of diverse natures, so that they
consist partlye of men, partly of beasts, such as the bouldest of the Poets
are wont to feign.

But what shall I say of those bodies which are given to no living creature to
devour, and which only for the worthiness of their nature have obtained the
honor of burial, seeing that the maker of all things has assigned to no
creature any body of like form for meat, although according to nature they
are fed with bodies of diverse form.

If so be that, they can declare, that the flesh of men is given to men for
meat by the ordinance of nature, what impediment shall there be, why there
should not be mutual slaughters of us committed, as is accustomed to be done
in things granted by nature.

And truly, let them, which dare say thus, rauenously devour the bodies of
their dearest friends as most deyntye meat, that they may eat them, whom
they loved best.

But if this be ungodly, and an heinous, and abominable offense to be spoken,
and to be detested above all other wicked meats and mischieuouse acts, for
man to devour the limbs of men, and again if it be true, that that which is
against nature, is not received of the hungry members, and that which is not
received for meat, cannot grow together with those bodies, for which it is
not meat naturally: it cannot be yt men's bodies at any time should be
confounded with other bodies of the same kind, into who^ contrary to nature
they are thrust for meat, although they be stuffed into their belies by reason
of some grievous calamity.

For flying back and refusing nutritive facultye, and being cast thither, from
whence they had their first beginning, are joined to their first grou^des for a
time, and yet being severed from thence by the wisdom and power of him, which
ordreth al things, they shall be joined one to another again in most convenient
order, whether they have been burnte with fire, or consumed with water, or
devoured of beasts or being cut of from the body of him, which is yet alive,
waxed rotten before ye other parts: yet coming together again amongst
themselves they shall possess the same place, that they may make the same
proportion and constitution of the body, and repair the resurrection and the
life of the body being dead or all together dissolved.

It is not convenient to prosequute these things at large: for they have a
declaration confessed and not doubted of, especially among such men, as do hate
beastly and brutishe customs.

But seeing their be many things profitable to the searching out of these
matters: first of all I wish them to be excluded, which run to humane works,
and to men, the makers thereof, whose works being worn out, or rotten by
reason of time, or clean undone by some other mean cannot be renewed again by
a similitude drawn their hence, do go about to prove, yt God either will not,
or if he will, can not restore a dead and vanished karcas to his former state:
neither do they consider with them selves, that by this means, they be
contumeliouse against God, whilst they compare powers differing one from an
other in every respect, or rather the possessours of the powers, and do
compare things artificial with things natural.

It is not without fault earnestlye to deal with such men. For it is a
foolish thing in deed to gaynsaye light, and vain persons: but it is a great
deal more probable, and of al other the truest to affirm that to be possible
to God, which is impossible to me^. Wherefore if either by these things which
are probable, or by all those things, which be heretofore examined, reason does
declare it to be possible to God, it is manifest enough, that it must not be
counted impossible, or to abhor from the will of God.

For what he will not do, therefore he will not do it, either because it is
unjust, or else because it is unworthy.

Furthermore this injustice is perceived, either about him, which ryseth, or
about some other thing without him.

But it is manifest, that there is no injury done to any thing at all, which
is without those, that rise again, and are existent in nature. For the
intelligible creatures do receive no iniurye by the resurrection of men, for
there being is nothing thereby hindered, and the resurrection of men does bring
no reproach or hurt to them, as it does seem not to do also unto things without
reason, and soul.

For they after the resurrection shall not remain, and to such things which
be not, can no wrong be done.

But if you do imagine them to be, then yet shall they feel no wrong by the
resurrection of men.

For if when they are bestowed on the nature of man, and be brought under
yooke, and all kind of servitude, for the behoof of them, being subject unto
miserye, do yet suffer no wrong, much less shall they suffer injury, when man
shall be made incorruptible, and be placed free from all need, and misery, and
they also delivered from all kind of servitude.

For if they were endued with the gift of speaking, they would not accuse the
maker of all things, as though contrary to right they were placed under the
condition of men, because they were not admitted into the fellowship of the
same resurrection.

For to those things, whose nature is not equal, he yt is just, does not
attribute one end or honor, and where is no sense of justice as in brute
beasts, and things without life, there is no indignation for any in justice.

This also can not be said, that in man any iniurye is perceived by that he is
raised from the dead.

For he, as he is framed of soul, and body, so he receives iniurye against
other part, other body, or soul, and a wise man will not affirm the soul
to suffer injury therefore, because by this means it does not retain the
same trade of life, in which now in this present world it lives.

For if now, dwelling in a corruptible body, and subject to passions, it
suffers no injury, much less dwelling in an incorruptible body, and subject
to no passions, shall it abide any wrong.

Nay, farther then this, even the body feels no injury. For if now being
corruptible, and joined in fellowship with an incorruptible soul, it takes no
wrong thereby, much less shall it take wrong, when on both sides they are
incorruptible.

Furthermore neither can this be said, that it is an unworthy thing for God,
that he should restore and gather again resolved bodies.

For if that, which is less in dignity (namely to create a mortal body,
subject to affections) did not seem unworthy God, much less shall it be
unworthy for him to bring that into the world, which is more excellent, and
endued with immortality, and freenes from passions.

If therefore by those things, which are first in nature, and those also, which
consequently do follow ye first, every point, which was in question, be
plainly showed, and declared: it is manifest enough, that the restoring of
bodies is such as is not unworthy of God, and which he both will and can bring
to pass.

For by these things the falsitie of the contraries, and the absurdity of
them, which believe not is declared.

For what need is there to speak of the mutual agree of one thing with
another, and of the mutual coherence between them, as though they were
separated by some diversity, and it were not lawful to say that what God
will, that he can do, and is for his majesty, to do with dignity.

But we have said before that there is one disputation concerning the truth,
another in defense of the truth, and have declared wherein one of them
differs from an other, and when, and amongst whom it profits.

Notwithstanding it will nothing hinder us, for common, safties sake and order,
that those things, which have been said may agree with those things that
shall be said, to take our beginning from the self same things, and such as
are congruente unto them: for it behooves the one by nature to have the
pre-eminence, and the other in steed of a waiting man to make way for the
chief. And with his waymaking which goes before to take away all
hinderaunces and impedimentes.

For the treatise which is of the truth, seeing it is necessary for all men,
both for their safegarde, and preservation is first and chief, both by nature,
order, and profit: by nature because it sets forth the knowledge of
things: by order, because it is in, and together with those things, the
judgment and knowledge whereof it promises: by profit, because it makes
defense and safegarde to them which know and learn it.

But the discourse* which is for the truth, is inferior both in nature and
power: for it is less to reprove a falsehood then to establishe a truth, and
follows by order.

For it exercises force against them, which believe the falshoode. But a false
opinion grows, and proceeds of a second sowing, as it were, and of
corruption.

But although these things be thus, yet sometime this is put before the other,
and is more profitable, because it takes away, and forepurgeth troublesome
incredulitye, or some new doubt, or some false opinion, and both these tend to
one end.

For both seeks godliness, as well that which refuses the falseshood, as yt
which establishes the truth, and yet are they not all one. For ye one is
necessary, as I said, for all believers, and them which have any care of the
truth, and their own salvation, the other is more profitable in some time and
among some men.

These things are spoken briefly, to keep the remembrance of the former
words.

But now we must return to our purpose, and declare that that treatise is
true, which is concerning the resurrection and that upon that cause, for the
which, and by the which the first man and his successors were borne, although
they were not both created after one manner.

Then we must prove it by the nature of all men, in that they be men.

Afterward by the judgment of the creator, which he will give of them,
according as they have lived, which judgment no man will doubt of, but that
it is most just.

But the handling of the cause does co^siste in this point, that we search
out, whether man were made unadvisedly, and to no end, or for some purpose.

If he were created for some purpose, whether it were that he should live, and
continue in this life, the, which he was naturally ordained unto, or that he
should minister some profit to an other.

But if he were created for some profit, whether it were for the profit of
the creator, or of some other thing which belongs to the creator, and is
more regarded of him, then man.

Here truly, using a common and simple kind of searching in beholding of
things we find, that whosoever is endued with reason, and is moved to do
any thing by reasonable judgment, does nothing unadvisedly, of those things,
which he does willingly.

For that he does, he takes in hand, either for his own sake, or for some
ma^s sake, which he loves, or inflamed with the desire and natural
inclination to that thing, which he has done.

As for example (For we will use a similitude that our purpose may be plain) A
man buyldeth a house, and that for his own proper use; he furnishes also his
house being in order; with Camels and other beasts, whose help he has need
of, not for his own use as it seems (although the latter end be referred to
him) but as touching the next and neereth cause, for their commodity whom he
cares for.

But he begets children, not for his own use, nor for the profit of any
thing, which belongs unto him, but that those, whom he begets, may be and
remain alive, as far as it is lawful, and may be done, ministering a
remedy to his own death by the succession of children, and believing thus
far, that he has put of mortality.

But God neither created man unadvisedly, seeing he is wise. (For a wise man
does no thing unadvisedly) neither for his own use and necessity (for he has
need of nothing) and that which has need of nothing, does not desire profit
of those things which he creates) neither did he make man for the profit of
any other of his works, for nothing amongst those things, which are endued
with reason and judgment, whether it be great or small, is created or shall be
created for the use of any other thing. For such things are created only for
their own life and safetye.

Neither has reason found out any other end, why men were created, seeing that
they were ordained to be immortal without ye need of any thing, seeing that
they require no help of men for the safegarde of their life, and seeing that
all beasts be subject, and all things else do minister commodity to men, for
whose use they were made.

But beasts have no use of men: for neither is it, nor was it at any time
lawful to debase yt creature, which is chief and ruler of all, for the use of
other things which are under him, or to bring that which is endued with
reason, under the yoke of those things, which be without reason and unfit to
rule.

Wherefore, if man were created neither without cause, nor unadvisedly, nor to
no end, (for there is nothing amongst the works of God done unadvisedly, if
we consider the meaning and intention of God) nor yet for the profit of ye
creator, nor for the commodity of other things, which the creator made, it
is manifest enough that if we look upon the first and universal cause, GOD
created man for himself, and his own goodness and wisdom, which you may
easily perceive in all things created: but if you search out the next cause,
and that which agrees with men being created, you shall find that man was
borne to this end, that he should live.

But not in such a life that should continue for a while, and straight way
should perish for ever.

For God (I think) has given such a life to beasts that creep, and to
birds, and to fishes: but to them which bear about them his own Image, and
there withal have a mind which is the finder out of things, and are adorned
with the gifts of reason, he has assigned a perpetual continuance, that by
knowing their creator, and following his power and wisdom by laws and
justice, they might with those virtues happyly continue everlastingly, with
which they established their former life, when they yet lived in their earthly,
and corruptible bodies.

For such things as are created for the behoof of other things, when those
things, for whose use they were ordained do perish, do not without cause
perish also, and can not remain for any purpose, because there is no place
amongst things created of God, for vain idleness.

But those things which were for this end created, that they should be and
continue (the cause being joined and entangled with their nature, seeing the
cause does only exact and require, that they should be) it is not possible
that they should at any time suffer such violence, whereby they should utterly
be abolished.

Furthermore, seeing that this cause is understood by a perpetual kind of
being, and does consist in this point, it is necessary that that creature do
remain in safety, which was thus created, and do and suffer those things
which be agreeable to the nature thereof, both the parts whereof it
consists, doing that which in them lies, so that the mind does continue and
remain inuariable in the nature wherein it was created. For it was therefore
created, to brydell the affections of the body, and to esteem with seemly
judgment, and measure, with upright measures whatsoever befalls: But the
body was ordained to this end, that it should incline it self to such
things, as be natural, and receive those alteratio^s, which are attributed to
it by nature, and that amongst other chau^ges, which happen unto it, either in
age, or beauty, or bigness, it should admit the resurrection.

For the resurrection is a kind of change, and that the last of all, and also
the alteration into a better thing, which then shall be in the bodies of them,
which be a live.

We are as sure of these things, as we are of them, which have already
happened, and considering our own nature, we do not bear impacientlye this
our needy, and corruptible life, as agreeable to this present world, and we
constantly hoope for Eternity of life, rydde of all corruption, which we do
not ground upon the inventions of men, feeding our selves with a vain hope,
but we believe an unfeigned and sufficient witness (namelye the reason and
ordinance of the creator) according to the which, he has framed man of a
soul immortal, and a body, which also he has endued with reason and equitye,
given by nature to conserve, and keep his gifts, and those things, which be
agreeable to a discrete life, and a mind endued with reason.

Whereby we know well enough, that God would not have ordained such a
creature, nor furnished it with all things necessary for perpetual
continuance, if he would not have it continue, which he had in such sort
created.

Wherefore, if the maker of the world created man, that he should use wisdom
in all his doings, and that being made a beholder of his magnificence, and
wisdom, which he declared in every place: with the co^templation of these
things should continue, and that according to his purpose, and will, and the
nature, which he ingendered in them, truly the cause of the creation does
confirm, and make credible an endless continuance, and this continuance a
resurrection, without the which man cannot continue.

It is manifest therefore by those things which have been spoken, namely by the
cause of the beginning, and the will of the creator, that the resurrection is
confirmed.

Seeing that therefore the cause is such, why man was brought into the world, it
shall be now expedient to consider those things which by natural order, do
follow the former reasons.

For if we weigh, and consider this business, the nature of men created does
follow the cause of their creation, and the just judgment of the creator
upon them, does follow the nature of men created, and after all these,
follows the end, why they live.

Seeing that therefore those things, which go before be plainly declared, the
nature of men must be hereafter declared, and that either by true opinions, or
by inquisitions, what sort soever they be of.

That demonstration does get a credit not inconstant to those things which
are spoken, which has his beginning not from some thing, or place, which is
without the matter, or does arise of the opinions, or decrees of others: but
does arise of common understanding, or is gathered by the consequence of those
things, which be last, to them which be first.

For that, is either of the first decrees, or of those things, which only by
warning, do stir up, and as it were, raise out of sleep natural
understanding, or of those things, which naturally in fellowship do cleave
unto the first decrees, and be of natural consequence.

And it behooves him, which declares this order, to make plain, what does
follow consequently the first, or the last, in deed that he do not neglige^tly
handle either the truth, or some assertion proceeding from the truth, neither
confou^d those things which be repugnant in nature, or pervert the natural
order of things.

Wherefore, I think it expediente for them which take pain in this argument,
and do desire wisely to determine, whether there be any resurrection of men's
bodies, first to consider the force of those things, which do make this
demonstration, the parts being compared together, and what place every thing
does obtain, and what difference is between these things, and the first,
second, and third, and last of all what does consiste in the last place. In
placing of these things in order, it behooves that the cause be declared why
man was created that is to say, the mind and purpose of ye creator, for the
which he took in hand to create man. Afterward, the nature of man (which in
order obteyneth the second place) must be fitlye placed and applied, partly
because we cannot judge of both at once, partlye because they be both
together, and do bring the same furtherau^ce to this present purpose: partly
also because by these things, as chief, and principal, and drawing their
beginning from the workmanship of God, the resurrection is plainly declared:
notwithstanding by the rule of wisdom also a man may gather the certentye of
this thing.

I say the rule of wisdom does consiste in this, that rewards, and
punishments according to just judgment, may be bestowed upon every man,
according to his deserts, and that the end of them do answer to their life.

For many which have taken in hand to dispute of the resurrection, did assay
to bring all their business to effect, only for that which is third,
thinking ye cause of the resurrection of men to be only for judgment.

But that is manifestly proved false, because that all men rise again, yet
all that rise again are not judged.

For if only the justice of judgment be the cause of the resurrection, it
should necessarylye follow, that they, which have not at all offended, or
have committed notable acts in their lives, should be exempt from the
resurrection, and they also, which in the beginning of their age, do end their
life, which they themselves also think sufficient, that the resurrection be
not for judgment, according to the principal cause, but according to the
determination, and appointment of the creator, and the nature of that, which
is created.

But seeing that the only cause of the creation of man does suffice, if it be
well looked upon, to confirm the resurrection, which by the natural guyding
of reason does follow the bodies being dissolved, yet peradventure it shall be
reason to omit nothing of those, which we have appointed, and to declare in
convenient order the power and efficasie of the causes, then afterward of
those things that follow, for the behoof of such men, as cannot perceive
those things by their own wit, and amongst other things to set forth the
nature of men created, which does lead us to the knowledge of the same
matter, and does breed as great credit to the resurrection.

For if the whole nature of man does consist of an immortal soul, and a body
made fit according to his creation, and if God have attributed neither to ye
soul by it self, nor to the body alone, such a beginning or life, but unto
perfect men, which are made of both these parts, that whilst they live, using
the same parts, of the which they received their beginning, and life, they
might come to the same common end, and reward, it is necessary, seeing one
creature is made of both these parts, which is endued with all the affections
both of the mind and body, which does, and exercises all things, that
require the judgment either of the senses or of reason, that the whole course
of these things be referred to some end, that all things, and in all points,
both the beginning of man, and the nature of man, and the life of man, and
whatsoever he does, or suffers, and the end agreeing to his nature, do run
together to one consent, and mutual combination.

But if there be one consent, or harmony of every living creature, and a
mutual passion, and participation of affections, both of those which have their
beginning from the mind, as also of those which proceed from the body, it is
necessary that in all these, there remain one end, and one reward, but there
shall be one end in deed, when the same creature shall consist of both his
parts, which shall happen for the ends sake: but the same creature shall
perfitly consist, when those things shall be present with it, and those parts
restored to it, by the which his perfitnesse is absolved.

But the renewing of the same men, does declare that the resurrection of dead
bodies does necessaryly follow, whether the self same parts can not be
naturally joined together, or the same men restored, or return again to their
own nature.

If therefore, mind and reason be given to men, to the end that they should
judge, not only of intelligible, substances but of the wisdom, justice, and
goodness of him, that gave these things: it is necessary that if those things
remain for whose sake this reasonable judgment was given, reasonable
judgment should also remain, which was given to discern those things.

But it is impossible yt this judgment should continue, unless that the
nature do eke continue, which keeps and cherishes it, in the seat and
resting place thereof: but man is he, which receives wit and reason into him,
and not the soul by it self, therefore it must needs be, that man consisting
of both parts, do continue for ever. But it is impossible for him to continue
for ever, unless he rise again. For unless a resurrection be a mean, man in
no case can endure. And if the nature of man can not endure, the soul was in
vain mingled with the needinesse of the body and the accidents, and affections
thereof.

The body also is in vain unto the soul, giving place to the regiment
thereof, and is bridled by it to the end it may obtain ye thing, which it
desires. And in vain is mind, in vain wisdom, in vain the observation of
justice, and exercise of virtue among men, and the appointing, and disposing of
laws, is to no purpose. And to be short, what soever is commendable in men,
and by men's procurement, is in vain. Yea, and that which is greater, the very
engendring and nature of men is in vain.

Wherefore, if all vainenesse be all together excluded from all the works of
God, and his function, it is necessary that the continuance of the body in his
nature be coeternall with the immortality of the soul.

Let no man maruayle, that we call life cutten in sunder by death, and
corruption, a continewing, since we are not ignorant, that there is not one
only signification of the word, nor one only manner of continewing, and no
maruayle seeing the nature of things continuing, is not all one. For every
thing according to the nature thereof has her proper continuance. You shall not
find in those things which are wholly incorruptible, and immortal, a like,
and uniform continuance, because the substaunces of the things above, are not
like the things beneath.

Neither is it convenient to require in men a continuance ever like unto it
self, indistinct without any variety, as in those things is, which from the
beginning were created immortal, and do only by the appointment of the
creator continue everlastingly, but that me^ have their continnaunce according
to the soul from their creation without any alteration or change. But
according to the nature of the body, men have immortality by a change. For
the cause of the resurrection does require it, and looking thereupon, we look
for the dissolution of the body, as it, which follows this needy, and
corruptible life, and after ward we hope for an incorruptible continuance
without alteration, neither making our end like to the end of brute beasts,
neither to the continuance of those things, which be immortal, lest for the
lack of knowledge in this matter we make the nature and life of men equal,
and like to those things, which we ought not.

We must not therefore be troubled. If there be any inequality espied in ye
perduration of men, neither ought we to despair of the resurrection, when
the separating of the soul from her bodylye members, and the dissoluing of the
bodyly members from it do dispart the continual tenoure of the life.

For although the bringing a sleep of the senses, and of other natural
strengths, which naturally does arise in man's rest, and for a season do
slumber, and in a manner are again revived, do seem to cut a sunder the
sensible life, yet we do not refuse to count it a life, for which cause, I
think, some men do call sleep the brother of death, not because they would
thereby declare the stock of them as though they came of one aunceters, and
parents, but because like things happen to them, which be a sleep, and to
the^ which be dead in respect of the rest and quietness of the senses, when
they understand nothing of things present, or which are then done, nay they
perceive not themselves either to be, or to live.

If therefore we do not refuse, to call the life of man, being full of such
inequality even from man's birth unto his death, and interrupted by all those
means which we have before rehearsed, a life: then ought we not to despair of
the life, which is ordained to succeed our dissolutio^, which brings
together with it ye resurrection, although for a season it be cutte^ a sunder,
by the departure of the soul from the body.

For the nature of men posseding from the beginning, and that according to the
decree of the creator, an inequality attributed unto it, has an unequal
life, and a continuance, distinct sometime by sleep, sometime by death, and by
diverse alterations of ages, so that the first do not plainly appear, when
the last do suddenly come upon them.

For who would believe, unless he were taught by experience of things, that
so great force lies hid in the moist and soft seed, or that such diuersitye
of bigness, and greatness, which arises and is framed thereof, is hid
therein, namely of bones, sinews, gristles, and also of muscles, flesh, and
bowelles, and other parts of the body?

For in the seed, being yet moist, a man can perceive no such thing, nor in
children be those things perceived, which in young men do increase, nor those
things do appear in youth, which the estate of man possesses: nor again in
the state of man, which age has.

But although amongst those things, which are said before, some do nothing at
all, and some but obscurelye declare the natural chaunges, and alterations
coming on men, yet notwithstanding they, which are not blinded with
naughtiness, and sluggishnesse, do know, what we must judge of these things.
For first of all it is required, that the seed be sown, afterward when, it
is separated into parts, and joints, and the young ones being now fashioned
do come to light, receive in their first age height, after their height the
absolute perfection of the whole body, after a while comes on the natural
decreasing of strength, which prolongeth it self even unto old age, then at
the last, when the bodies are worn away, dissolution comes on.

Like as therefore in this business, neither the seed by any likeness, or
similitude, does declare, either the life, or form of man, nor the life does
foreshewe the dissolution, wherewith the joining together of parts shall be
resolved into the first element, yet the order, and guyding of natural euentes
does get credit to those things, which in their own appearance, and show, do
seem to deserve no credit: even so reason by searching the natural
consequence, finding the truth, does establishe the resurrection, (which is
much more certain, then experience, to prove those sayings, wherewith a little
before we endeavored to get credit to the resurrection) and that therefore
because we are all of one (...) kindred, as proceeding from one and the (...)
beginning. For our beginning proceeds from the procreation of our first
parents, whom God created.

But some men eue^ from the beginning, whence they come are established to
believe, other some following nature, and the life of man, as their guide, do
get belief, of the wisdom of God toward us.

For the cause, according to the which, and for the which me^ were borne,
agreeing with the nature of men, does obtain her force, by the workmanship of
man created.

But the cause of justice, according to the which God will judge men, whether
they live well, or ill, does take his force from the end of men. For therefore
are men borne. But it depends rather upon the providence of God.

Seeing that therefore those things be declared, and proved by us, as fare as
we could, which were of the first order, let us declare now also those
things that follow. But I speak of the reward and punishment, which according
to just judgment, shall be bestowed upon every man according to his deserts,
and of (...) which shall be correspondent to (...) of man. But let that be done
in such order, that such things go before, as be naturally of the first place,
and first let us entreat of the cause of the judgment, which words we
therefore speak, because we have a care of the chief stay and order of this
disputation in hand, and because it behooves them, which admit God, as the
creator of the whole world, to attribute the charge, and care of all things
to his wisdom, and justice, if so be yt they will stick unto the foundation
appointed, and the principles once allowed.

Furthermore, seeing they be of this opinion, it is reason, that they think
nothing either of things terrestrial, or celestial to be destitute of the
care and providence of God, but that the care of the creator does extend it
self unto all things indifferentlye, as well unto those which be open, as
those, which be hid, and unto those, which be great, as those which be small.
For all things, which be, have need of the providence of their creator, but
every thing peculiarly according to his nature, and for that purpose, for
which it was created.

For I do not think it expedient, with much labor particularly to declare,
and distinguish with diuisio^s, what is agreeable to the nature of every thing.
Man truly, of whom we now entreat, as he is hungry, has need of meat, as
he is mortal, has need of succession of children, as he is endued with
reason, has need of judgment.

But he has need of judgment, that he may lawfully labor for living, and
succession.

But it is necessary, that seeing sustenaunce, and succession do pe rtayne to
that, which consists of both parts, judgment also do perteyn to the same.
But I call that which is compounde of both parts, a man consisting of a
soul, and a body, and such a man to be accused of all things, which he does,
so that he receives either a reward, or punishment for them.

If therefore the sentence of just judgment be pronounced against that, which
consists of both parts, according to his doings, it cannot be, that the
soul alone should receive either reward, or punishment for those things,
which it committed with the body.

For the soul by it self is not touched with those offenses, which are
committed by the pleasures of ye body, or meat, or apparel: neither must ye
body receive reward, or punishment, because it perceyueth not the danger of
laws, and judgment, but man which consists of both these parts, must
receive judgment for all his doings.

But you can perceive by no mean, that this does happen in this life, for that
is not lawfully observed in this present life, seeing that we see many, which
are wicked, and abound in all iniquity, to persist void of any misfortune
even until death, and we see them, which are well known for there virtue, to
spend their life in suffering greefes, vexations, sclau^ders, reproaches, and
al kind of affliction. Neither can you perceive it after death, for that which
consists of both parts does not remain, seeing the soul is separated from
the body, and the body it self dissolved into those things, of which it was
first made, and nothing now remains, which reserueth the old form, or
nature, or yet the memory of those things, which are done.

Wherefore, that which follows is evident, namelye that (as the Apostle
says) this corruptible being dissolved, must put on incorruption, that those
bodies which be dead, being made alive by the resurrection, and those things
being joined together again, which were cast a sunder, or altogether consumed,
every man may iustlye receive those things, which he has committed by reason
of the body, whether they be good, or ill.

Against them therefore, which do admit the providence of God, and receive the
same principles, and grounds, which we do, and afterward (I know not how)
do shrink, and revolt from those opinions, which they received, and thought
well of, you may use such words, and other much more plentiful: if you will
dilate at large those things, which have been spoken briefly, and in few
words. But against such, as make a doubt concerning the principles them
selves, it shall be good to appoint another principle, and ground before these,
yt in the mean time we may imagine things, that may be doubted of, and
must be searched out by questions, which they doubt of, namely whether the
life, and manners of men be neglected, and darkened with the gross shadow of
the earth, which hides, and wrappeth in ignorance, and silence both the men
themselves, and also their deeds.

Or which is much more certain, whether we must think, the creator to be
ruler of the things created, and to be the obseruer, and judge of all
things, which are done, or committed, as well deeds, as thoughts.

For if there shall at no time be judgment of the acts of men, then men shall
have no pre-eminence above brute beasts, and they shall be in worse case, then
brute beasts, which do bring their affections under bondage, and do greatly
regard, and honor godliness, justice, and other virtues. Co^trarywise, the
beastly and savage life shall be counted best, and virtue on the other side a
foolish thing, the threatens of judgment worthy to be laughed at, and to
follow pleasure the happyest thing of all, and that shall be counted the common
decree, and chief law of all men, which is pleasant to naughtypackes, and
riotous persons, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

For the end of such a life, is not pleasure, as some men think, but a full
voydnesse of perceiving.

If therefore the creator has some care of his creatures, and the judgment of
good, or evil acts shall at any time approach, it shall be either while they do
well, or ill in this present life, or after death, as long as they consist in
dissolution, and separation. But neither way can you find that just judgment
is observed.

For good men in this present life do not receive the rewards of virtue, nor
evil men punishment for their wickedness, that I may in the mean time let
pass, that as long as the nature, wherein we now are does continue in
safetye, the nature of man cannot abide sufficient punishment for his manifold,
and grievous offenses. For when a thief, or prince, or tyrant does heap
innumerable murders of men one upon another, it cannot be, that he can make
satisfaction for his sins by one death. When also a man does think nothing
truly of God, and has lived in all voluptuousness, and blasphemy, has
despised all the divine commandments, has broken the laws, has committed
whoredom both with women, and children, has injuriously overthrown Cities,
has burnt houses with the inhabitants, has spoiled provinces, has destroyed
by slaughter great people, and countries, and whole nations: how can he in this
corruptible body suffer condign punishment for his deserts, seeing death does
prevent his deserved torments, and this mortal nature is not sufficient to
punish duly one offense.

Therefore in this present life, the judgment of every man according to his
worthiness, and desert, can not be declared, nor after death, for death is a
destroying of the whole life altogether, if the soul perish, and be putrified
together with the body.

Or else truly the soul remains, and cannot be dissolved, nor broke in
sunder, nor corrupted, but the body is dissolved, keeping no longer the
remembrance of things done, or the sense of such things, as happen unto it.

For if the whole life of man be utterly destroyed, there appears no respect
or care of men, neither does there seem any judgment ordained for well or
evil doing: but whatsoever wickedness is in a lawless life, will approach,
and ouerflowe again, and other inconveniences, which such a life does bring
with it, as a flock of companio^s, and amongst them impiety the denyer of
God, which is chief, and ruler of that life, in which men live without law.

And if the body be corrupt, and as every part is dissolved, so it departs to
the elements, which be of the same nature, but the soul does continue by it
self incorrupt, yet there shall not be place to judge the soul, when justice
shall not be present.

But it is an heinous offense to suspect any judgment to proceed from God, or
of God, in which justice is not present: but justice is not present when he
remains not in safety, and capable of judgment, which committed just, or
unjust acts, but he that committed all things in his life, which must be
judged, was man, and not the soul alone, to be short this kind of dealing
does defend justice in no point.

For in receiving rewards for things well done, undoubtedly the body shall
suffer wrong, because it was partaker of the travail in doing things well, and
now is not partaker of the honor which is rendered for well doing: and seeing
pardon is often granted to the soul for diverse offenses, in respect of the
need and necessity of the body, if the body be disapoynted of the rewards,
for the which whilst life lasted, it suffered labors, how shall it be
counted not unjust?

Contrariwise, if wickedness be condemned, the soul shall be iniuriouslye
dealte withal, if it alone suffer punishemente for those things, which it
committed in life time, at the suggestion of the body, drawing it to his own
appetites, and motions, whilst some time it is lead from that, which is honest
by violence, sometime by stealth, sometime it is drawn by a violent
inclination, and some time it gives it self to vices, for to gratify, and
slatter the fellowship of the body.

Or how, I pray you, is it not unjust, that the soul only should be
conde^pned for those things, to the which according to his own nature, it has
neither desire, nor motion, nor inclination, as superfluity in carnal
pleasure, violence, covetousness, injustice, and other offenses, which are
committed for this cause?

For if many offenses be committed, because men cannot well rule their
inordinate affections, and the affections keep a whurly burly to this end,
that they may help, and remidy the need, and necessity of the body.

For they prepare all things for the behoof of these things, that thereby a
man may come to the use, and fruition, and also marriages are begone, and other
business, which happen in the life time, in which, and about which every
thing, that is worthy either of praise, or dispraise, is considered. Where is
here equities, seeing the soul is condemned for those things, which the body
is destrous of, and draws the mind to the fellowship of the same affection,
that it may obtain the thing desired? And seeing desire, pleasure, fear,
grief, the unruliness of which affections is subject to judgment, have their
beginning from the body, notwithstanding the offenses proceeding from thence,
and the punishments for them, do lie upon ye souls shoulders, which required
no such thing, which desired no such thing, nor feared, nor suffered any such
thing by it self, as man is accustomed to suffer.

Furthermore, if we say, that they be affections not only of the body, but
of man, because he has a life consisting of both parts: yet can we not
affirm, that they pertayne to the soul, if we plainly beho^de the proper
matter thereof.

For if it have no need at all of any nourishment, it will never desire those
things, whose use it requires not to conserve his being, neither will it be
ravished with those things, which by nature it does not inioye, nor yet be
sorye for the want of money, and possessions, as things nothing perteyning unto
it.

Wherefore, if it remain free from corruption, it fears nothing, that may
destroy it. For it fears not hunger or sickness, or mayming, or mangling, or
fire or sword, because it can take no misfortune, or hurt by these things,
seeing no body, or that which has a body, can touch it in any point.

If therefore it be absurd, to ascribe the affections peculiarly to the soul,
it is also great iniurye, and far from the judgment of God, to attribute the
punishment of them to the soul.

Beside these things, which have been spoken, how, I pray you, is it not
unjust, that although the virtues, and vices can not be considered to remain,
specially in the soul, seeing we throughlye perceive, that all virtues of men,
as also vices contrary to virtues, be not in the soul separated from the
body, and consisting by it self, yet we will refer the punishment, and
reward of them to the souls alone?

Or how I pray you can a man perceive valiaunce, and manliness in aduenturing
dangers to be only in the mind, which fears neither death, nor wounds,
nor mayming, nor hurt, nor reproachful handeling, nor those greefes or miscries
which happen thereby?

Or how again can you perceive temperaunce, and wisdom, where no desire does
allure the mind to meat, or natural copulation, or any other pleasure, or
delight, and where nothing either disturbeth within, or provoke without?

Or last of all, how can you imagine prudence, when the matter of things to
be chosen, or to be eschued, does not perteyne unto the Souls, seeing the
matter of choice in doing things is not subject to the soul, or rather no
motion, or natural inclination is in it to do any thing.

But where is there at all any fit justice amongste the souls, whether you
consider things of the same nature, or things external, or from whence, or
to whom, or by what means, shall they give that, which is right, according to
the worthynesse of every man, or according to proportion? Truly there is no
such thing, if you except the honor to be bestowed by them upon GOD, seeing
they have no inclination, or motion, either to use their own, or absteyne from
other men's, seeing use and abstinence is seen in those things, which by
nature have need of such things. Contrariwise the soul is so borne that it
needs no such thing, and thence is it, that you can not perceive the propre
use of the members in a thing so ingendered.

Furthermore, this is most absurbe, that the laws made, should be referred to
men, and the punishmente of the laws wrested to the souls alone.

For if he which received the law, ought also rightlye receyne punishment for
breaking the law, and man received the law, and not the soul alone, it is
right, that man suffer punishment for his offenses, and not the soul alone.

For truly God commanded not the souls, to abstreyne from things unlawful,
as adulteries, murders, theefts, robberies, and from contempt of parents, and
all hurtful, and unjust desire of other men's goods.

For this commandment, honor thy, father and mother, does not appertain
unto the souls, seeing such names do not belong to them. For one soul does
not beget another, that it may challenge to it self thereby the name of a
parent. But one man begets another.

And furthermore this commandment, thou shall not commit adulterye, can not
be spoken, or understood aptlye of the souls, seeing in them there is no
discretion of ye masculine, or feminine kind, or aptness, or desire of
carnal copulation, and where ye desire is not, it is impossible, that ye
mixture should be made. But amongst whom such mixture is not, truly lawful
copulation, namely which is in wedlock cannot be found, and where such
copulatio^, as is in wedlock, is not, there also unlawful desire of carnal
company with another man's wife (for that is adultery) has no place.

Moreover, the precept of eschuing theft, or desire of too much, does not
serve for the souls. For they have no need of such things, as they that have
need of, do get for themselves for their natural need, or necessity, either
by theft, or robbery, as gold, silver, cattle, or any thing else necessary,
either for meat, or apparel.

For that is unprofitable for an immortal nature, which is desired of them,
that need, because it is profitable.

But let a more curiouse trade be left for them, which desire more diligently
to search out these things, or more earnestlye strive with our adversaries.

But seeing those things, which have been spoken before, be sufficient for us,
and agreeable with these things, and as it were with one consent do establish
the resurrection, it does not seem convenient to tarry longer in them.

For we did not direct our purpose to this mark, that we should omit nothing,
that belongs to this matter, but that we might briefly declare to all them,
that are come hither, what men ought to think concerning the resurrection,
and that by the force of those things, that we have already spoken, they might
measure the force of other reasons, belonging to the same purpose.

Seeing those things, which we had in hand be searched out, and examined,
it remains now, that we consider the cause of the end, already plain, and
evident, which has need of no care more, then that it be added to the rest,
lest it seem either to be omitted by reason of oblivion, or hinder the
argument in hand, and division made in the beginning. For these causes, and
other belonging to the same purpose, it shall be convenient, to declare the
matter only for this cause because those things, which consist by nature or
art, have their peculiar ends, which custom, and common understanding does
teach, and those things which are before our eyes, do witness the same.

Do we not see one end ordained for husbandmen, another for Phisicions, and
again one for those things, which grow out of the earth, another for
creatures living thereby, and ingendered according to a natural order, and
sequel of succession?

Wherefore, if it be euidente, and necessary, that natural, and artificial
faculties, and the acts of them do follow their end, every one according to
his nature: it is necessary altogether, that the end of man, be excepted from
the communion of the rest, as a peculiar nature.

For it is not lawful to assign one end to those things, which lack
reasonable judgment, and those, which according to natural law, and reason
do their actions, and use wisdom, and justice in life.

Neither therefore voydnesse of grief is ye proper, and peculiar end of these
things. (For you may find that also in those, that be without sense) nor yet
the enjoying of those things, which delight, or nourish the body, nor
abundance of pleasures. Otherwise it were necessary, yt the beastly life did
excel, and the life adorned with virtues were an imperfect thing. For such an
end is proper to beasts, and cattle, and does not perteyne to men, which have
an immortal soul, and reasonable judgment, nor yet the felicity of the soul
separate from the body.

For we do not look upon either the life, or end of either part, of which man
consists, but on that, which has fullness, and perfection of both parts.

For man which has received this life, is such a one. And it is necessary,
that he have a proper end, agreeable to his life.

Wherefore, if an end must be ordained for that, which is both together, namely
for that which consists both of soul and body, and you cannot find it,
neither while he continues in this life, for the causes now oftentimes
alleged, nor then, when ye soul is separate from the body, because man must be
thought no such thing, when his body is dissolved, or wholye dispersed,
although the soul remain by it self, it is altogether necessary that the
end of men do appear in some other recomposition, and renewing of both parts,
and the same creature, and seeing that does follow of necessity, it is
necessary also, that there be a resurrection of bodies dead, and wholye
dissolved, and that the same men be made again, seeing that the law of nature
does command not every end, nor of all men, b^t of those, which lived in the
former life. But it is impossible for ye same men to be made again, unless the
same bodies be restored to their souls. But that the body receive the same
soul, can by no other mean be brought to pass, then by the resurrection.

For when that comes to pass, an apt end does follow the nature of men, an
end truly of: a (...) life, and reasonable judgment. A man shall not offend
if he say it is it, that we may for ever cleave, and continue with those
things, wherewith chiefly, and especially natural reason does agree, and
consent, and that in respect, and consideration of him, which is, and for the
behoof of those things which it plesed him to promise, although the common
sort of men more earnestly, and vehemetlye desire such things, as are now
presentlye, and do nothing esteem or regard this end. For the multitude of
such, as do leave, and go from the end agreeable to them, does not wea^ (...)
common ordinance of duty (...) a peculiar examination is ^^pointed against
that, and puni^^ment, and rewards or^^^ned, which be correspondent to the
measure of well or evil doing.

FINIS.

