THE CHRISTIANS RACE: TEACHING US ALL SO WORTHILY, AND SO WISELY Both to
begin, continue, and to end, this our most short and momentanie course in
this mortal Life: that in the day of our death we may for ever enjoy that
inestimable Crown of eternal Bliss in the life to come.

Being a Sermon preached in the Parish Church of North Parrott in Somerset, by
JOHN ATKINS Master of Arts, and Preacher of the sacred Word of God, and Pastor
there.

1. COR. 9.24. Know ye not that they which run in a Race run all, but one
received the price? So run that ye may obtain.

LONDON, Printed for George Hodges, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Gray-hound. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM SAINTMAVRE, LORD BEAVCHAMPE, EARL OF HERTFORD:
AND TO THE MOST Virtuous and truly Religious Countess; my very good Lord and
Lady, JOHN ATKINS wishes all grace, and peace from our LORD JESUS Christ.
Custom (which with us is another nature) has evermore claymed by
Prescription (Right Honorable) that such Books, as are publicly committed to
the Press, whither they be small or great, should be sent abroad to the open
view of the World, with some Epistle Dedicatorie going before them. Which if
they have not, they may then be questioned by the Readers, whither that the
Authors and Writers of these Works, have any worthy good Friends abroad: or
else, whither that the Works themselves may be thought well worthy of their
Patronage. In due regard whereof, I have here in bent my self to tread the
common path, and now at this present to usher forth into the Vineyard of Gods
Church, these first Fruits of mine imprinted labors in my public Ministry,
under both your Honors most worthy Patronage (which are now but one in the
Lord.) Most humbly craving your Honors favorable acceptance of the fame, as
our Savior once did of that poor Widows Farthing. And although I may most
truly confess and say, in the words themselves, of that Centurion in the
Gospel, Mat. 8.8. I am not worthy to be graced here in by your Honors
greatness (knowing right well mine own unworthiness) yet the very little
matter, and argument it self, of this little Book of mine is it, which I have
here made bold to commend unto you, to wit, The Christians Race: A Race
indeed, which the Wisemen of this World do utterly refuse to run, because
they are yet but Worldly wise: and what our ignorant ones dream not of,
because that their eyes as yet are blinded: and what our Naturalists know not
of Because that this Race is spiritually discerned, and what our Earth-wormes
think not of, because that all such are but earthly minded: and which all our
profane ones utterly despise, because that as yet they are altogether
irreligious: and which all our ungodly ones as yet regard not, because that
their hearts are hard and stony, and which our Hypocrites know right well, but
yet will not run, unless it be only in the sight of men for a season, to
have the applause and praise of men: and lastly, which all our truly Religious
ones strive to run; albeit, with many faintings, failings, and desertions.
And therefore (now Right Honorable) to this only end, that all our Worldly
wise (benedictione diuina) may be yet more truly wise unto their own
salvation: and all our ignorant ones may be the more enlightened, and all our
Naturalists may be the more renewed, and all our Worldly ones may the more
have their minds set on heavenly things, and all our profane ones may yet
prove the more pious, and all our ungodly ones may come at last to Repentance:
and all our Hypocrites may be much more zealous, so many as are found within
the rank of Election. And finally, all our Religious ones may be much more
strengthened, and animated in that good course which they have hither unto
begun, that so constantly and comfortably continuing to the Goales end, they
may reap that rich price of eternal bliss.

I have here made bold for the public good of Gods Church, to commit this
short Sermon of mine to the Press: teaching both your Honors in particular,
and all true Christians else in general, so to begin, hold on, and continue
this our true Christian Race, unto the very end and vpshot of our lives: that
in death we may enjoy eternal life.

Vouchsafe therefore (Right Honorable, I beseech you) to permit this little
Work of mine, to pass into the World under your Honors Name, which in truth
will not only be even as a shield to protect it against the bitter and biting
Tongues of all our carping and captious Ones, but also be as an Ointment
powered out, yielding a most sweet and redolent savor, for to make it so much
the more odoriferous indeed, in the hearts and minds of all true Christian
Readers, and Hearers of the same. And thus most humbly craving pardon for this
my boldness, and not being willing to detayne your Honors any longer, least I
should be too tedious. I commend you and yours to that most gracious God, whom
you daily serve, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build further
in you both, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are satisfied.

Your Honors Chaplain in all duty to be commanded, JOHN ATKINS.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
COurteous Reader: forasmuch as we are all (as Experience proves, the surest
Schoole-mistresse in the world) from the King to the Beggar: from the best to
the basest: from the mightiest to the meanest: from him that sits upon the
Throne: to the poorest grinder in the Mill, without exception, or exemption of
any. Actors here upon the Stage of no long continuance: and (as evidently the
Holy Ghost does witness unto us all, in the 1. Cor. 9.24.) runners of a most
short and transitory race here in this mortal life: the which race being
finished first, or last: either at our first, third, sixth, or eleventh hour.
That is to say, either in Childhood, Youth, Middle age, or Old age: our Bodies
must then return unto Dust, from whence they came: and our Souls must return
unto GOD who gave them. That therefore in the very day and hour of our Deaths:
that immortal part, I mean our souls, (which as Saint Austen says,
Generando infunduntur and infundendo generantur, are infused into our bodies by
a Divine and unutterable generation, and are begotten of GOD himself in us, by
a Celestial infusion,) may not be repulsed by CHRIST himself, the Judge of
quick and dead, with Non noui vos, discedite maledicti, etc. I know you not,
depart you Cursed, etc. But may then be immediately, and that most joyfully
admitted, into the Coelum Emperaeum, the Heaven of Heavens, with that sweet
Venite benidicti, etc. Come ye blessed Children of my Father, etc. to GODS
most comfortable presence, there to have full fellowship with the Blessed
Trinity, and with all the Communion of the tryumphant Saints, and so reign
with them in Bliss for evermore. I have here made bold in love, as GODS poor
Labourer (though Apostolorum minimus, Peccatorum maximus, and Sanctorum
infimus: the least of the Apostles, named of GOD, chiefest Sinner, and the
meanest Saint.) to commend this compendious Sermon of mine unto thy Christian
view, for thy better instruction and daily direction in this present Life
(which is but for a moment) how to run most wisely and worthily indeed, of
this thine appointed Spiritual race. The which poor Mite of mine, if I shall
find thee (courteous Reader) with willingness and cheerfulness to accept,
and with carfulness and faithfulness daily for to use, it shall then be
thine; Otherwise, if you do gracelesly abuse it, or else most grossly refuse
it, then it shall be mine. Read, and consider well I pray thee with good
discretion, what here thou read: and the Lord give us all a right
understanding in all good things. And if upon thy reading, or hearing hereof,
you shall find any Spiritual and Ghostly comfort for to follow: let GOD have
all the glory, to whom all Glory chiefly appertains: and let me (the Lords
unworthy Minister) have thy daily Prayers to GOD in my behalf, that GOD of his
goodness may so bless me in my Ministry, which I have received from the
Lord, as that hereby I may from henceforth be boldly encouraged, and enabled to
prepare yet some few Meditations more of this kind hereafter for thee. And
thus most heartily commending it to thy Christian and charitable consideration,
and my self with all my daily Studies and endeauours, unto thy most faithful
and fervent prayers, I rest.

Thine in the Lord Jesus. JOHN ATKINS.
North Parrot in Somerset, this twelfth of September, 1623.
Five general Doctrines, or Instructions, handled in this Sermon.
First, from the word, Us. THat all the Elect of God, This Doctrine.
which do expect indeed, that rich reward of Glory in the day of Death: must
labor now to be Cursores, Spiritual runners of the Christians race, here in
this present Life. Secondly, from the word, Run. That all those which are
sound professors indeed of true Christian Religion: This Doctrine.
must neither stand still nor sit down, nor flinch, nor look back, but daily
go forward in this Religious race, until they come in Death unto that wished
place. Thirdly, from the word, Race. That man's life here upon Earth, This
Doctrine.
it is exceeding short, and passes very swiftly. Fourthly, from the word,
Patience. That true Patience indeed in undergoing of Crosses, This Doctrine.
is a most needful and gainefull Grace, for the fitting, fencing, and
furnishing of our Souls, to run this Religious race. Fifthly, from these
words: Looking to JESUS. That in running of this our Religious race, This
Doctrine.
the life of our Lord and Master Jesus, must be our special Card and
Compass, our Celestial Circle, and our Line, for to guide us by.
THE CHRISTIANS RACE.
THE TEXT.
Heb. 12. Part of the 1. and 10. Verse. Let us run with Patience the Race
that is set before us, looking unto JESUS.


IN these words (my well-beloved in CHRIST JESUS, our best beloved:) the Holy
Ghost (our celestial Schoolmaster of all true saving Knowledge) does borrow
a very plain and familiar comparison (as we may all perceive and see) from
the Earthly games of mortal Men, which in a word, we may thus conceive. The
Race which we are here exhorted for to run, is not the voluptuous Race of
vain pleasure with Epicurus: (whose wanton Song was only thus: Ede, bibe,
lude: post mortem nulla voluptas. Eat, drink, and play: for after death there
is no further pleasure:) Nor yet the ambitious Race of vain Glory, with
Alexander: who having Conquered all this World, wept because he could not
find a second: that so he might also conquer it: Nor yet the envious Race of
beastlike revenge, with that accursed Caine, who most insatiably thirsted after
his Brother Abels innocent blood. Genesis 4.8. Nor yet the covetous Race of this
worlds bewitching wealth: with that most greedy Cormorant mentioned in the
Gospel: ( Luke 12.18.19. Qui modo ^^lligat hordeum in horreum, etc. so as he
might fill his Barnes up to the roof:) This was the whole and sole compass of
his cares: being crop-sicke (as I may say) out of his great abundance. But
only that pious and Religious race, of a new, a holy, a godly, and a
sanctified life, with that regenerate and most worthy King David: running in
the path of Gods Commandments. Psalm. 119.32. Let us run with patience this
race that is set before us, looking to Jesus.

Of which words, that I may the more orderly speak, and you in Gods fear the
more profitably hear: may it please you all, for methods sake (which is
memories guide,) seriously to observe herein these two general and remarkable
parts; to wit, Us: To run with patience the race that is set before us,
looking to Jesus. The parties, are not all men in general, without exception,
but only Us: that is, all the righteous and regenerate rank, which being made
Spiritually new creatures in Christ Jesus, are Justified by the merit of Christ
his obedience, and Sanctified by his most blessed Word and Spirit. And so this
word Us, has only a reference to all that are of this righteous and
regenerate rank, whither Jews, or Gentiles, male, or female, noble, or
ignoble, learned, or unlearned, bond, or free. So that in this sense (as you
may perceive and see) the persons are not definitely, but indefinitely here
proposed. For the Holy Ghost does not say here: Let us that are Noble, or let
us that are Ignoble, or let us that are Mighty, or let us that are Mean, or
let us that are Rich, or let us that are Poor, or let us that are Young, or
let us that are Old: but generally (having a respect to all the regenerate
only) he expresses it indefinte in this wise: Let us.

a personis from the parties, here most powerfully exhorted, for to run this
Religious race, there arises this obseruable lesson for our further Learning,
that all the Elect of GOD, which do expect indeed, that rich reward of Glory
in their day of Death: must belabour now to be Cursores, Spiritual runners of
the Christians race, here in this present life. The reason is drawn a decreto
Dei: because that the Lord himself has so Decreed: That first, we must be
all of us Viatores, Travelers, and Cursores, Runners, ere ever that we can be
Comprehensores, obtainers of eternal Life. Insomuch, that in this respect, not
the very true natural Son of God himself, as he was the very Son of Man,
(like unto us in all things excepting only in sin) was in any wise exempted,
or privileged above his Brethren, whiles that he was here militant, and
conversant upon Earth. But first he did Run, and then after that Obtain:
first he did Fight, and then he did Conquer: first he did Suffer, and then
after that he did enter into his Glory. Luke 24.26. So then (my well-beloved in
the best beloved) this being the Militant estate here upon Earth of Christ
himself our head: this also must be the Lot, Estate, and Condition, of all
and every one of us, that are his members. For that as in Math. 10.25. we may
run, and read, from the mouth of our Master Christ himself: It is enough for
the Disciple to be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord. And no marvel;
for, as a learned Father says. Our God has these three distinct or several
houses: Earth, Hell, and Heaven: Earth for labor, Hell for torment, and Heaven
for pleasure: Earth for labor in this present life; whereof that holy man Job
speaks thus, in Job 5.7. Man is borne to labor, as the sparks to fly
upward. Hell, for torment to all the Damned, in the life to come: whereof
Abraham spoke thus to damned Dives, in Luke 16.25. Son remember that thou in
thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and contrariwise Lazarus endured
pains: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And Heaven for
pleasure, to all the Elect of God, whereof our blessed Apostle Saint Paul
writes thus, in 1. Cor. 2.9. That no Eye ever saw, no Ear ever heard, no
Heart ever conceived, the joys which God has prepared in Coelo Empiraeo, for
them that love him. So then, if here we have no fighting, striving, running,
encountering, and conquering in this present life: we can never then look for
any Celestial blessing, immortal Crowning, and most happy rewarding in the
Life to come. And therefore of force I must thus conclude, a decreto Dei
immutabili, from Gods unchangeable Decree, the truth of this my proposed
Doctrine raised a personis, from the persons, which are here exhorted by the
Holy Ghost, for to run this Christian race, that if ever we do expect
indeed, that rich reward of Glory in the day of our Death: we must labor now
with might and maine, for to be Cursores, Spiritual runners of this Religious
race here in this present life.

The use of this Doctrine a Personis, from the Persons, serves to reprove, to
check, and sharply to rebuke, many thousands amongst us in these our days
and times, who being yet but Talpae in Diuinis, blind Moales in Heavenly
matters, do ignorantly, and most absurdly think to go to Heaven, as it were
upon beds of Down, and that all other matters and businesses in this world,
this one thing is the easiest matter of all, for a man to enter into Eternal
life, in his day of Death: and in this Life to be spiritually rich toward
God, with a Lord have mercy upon them at the last. Whereas ( lumine Naturae by
Natures light,) they can all confess and say; that a man cannot possibly be
rich to this slipperie world, first beginning even ex nihilo, but of a slender
Stock: without rising up early, and going to bed late, and taking of every
opportunity offered for that end and purpose: and yet alas these Naturalists
do think, (being yet but flesh and blood) which as our Apostle plainly tells
us from the Lord, in 1. Cor. 15. verse. 50. cannot possibly enter into the
Kingdom of God) to be spiritual rich to Godward in their souls: and
suddenly, in ipso articulo mortis; at the very last gasp, to enjoy CHRIST,
with all his Merits, Graces, and Blessings (which is man's best and chiefest
gain, because the most true and perfect gain:) though here they do stand
still in the way of sinners, or sit down in the seat of the scornful: never
running (as we are here exhorted) in this Religious Race; nor yet struggling, or
striving, as Christians ought to do; either against Satan's fiery suggestions,
or against this Worlds most dangerous hallucinations, or against their own
carnal lusts and most filthy corruptions: but that only one, Miserere mei
Deus, at the last, will suffice their turn.

To all which blind Moales in heavenly matters, I must be a ghostly
Remembrancer this day from the Lord of Heaven and Earth, with this my present
Doctrine, raised a personis, from the parties, which must run this our
Christians Race. That if ever they do expect indeed, that most rich reward of
glory in the day of death: they must labor now then to be cursores,
spiritual runners of this Religious Race here in this present life. Remembering
still, that as a godly Father says: Nunc pugnandum tibi est fortiter, nunc
currendum viriliter: vt tandem in die mortis triumphs suauiter. Now we must
fight courageously, now we must run manfully: if ever we look in our day
of death to triumph most joyfully. And so I come, a personis ad rem, from the
parties that must run this Religious Race, to their practice in running and
finishing of the same: which is, To run with patience the Race that is set
before us, looking to Jesus.

In which two general parts of this my proposed Text, may it please you
methodically to note these three particular points. First, A word of
Exhortation in that first word Run. Secondly, A most worthy direction how, in
these next words: with patience the Race that is set before us. And thirdly and
lastly: An illustration of this most worthy direction, by a demonstration
drawn, ab exemplo Christi: in these last words, looking to Jesus. Of these (by
the help of God) in their order. And first, of the word of Exhortation, Run.
Running (as we all know) is a violent exercise, and therefore most painful
and laborious: And so likewise is the militant present estate of every man and
woman amongst us, that will run this Christians Race full of affliction,
misery, and of trouble: insomuch, that Sicut fluctus fluctum insequitur: sic
afflictio afflictionem: as one wave follows upon the Seas, in the neck of
another: so do trials and afflictions here pursue Gods dear Saints one after
another. And therefore, Eccles. counsel is this in his second Chapter and
first Verse, My Son if thou will come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul
for temptations. Moreover, in running, which (as before I have taught you) is
actio laboriosa: a violent, painful, and laborious exercise of the body: men's
bodies are still in motu, and progressu: in action, and in progress, until
they do come at length unto the Goal.

And even so likewise (my well-beloved in the best beloved) both in our
speculatiue, and practical part of true Christian Piety, our whole man flesh,
and spirit must still be in motu and progressu: until we do attain to that
wished Palace of felicity. And hence from this first word of Exhortation, Run;
There arises this remarkable Instruction, or Lesson for our learning: that all
such, as do now profess indeed true Christian Piety, and Religion; must
neither stand still, nor sit down, nor flinch, nor look back: but go on
still forward in this spiritual Race, till in death they shall come unto their
wished place.

The reason for the purpose and confirmation of this Doctrine, is drawn a
comparatis, from a comparison: because that even as runners in an Earthly Race,
do not at all, whiles they are Agents in that corporal exercise, either stand
still or sit down, or flinch, or look back: but do hold on courageously,
cheerfully, and constantly, until they attain unto their wished Goal: Even
so must we that are now Cursores, spiritual runners in this our Religious
Race: not stand still with those Idlers in the Gospel, Matthew. 20.6. whom our
Savior himself did most sharply check with Quid hic statis toto die otiosi?
Why stand ye here all the day idle? Nor yet sit down with that covetous
Cormorant in the Gospel, Luke 12. verse. 19. who sang this sweet requiem unto
his soul: saying, Anima requiesce: Soul take thy rest. Nor yet flinch with
those dastardly Disciples of our Savior, who fled all away from him, at the
hour of his apprehension, Mar. 14. verse. 50. Nor yet lastly look back with
that disobedient Wife of righteous Lot, Genesis 19. verse. 26. who was deservedly
therefore turned into a Pillar of Salt: to be a warning peale (as I may say) to
all succeeding Ages. But according to that most blessed pattern and practice
of our holy and blessed Apostle Saint Paul, in Philip. 3.13.14. We must forget
that which is behind, that is, the things we have already done, and endeavor
our selves to that which is before: that is, to those good duties, which as yet
we have left undone, and press continually toward the mark, which is our
Master Jesus Christ alone: upon whom, as on a mark, our eyes must be wholly and
solely set, in the complete course of this our Christian Race. And albeit in
the running of this Race, we may either stumble, or fall, or both: as David
did; when he committed both Murder and Adultery, 2. Sam. 12. verse. 9. and as
Saint Peter did, when he denied and defied his Lord and Master Christ, Matthew.
26.72, 74. and as Saint Paul did, when a prick was given him in the flesh, the
very Messenger of Satan to buffet him withal, 2. Cor. 12.7. and generally as
all the Disciples did, when as they all forsook their Master Christ, and fled,
Matthew. 26.56. Yet we must up again, and to it; We must break off our wonted
sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by mercifulness. So that if with
the Church of Ephesus, We have left our first Love, Revel. 2.5. yet we must
again remember from whence we are fallen, and repent, and do our first
works. If then in running of this Religious Race we do fall, yet we must not
lie still and sleep in sin: but rise by true Repentance, and so run
again, even as if our spiritual strength were renewed by our falls; knowing
this, that in due time we shall reap if we faint not, Genesis 6.9. And thus by
this one Reason from a Comparison, I prove the truth of this my former
Doctrine, raised from this first word of Exhortation, Run: that all and every
one of those, that do now profess indeed true Christian Piety and Religion,
they must neither stand still, nor sit down, nor flinch, nor look back: but
must hold on still in this Religious Race, until they attain in die mortis, in
their day of death, unto that most wished place of eternal life.

The use of this Doctrine, raised from this first word of Exhortation Run: is
of reprehension to tax a number of lazy Lepid^ (I mean, of drowzie
Protestants and Professors) now in these our days and times, who albeit with
Judas amongst the Apostles of Christ, they do know as much in Christ his
School as others do, and with the dissembling Pharisees too, in Christ his
days, can profess as much in their golden and glorious words, as the
soundest, and most sanctified Christians that are amongst us: yet in all this
interim, they run not with perseverance in this our true Christian Race. But
either they resemble Joshua his Sun, which stood still by the space of one
whole day, Ios. 10.13. or else Hezekiah his Sun, which went backward ten
degrees, Esaias 38.8. So do these either stand still, or else go backward in
goodness: whereas they should resemble King David's Sun, in Psalm. 19.5. Which
comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber: and rejoices as a Giant to
run his course. So should these (if they were as they should be indeed) shake
off all such lets and impediments whatsoever, as either did clog them that they
could not run this Race at all: or else did cause them to break off, when as
they should continue. To all which drowzie Protestants, (as Gods unworthy
Messenger) I must be also a Rememberancer from the Lord, with this my former
instruction, from this first word of Exhortation, Run: that all and every one
of those that do now profess indeed true Christian Piety and Religion: they
must neither stand still, nor sit down, nor flinch, nor look back, but hold
on constantly in this Religious Race, until they attain in die mortis, unto
that most happy and wished place. Whereunto we have these two main Motives
to incite us (which I beseech you mark) First, that there is always in true
Christianity, a (...): that is, a furthermore: as our Apostle plainly does
express, in the 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. Furthermore, we beseech you Brethren; and
exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that you would abound yet more and more, as ye
have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to please God. And as Saint
Peter also implies, in 2. Pet. 3.18. Crescite in gratia; Grow in grace. And
therefore, as Appelles Poesy was this, Nulla dies sine linea; Let no day pass
without one Line. And as Pythagoras Poesy was, Chaenici ne insidias: Sit not
still upon the Measure of Corn. And final, as the Motto of Charles the Fifth
was this: Vlterius: Go on further. Even as Christ himself sometimes said to
that worthy Ghest in the Gospel, Luke 14.10. Superius, Sit up higher: So
according to all these particular Directions or Mementoes, (as I may truly
term them) let us now run on still in this Race, without ceasing.
Remembering that here upon Earth whiles we are Militant, we have not Mansions
to rest in; crying, Anima requiesce (as I told you before) but only Vineyards
to work in. So that in this World we must never think that in grace we are
rich enough: but we must be always poor in spirit, Mat. 5.3. we must never
think, that we have either Knowledge, Grace, or Goodness enough; but we must
always hunger and thirst after Righteousness: that so we may be filled and
satisfied at the last. So then having a Talent of Grace, we must not put it
into a Napkin, but into the Bank, lighting our Candle; we must not set it
under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick: Seeking Christ, we must not seek him
in our Beds of rest, but in our Gardens, and Vineyards of labor, Cant. 3.1.
Still casting off all such clogges and impediments, as may hinder us in this
our Celestial Race. Herein resembling Ezechiels Waters that rose up higher and
higher, in Ezec. 47.4 till we come to our Head, which is the Son of God: and
that growing Wheat in the Gospel, which waxed riper and riper, Mark 4.28.
till we come to that great Harvest Day, which is in the end of the World.

A second Motive to persuade us to run on, with all possible perseverance in
this our Religious Race, is, for that in our great Audit Day, the Day of the
Lord: it is not our only Faith of knowing much, which the Devils have, James 2.
Verse. 19. Nor yet our only Faith of assenting to much, which our Hypocrites
have, that will then suffice, and serve our turns: but only this our true
saving Faith of knowing, assenting, and applying of Christ with all his
benefits unto our selves. The which Faith of ours, if it be sound indeed, as
it ought to be; it will have these two principal properties, to wit: First, a
godly sorrow, or unfeigned Repentance, for her Gentleman Usher, as the Faith of
the Ninouites sometimes had, Jonas 3.10. and secondly, those lively fruits, or
effects of the Spirit of God for her Attendants and Companions, mentioned in
Genesis 5.22. Love, Joy, Peace, long suffering, etc. This grace of true saving
faith, being a most glorious Queen. And as Saint Austen styles her, Ipsa
Regina virtutum: The very Queen of all the Theological Virtues: most
honorably attended evermore as a Queen, with those Celestial Virgins the
fruits of the Spirit, whereof I spoke before: as in Psalm. 45. Verse. 14, 15. you
may run and read. And so I come from our Apostles word of Exhortation,
Run, unto his most worthy Direction how, with patience the Race that is set
before us. In which Direction, note I pray you these two particular Points:
First, our Apostles Metaphorical word Race: by which Race is here meant the
whole course and compass of this our mortal life: and Secondly, that
Theological Virtue or Grace, wherewith our souls must be seasoned, fenced,
and guarded, for our more comfortable finishing of this our mortal Race, in
that one word Patience: Let us run with patience the Race, etc.

The word Race in the Original, as I find, is (...): whereof there were three
several kinds. The first of Italy, called Stadium Italicum, the Italian Race:
containing six hundred five and twenty feet. The second, Olympicum: the Race
of Olympus: containing only six hundred feet. And the third and last,
Pythicum: containing no less then a thousand feet: which is two hundred paces.
Now it is most probable, that our Apostle in this place, writing to the
Hebrews, alluded to that Olympian Race, or Course, which of the three is found
to be the shortest; much like to those Ties (as they term them in Kent)
which are but some thirty or forty Rods: and then there stands the Goal. And
even so likewise, this life of ours (as we see, and know by daily experience)
is but only the lasting and continuance of a few years, months, weeks, and
days at the uttermost, and then at last comes this death vpshot, Mortuus est:
So this man died, which is the Epitaph of every man, either first, or last. So
that as every man had a day of Birth: so shall he have also; and that very
shortly, a day of Death. For that all our whole course and compass here is but
as the extent or continuance of a Race, which is but a few feet, or paces of
ground, and there is the period or the uttermost bound.

Hence then from this Metaphorical word Race, there arises this Doctrine for
our Learning, that the lasting of this our life upon Earth, it is exceeding
short, and passes very swiftly.

a testimonio Spiritus sancti, (which is, Spiritus veritatis the Spirit of
Truth, John 14. ver. 17. and therefore his testimony cannot but be true:) in
Job 14.1. Man that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live: And it is
most truly said, Quod homo est animal aui breuissimi, and solicitudinis
infinitae: That man's days are few, and evil: (as once old Jacob said to King
Pharaoh, in Genesis 47.9.) and that his cares and sorrows are infinite. So that
this our life is not short and sweet, (as Epicures use to say, though falsely)
but very short and sharp, as daily trial and (experience proves unto us all
most plainly) some giving over, at their first setting out in this their
earthly Race, even in their very Cradles, as did those Infants of Bethlehem, in
Matthew. 2.16. Some others when they have run some three or four paces in their
youth: as did the young man in the Gospel, Luke 7.12. Some others about the
midst of their Race, as did Lazarus the Brother of Martha and Marie, in John
11.14. And some when they are almost come to the Goal: as old Simeon did in
Luke 2.29. Yea, and most men and women are out of breath, before they can reach
the stayed paces of threescore years, and if any do live till eighty years,
we repute him then exceeding old, as appears out of Psalm. 90. verse. 10. the
days of the years are threescore and ten: and if by reason of strength,
they reach to fourscore years, yet is there strength then but labor and
sorrow for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. And thus, a testimonio
Spiritus Sancti, I prove the truth of this my former Doctrine, from this our
Apostles Metaphorical word Race, that the lasting of this our life here upon
Earth, it is exceeding short, etc.

A second Reason is drawn, ab experientia quotidiana, from daily experience
(which is the surest Schoole-mistris in the World) in that we do find,
perceive, and see by experience: that there are as many small sculs in our
Golgothaes (which are our Churches, and Churchyards) as there are great: and
that for one Apple which falls ripe from our Trees, ten are pulled before
they be ripe: and that the Parents do as often naturally mourn for the death
of their children, as the children do for the death of their Parents. Thus
being our April and our June (as I may term) in which we flourish for a
while, but very shortly will come our September and November, in which as
leaves we must fall to the ground: and what a wonderful change will this be,
that within these fourscore years at the most, scarce one of all this
Congregation shall remain alive: but another Pastor and other people, another
Preacher, and other hearers shall supply these rooms. The Raven, and the
Phoenix, and the Elephant, and the Lion, and the Heart, live out their hundreds
of years: but Man dies, when his sun is yet but risen, before his Eye can
be satisfied with seeing, or his Ear with hearing, or his Heart with lusting;
Death knocks at the very door of his heart, and will not suffer him to study
for an excuse, before he must appear to give an account of his Stewardship,
for he can be no longer steward. Luke 16.2, 3.

And even thus, Ab experientia quotidiana, by experience, I prove also the
truth of this my former Doctrine, raised from the word Race. That the lasting,
and continuance of our life here upon earth, it is exceeding short, etc. A
third reason, for further proof and confirmation of this Doctrine, is drawn a
Comparatis, from Comparisons, taken out of the pure fountain it self of Gods
blessed Book. In that this present life of ours is compared by the Holy Ghost
in Scripture, sometimes to a Pilgrimage in which is uncertainty: as in Genesis
47.9. The days of my Pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years. Sometimes
to Grass and Flowers, in which is mutabilitie: as in Esaias 40.7. Sometimes to a
Smoke, in which is vanity; as in Psalm. 102.3. Sometimes to a house of Clay,
in which there is misery. Job. 4.19. Sometimes to a Weauers shittle, in which
is volubilitie: as in Job. 7.6. Sometimes to a Shepherds Tent, in which is
variety: as in Esa. 38.12. Sometimes to a Ship upon the Seas, or to a Post
upon the Land, in which is great celeritie: as in Wisdom. 5.9.10. Sometimes to a
Race, as in 1. Cor. 9.24. And so likewise here in this my Text. Sometimes to a
Dream, whereof we have many in one night: as in Job 20.8. Sometimes to
Vanity, which is nothing in it self: as in Psalm. 39.5. And sometimes to
nothing, or a thing of naught, which has no being in this world: as in the
self same Psalm and Verse.

By all which comparisons taken out of the written Word of God, I prove the
truth of this my former Doctrine, as by a third reason, that the lasting and
continuance of our lives here upon Earth it is exceeding short, and passes
very swiftly. And no marvel, for that the holy Ghost resembles Man's present
estate: (besides all those transitory things, which before I have mentioned:)
sometimes to a Shadow, which is as nothing to the body: as in Job 8.9. And
sometimes to a vapor, which quickly vanishes: as in Iam. 4.14. Now then, all
these things of so short a continuance, what else do they intimate unto us
all, but a serious consideration with our selves of our most short, unconstant,
and variable estate? The chiefest of man's glory here upon Earth, being
resembled (as before I showed you) but to a Flower: and a Flower (as in Summer
we do see) is a thing of no long continuance: for that the cold nips it, the
heat withers it; and lastly, the sith will quickly cut it down. And even so
is our life, in length but as a spanne; yea, a very nothing in respect of
Eternity. Psalm. 144.4.

The use of this my former Doctrine, raised from our Apostles metaphorical
word Race, is of admonition to warn us all, that since this present life of
ours is so exceeding short: (as I have most evidently proved unto you, by
three most pregnant and powerful reasons) So that in truth, in comparison of
that which follows, it is but Punctum temporis, quod hic viuimus, imo and
puncto minus. But a very moment of time, that here we all do live. And yet
as Saint Austen truly says; Hoc est momentum vnde pendet Aeternitas. This is
that only moment whereupon depends Eternity. For that if this time be well
spent, then of our living in everlasting Felicity: but if this be misspent,
then of our living in eternal Misery. That therefore we be now mindful and
careful every day, for to spend it well, and to make good use indeed, of this
so short a moment of our time, in running of this our Christian race aright: by
living Religiously toward God; Soberly toward our selves, and justly and
squarely one toward another: taking especial heed of all carnal security.
Considering, that which way soever we cast our eyes, we have great cause of
vigilance, but none at all of security. For if we look upward, let us think
upon God, whom by our sins we have most justly displeased: if downward,
upon Hell, which we have all of us deserved: if backward, upon our Sins,
which we have formerly committed: if forward, upon our Death and Judgment,
which cannot be avoided if inward, upon our own Consciences, which we have
defiled: if outward, upon this wicked World, which to too much we have loved.
Let us all now consider whence first we came, and blush, where we are: and
sigh, whither we are going, and tremble: and lastly, how short this our life
is, and prepare. And now to this end, that we may all of us the more directly
run in this our Religious race as we ought to do; without standing, sitting,
fainting, flinching, or looking back. Two special rules must be well learned
of us; to wit; First, a due Preparation before: and secondly, a right
Disposition of our selves, in running of this Religious race aright as we
ought to do.

For the first rule. Our due Preparation before, does chiefly consist in these
two principal points. First, in dyeting of our selves aforehand, from
forbearing the pleasing and delightsome practice of all our old and wonted
sins: even as earthly Runners in a corporal Race, do keep themselves to a
bodily diet before their Running day. Secondly, in the stripping and shifting
clean of our selves, from the filthy rotten rags of our own supposed
righteousness, (which is all but like to a menstruous Cloth, as in Esaias
64.6.) even as earthly Runners strip and shift themselves of their daily
wearing Clothes, before they do set forth.

And as for our second and last former rule, viz. Our right Disposition in
running, it consists in these three principal things. First, in our
beginning well, for that (as the Poet said of old.) Dimidium facti, qui been
caepit habet. He that has made a good beginning, has therein half finished
this his Running, being guided herein by the Word of God and Prayer. Secondly,
in going on well, not in the wry way of Paganism, nor in the by-way of
Papisme, but only in that old way, which is the good and right way of
Christianisme. That is, In semita Dei statutorum, only in the path of Gods
Commandments. Thirdly and last of all, In ending well. For that we usually
say, and not untruly, if the End be well, then all is well. As our Savior
himself does teach us, in Math. 24.13. Qui perseuerat vsque ad finem saluus
erit. He alone which continues unto the end shall be saved. For that sola
perseuerantia Coronatur, only our perseverance in this Race, will enrich us
with the Crown. And in deed and truth, (as a godly Father says) Incassum in
hoc stadio curritur, si ante vitae terminum deseratur. As good not at all to
begin this Race, as to give off again before our dying day. The which Truth,
is taught us by Christ himself, in Luke 9.62. Whosoever shall put his hand to
the Lords Plough, and then look back again, is unfit for the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Let us therefore now labor, not only to enter, but once being entered,
carefully and constantly to hold on in this Religious race, to the uttermost
end, and Catastrophe of our lives, that so in death we may take hold by Faith,
of that our inestimable prize which is Eternal life. Closing up this our Race,
when we shall come to the goal, with that sweet and comfortable conclusion of
our blessed Apostle Saint Paul, in 2. Tim. 4.7.8. I have fought the good fight
of Faith; I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith: from henceforth
there is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord that
righteous Judge shall give unto me, and not to me only, but to all them that
love his appearing. And so I come from this Metaphorical word Race, to that
Theological grace or virtue it self: wherewith our hearts must be fortified,
fenced, and guarded, for our more comfortable running and finishing of this our
Religious race, most lively laid down in that one word, Patience. Let us
run with Patience, etc. Patience, is described for to be a most excellent
gift, or grace of God, whereby all Gods militant Saints here upon Earth, are
enabled to bear quietly, peaceably, and contentedly, all Crosses and
Contumelies, whatsoever it shall please the Lord for to lay upon them.

And hence there arises this Doctrine, or lesson for our learning, that true
Patience indeed in undergoing of crosses, is a most needful and gainefull part
of every true Christians spiritual Armor, for the fitting, fencing, and
furnishing of him, to run this Religious race aright. The first reason, for
proof of this Doctrine, is drawn a presenti condition Sanctorum, from the
present troublesome estate of all Gods militant Saints. For that even a whole
world of troubles, trials and crosses, must be undergone of them in this
present world, before they can come to the goales end, and enjoy everlasting
rest and happiness in Heaven: as in Ioh. 16.33. in Luke 14.27. in Act. 14.22.
and in Heb. 12.6.7. (being the very Chapter it self, from whence this my Text
is taken) you may run and read. To all which places of Scripture; for
brevity, I refer you. For that all these particular places do show how
rough, and full of Thorns our way to Heaven is, in this our Spiritual race.
Exeperience whereof, the Histories of all ages do most apparently prove unto
us.

As namely of Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and his posterity in Egypt,
in the Wilderness, in Canaan, under Judges, under Kings, and in their
Captiuities. Quis Sanctorum, says Saint Hierom, sine certamine Coronatus est.
Which of all the Saints was ever Crowned without crossing, without fighting,
without suffering? Let us but seriously consider with our selves, the lives of
Christ, and of his Prophets and Apostles: and the estate of Gods Church in the
Apostles time, and after their time, and ever since, to these our days and
times, and we shall quickly find, that it were an infinite work to reckon up
only all the persecutions, troubles, afflictions, and sundry kind of Crosses,
which Gods own people, his delicate ones, from time to time have endured in
this present life. And no marvel; for that as impossible as it is for Sheep
to live quiet amongst Wolves without hurt: or for Noah's Arc to be without
floating upon the Waters: or for Christ his Ship to be without danger of
sinking upon the Seas: or finally, for a Lilly to be without pricking, growing
among Thorns: so impossible is it for Gods militant Church to be without
troubles and trials, and persecutions in this present world.

Object. But here now me thinks, I hear some say unto me, that all Ages and
Times, have not been times of persecutions unto the Church of God. For that
the Church of God in Kings Salomons days, and so likewise under the reign of
many other good Kings and Princes, had very great peace and quiet. And in Act.
9.31. we do find that in the Apostles days, which were troublesome times,
the Churches had rest. And so likewise in Constantines time, and of other most
worthy Christian Emperors. And even so likewise (blessed be God) here in
this our Island, under the peaceable reign of King Edward the sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, and our most Gracious King JAMES, whom the Lord of his goodness
long continue amongst us, if it be his blessed will, even as the days of
Heaven.

Answ. Though Gods militant Church, and the members thereof, be freed for a
season from all outward public persecutions of the cruel Magistrates, or from
open invasions of their foreign Foes, yet never fully free from all manner of
troubles. For that as in Psalm. 34.19. Many are the troubles of the Righteous;
yea, even in the most halcion and peaceable days and times that ever were. And
no marvel; For behold in the bosom of Gods Church here upon Earth, there
have always been, still are, and ever will be, some Ismaels as well as
Isaacs; some Esaus as well as Jacobs; some borne carnally after the flesh
only, as well as some newborn again after the Spirit of God. Which being so
indeed, there will therefore evermore be persecution of Gods Church upon
Earth; if not with Fire, Sword, Banishment, Imprisonment, and with such like
outward tortures and torments; yet with Ignominies, reproaches, taunts, and
disgraces, and with such like Ismaeliticall persecutions, which will go as near
to the hearts, and pierce through the very souls of Gods Saints, as deeply as
the other. And thus in the most quiet times of Gods Church militant; he that
refraineth from evil, makes himself a prey. Many and manifold injuries, both
in body, goods and name, do the true Saints of God receive from their wicked
neighbors, being often disgraced and oppressed of the greater sort, and many
times reviled and wronged of the meaner sort. And if in this life they should
have peace abroad, yet at home, even in their own private Families, shall they
find trials and troubles enough, arising ordinarily from their Parents,
Husbands, Wives, Children, Servants, Friends, Kindred, and the like. Hence then
from our present condition here in this life, wherein we all are subject to
so many storms, and do daily meet with such an ocean of troubles, I prove
the truth of this my former Doctrine, that of necessity we must strive to be
fenced, and fitted with Patience, for the finishing of this Religious race.

A second reason, for proof and confirmation of this Doctrine, is drawn Ab
vtili, seu commodo Patientiae. From the unspeakable gain and profit, of this
most excellent pearl of Patience. For that even as the lidde is made by God to
open and to shut again, to save the Eye from hurts and harms: so Patience is
set to keep our Souls, and to save whole our Hearts, and to cheer up our
Bodies again. And therefore if we observe it, when we can go by offenses,
and put up wrongs, and suffer troubles quietly, we shall find a kind of
peace and joy in our hearts, as though we had gotten some victory; and the
more that our Patience does increase, the more our Pains will still decrease.
For even as a light burden borne at our arms length, will weigh much heavier
then a burden of treble weight laid upon our shoulders, which are made to
bear. So if we take impatience to bear all our Crosses, which is not fit to
bear them! O then we will immediately murmur, and grudge, and shrink, and
start, and let our burden fall: but if once we put Patience for to bear
them, which is made to bear them all indeed. O then, even as those hearty
Spies which came from Canaan, said, it is nothing to overcome them. Ios. 2. So
will Patience say unto us amidst all our crosses it is nothing to be belyed,
nothing to be envied, nothing to be back-byted, nothing to be slandered,
nothing to be imprisoned, etc. as though all these things did come upon us, not
to make us conquered, but rather by our patience to make us Conquerours. And
thus all is (as we see) in the manner of bearing of the Cross, which makes
persecution seem joyful to some, and irksome to others: which makes poverty
welcome to some, and bitter to others: which makes some sing in their
sickness, as if they were whole, and others to rave, and whine, and curse, as
they were not sick but frantic. And therefore Christ his yoke is styled
easy, in Matthew. 11.28. because it is made easy to some that have patience to
bear it. As Christ by his infinite patience did suffer infinite pains for our
infinite sins: so shall we bear all our crosses that come upon us in this
our Christian Race, if we have this one Preservative of patience about us. For
what else has the poor man to bear his poverty? or the sick man his
pains? or the bondman his bondage? or the banished man his exile? but only to
lay all upon the shoulders of patience, and to say, with Jeremy in all his
trials, This is my sorrow, and I will bear it, Ier. 10. Verse. 19. In Exodus
15.25. we do read, That the Tree which Moses cast into the Spring did season
the bitterness of the waters: So this Tree of patience, being cast into our
troubles, will season the bitterness of all our crosses, and will assist us to
overcome all our trials and temptations: like that Armor-bearer, which help
good Jonathan to vanquish all his enemies, 1. Sam. 14.

And no marvel, for that this most excellent grace of Patience, has a device
(as one wittily writes) to draw such a skin over all our soars and
sorrows, as to make our poverty seem Riches, our Reproaches seem Honors,
our Bondage seem Liberty, our Labors seem Rest, our Sorrows seems Joys,
our Pains seem Pleasures, our Sickness seem Health, and all things that
hurt us to rejoice us: until we do say with holy David; Behold, thy
Judgments are good, Psalm. 119. Ver. 39. And for want of which most worthy
grace, many think themselves in Hell, amidst there earthly woes; and say, that
no man's pains are like their pains, no man's wants like their wants, no man's
foes like their foes, no man's wrongs like their wrongs, when as they can
scarcely tell, where their pain does hold them. And therefore, even those
which cannot suffer that they might have rest, yet sing that old and patient
Proverb: Of sufferance comes rest. So many and manifold, being the effects and
fruits of this Theological grace of Patience: that as a godly Father says;
First, In patientia (vt in arca) anima nostra custoditur: By patience our
Souls are kept in safety, as earthly Treasure is in some Iron Chist: which
our Savior himself does teach us; saying, in Luke 21.19. In patientia
possidete animas vestras: By your patience possess your souls. Secondly, In
patientia vita gubernatur; By Patience our whole life is led, ordered and
guided: for which cause the Holy Ghost does plainly tell us, That he which is
patient, is of great understanding, Prou. 14.29. Thirdly, Per patientiam qualis
homo sit probatur: By patience a man is proved what a one he is: as in Prou.
27. Verse. 21. As the fining Pot for Silver, and the Furnace for Gold, so is a
patient man to his praise. Fourth, Per patientiam victoria acquiritur: By
patience we become Conquerors over all our troubles. So that as Seneca says,
Qui vere patiens est, a toto mundo vinci non possit. He which is truly
patient, no crosses can overcome him, but he ouercomes them all: according to
that old saying, Vincit qui patitur: He which is patient shall overcome. For
which cause in Revel. 13.10. and in Revel. 14.12. When the Holy there speaks
of the victory of the Saints; he says, here is the patience of the Saints.
Noting that by their patience they overcame all their troubles: and therefore
in Iam. 1.5. We are all of us exhorted, let patience have her perfect work.
For that Nobile genus vincendi est patientia. Patience is a most noble kind of
conquering. Now then your patience may have her perfect Work. First, it must
be sound and hearty, and not feigned and counterfeit. For that as soundnes and
integrity is a kind of perfection in all Christian graces, so also in
patience. Secondly, It must extend to all our crosses, both heavy and light;
inward and outward, at home and abroad, whither from the Devil, or from any of
his Instruments: or else from God himself, as his own immediate hand. And
lastly, of what kind, quality and quantity soever they be, as the Holy Ghost
implies, saying, in 2. Cor. 6.4. We approve our selves in much patience.
Thirdly and last of all for the continuance it must endure unto the end of our
Race. So as we must both patiently bear the present, and so likewise prepare
and fit our selves for future crosses. Remembering still, that he which has
patience to the end shall be saved, Mat. 10.22. Thus the patience of Job had
her perfect work in all these three respects. For first it was sound, and of a
large extent, or else he could not have so stood against all his friends, and
amidst all his trials, so uprightly as he did: and finally, it continued unto
the end, for he was overcome by none of them, but he by patience overcame
them all: as we may run and read in Job 13.15. and 42.7. whose President by
Saint James is proposed for our practice, Iam. 5.11. and that not unfitly.
First, in regard of the greatness of our trials and troubles in this present
life: because they are not Scar-crowes, or troubles in show which we suffer,
but such as pierce both our bodies and our souls. Secondly, because that the
number of our trials is to us uncertain, (our calamities as waves falling one
upon another) and thirdly and lastly, because that their continuance is also
uncertain, as is the continuance of our life.

This whole life (as I have taught you) being but a Race, so that so long as
we are Runners in this Race: so long we must look for many storms and
temptations. Now then for us to faint before we have ended our Race, is worse
then never to have endured any whit at all. In that not only the glory of all
our former patience is utterly lost, but also turned into shame. First,
Ignominy, and our God provoked utterly to forsake us, and to have no pleasure
in us, as in Heb. 10.38. and therefore evermore amidst all our crosses, we
must still remember this short close, Si vis vincere, disce pati. Learn to be
patient if thou look to conquer. And thus, ab vtili patientiae, from the gain
of this most excellent grace of patience, I prove also the truth of this my
former Doctrine; That true patience indeed amidst all our crosses, is a most
needful and gainful grace, for the fitting, fencing, and furnishing of our
soul to run this Religious Race.

The Use is of admonition to warn us all, to labor for this Celestial Herb
of grace and of patience, that so we may have it still sprouting and springing
in the spiritual Gardens of our hearts and lives. Knowing well, that God has
given such a wonderful power to this Medicinable Herb of perfect patience,
that it shall be an acceptable Medicament to a general salve for all persons,
and for all Diseases. And therefore in Revel. 13.10. we do read that when
Gods Angel had recorded all the troubles, which should come into the World in
the latter days, at last he closes and concludes thus. Here is the
Patience and Faith of the Saints. As if patience should bear and overcome them
all. And for this very cause throughout the whole body of the Bible: so many
several Sentences of Scripture are written and placed, as so many Preachers to
exhort us unto patience, as in Luke 19.21 By your patience possess your soul,
and in Prou. 14.29. A man's wisdom is known by his patience. And in Heb.
10.36. We have need of patience, that after that we have done the will of God,
we might receive the promise. And in Romans 5.4. Patience breeds experience,
experience hope; and hope makes not ashamed.

And again, in Iam. 4.7, 8. Be patient Brethren to the coming of the Lord,
etc. And besides all these powerful Exhortations unto patience, the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles, have set forth a number of Examples before our eyes,
like Beacons upon the tops of Hills, of such great Cures as have been healed by
patience. So that what our Apostle says of Faith, in Heb. 11. from the fourth
Verse to the fortieth, the very same may I say of this grace of patience. By
patience holy Job did bear all the trials that the Devil could possibly heap
upon him, Job 1. By patience Jacob put a number of wrongs at the hands of
Laban, his Father-in-law, and never once complained in one and twenty years,
Genesis 31.7. By patience good Joseph forgave all his Brethren, when he might
have put them all to death: and gave them food for revenge, Genesis 45.15, 17. By
patience David overcame all his crosses: though he had King Saul that mighty
one against him; the Philistims against him, the Ammonites against him, the
Edomites against him, the Moabites against him; and lastly, Absalom his own
bowels against him. For whom he cried, saying, would God I had dyed for thee,
2. Sam. 18.33. Yet David still comforted himself in the Lord his God, 1. Sam.
30.6. even as if this most precious Pearl of patience, were the only spiritual
stone upon which he leaned and rested his head. Lastly, by patience our Lord
and Master Christ suffered Banishment, Reproaches, Taunts, and Scourges, until
last of all he went to his death, like a Lamb to the slaughter.

Object. But here now (me thinks) I hear some say unto me; how may we get
and obtain this spiritual Armor of proof, this Pearl of Patience: which is
so needful and gainful a grain.

Answ. First, by laboring to be furnished with Faith toward God. For that
whosoever does know perfectly, and is sure in his heart by Faith, that God who
is the Lord of all haps and mishaps, of prosperity and adversity, of health
and sickness. Life and death is pacified, and fully reconciled with him by
Jesus Christ, so that he cannot possibly be deprived of eternal salvation;
to such a true believing Christian man, there can be no cross so sharp,
bitter, and grievous unto him, as can possibly bring him out of patience. But
by faith he shall still obtain and keep this precious Pearl and Jewel of
patience, as in James 1.3. The trial of your Faith works patience; the which
faith, though in this life it be little and weak in the best, and dearest of
Gods children here: and in time of trial and affliction begin to draw
back, and prove like to a brand that has but little fire in it: yet ought we
not to despair, but to remember that the Lord Jesus will not quench, but
increase it: so as we do but pray with the blessed Apostles, O Lord increase
our Faith, Luke 17.5. And with the Father of him that was possessed, Lord, we
believe, help our unbelief, Mark 9.24. Secondly, sound hope, which is the
Daughter of a true faith, makes men to be patient, when as they hope and
trust for honor, and reward after all their sufferings, as in To. 8.25. If we
hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. Thirdly,
faithful and fervent Prayer makes men to be patient: for that in Mat. 7.7.
he has promised, do but ask and have, etc. And if experience proves this
much unto us, that when once we have but opened our needs and griefs to our
friends, we do afterward feel a certain ease in our selves, so that our former
pain and grief is somewhat remedied and taken away; O then much more comfort,
and ease shall we find from God, to the quieting and settling of our minds, by
the opening of our griefs and complaints unto God in humble Prayer. Fourthly,
diligent reading, searching, and seeking into Gods most holy, and blessed Word,
helps much unto patience, wherein he does set before our eyes his most sweet
and loving promises, as in John 16.33. These things have I spoken unto you,
that in me you might have peace, in the World you must suffer tribulation. But
be of good comfort, I have, etc. In Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of
trouble, I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me: with such like gracious
promises, which we ought daily to seek, and search in his Sacred word, never
ceasing to laud and praise his holy Name, in that in these our days and times
he has made us rich partakers of these most sweet and infallible comforts for
our souls, in his Word and Gospel: which Word we ought all to believe,
receive and obey, even as though we heard the immediate voice of God himself
from Heaven, speaking all such things as we hear out of the same. Fifthly, and
lastly, a true love waxing and sprinkling out of faith, will work in us this
worthy grace of patience; in Genesis 29.20. It is said that Jacob served seven
years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a few days, because he loved
her: So likewise, whosoever truly loves God, he will bear and take most
patiently whatsoever trials and troubles God shall lay upon him; and whatsoever
here he suffers for Christ his sake, it shall be easy unto him. So that
still he will be ready to run after him, through all manner of ways be
they never so rough, until such time as he may come at last to perfect and
eternal rest in him.

And so I come from our Apostles Direction, with patience the race that is set
before us. The last part of this my Text, which is his Demonstration: drawn ab
exemplo Jesus Christi, in these last words: Looking to Jesus. Not looking to the
World, Quia mundus deficiet: because that the World will forsake and leave us,
and we must leave the World, we cannot tell how soon, as in Prou. 27.1. Boast
not thy self of to morrow, for thou can not tell what a day may bring forth.
Nor yet looking to our own rebellious flesh; Quia care irficiet: our flesh
will infect and poison our souls; so that if we live after the flesh, we
shall dye, Romans 8. Verse. 13. Nor yet looking to Satan, Quia Diabolus
interficiet; The Devil will destroy us, walking about continually like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8. but, as it is here in
this my Text; Looking to Jesus: Quia reficiet: for that he will ease us, he
will refresh us, he will direct us.



The Reason for proof and confirmation of this my last Lesson, for brevity
shall be but one; drawn Ab ipsissima vita Jesus Christi: because that in his
life, he both was, and is the Lord of all Virtues: and therefore he says thus
to all his Disciples: Discite a me: Learn of me, Mat. 11.29. and sequimini me:
follow me.

For where in all the whole World can we sooner fiud true Humility, perfect
Charity, Sobriety, Patience, Obedience, and Prayer without Example, with all
other co-adjoyned, and allied Virtues, then in Christ his life? of whose life
Saint Augustine writes thus. Thou have O Christian Soul (says he) in the
life of Christ alone, a most Celestial Medicine to help all thy defects. For
what Pride is there in thee, that his Humility cannot abate? What Wrath and
Anger, that his Gentleness cannot lenifie? What Covetousness, that his
Poverty cannot salve? What benummednesse of thine heart, that his Love cannot
inflame? And as Christ his life is a most Celestial Medicine for all the
Defects and Diseases of our Souls; so is it a most absolute Rule or Square, of
most perfect Discipline for our lives. For where I pray you, can we behold such
a President without parallel of Humility, Charity, Patience, Chastity,
Obedience, Sobriety, and generally, and in a word of all Virtues, then in the
life of Christ? Where is there true Wisdom more to be found, then in the
Doctrine of Christ? Where true Fortitude, then in the Death and Passion of
Christ? Where true Clemency, then in the Mercy of Christ? Where true Humility
then in the obedience of Christ? Where true Charity, then in the forgiveness
of Christ? What, I pray do we learn by his base lying in the Manger at
Bethlehem, and by his poor bringing up in a mean Hostage at Nazareth, but an
utter contempt of this wicked World? What learn we by his Exile into Egypt,
and by his Birth in the days of cruel Herod, but patient suffering hereof
Persecution? What learn we by his Fasting in the Wilderness, the Austeritie
of his life; and conflict with Satan? But how to be able to withstand all
Temptations? What learn we by all his Contumelies, and Reproaches offered unto
him by his own Countrymen the Jews: calling him a Blasphemer, a Seducer of
the people; and a friend of Publicans and Sinners: but still to possess our
souls by Patience? What lastly learn we, by his most hearty Prayers to God
his heavenly Father for his most bloody Persecutours (yea, even in the bitter
pangs of death upon the Cross) but a Lesson of Charity. If we speak of this
World, and of worldy things: Who ever respected them less then he? But if we
speak of heaven and of heavenly things, who ever tended and tendered them more
then he? If we speak of Alms, where ever was there such an Almesgiuer heard
off as he, who freely gave his own body and blood to refresh the hungry? If we
speak of Bountifulness, where ever was there so bountiful a giver as he,
who gave Paradise it self to a sinful Suter, only upon the very first motion
made unto him? Finally, what Grace I pray you can any Christian man's heart
desire, which is not to be found with much spiritual delight in the life of
Christ? Or what any one Virtue can we wish, but that in him we may evidently
see, a most lively Idea, or Image of the same? Thus has our Lord and Master
Christ done his part, and conformed himself unto us: and what now remains on
our parts, but that we strive to conform our selves to him, Who is the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, John 14.6. The Way without erring, the Truth without
failing: the Life without fading: the Way by Example, the Truth by Promise,
Life by Reward. In the way of Life, (which is, The Christians Race) whom may
we more safely follow, then the way it self? They cannot go amiss, whose
Guide is the Way: they cannot err, whose Director is the Truth: they cannot
perish, whose Preserver is the Life.

And therefore evermore in this our Religious Race, we must look to Jesus;
but not to his Miracles to be Imitators of them: For that, Quae supra nos nihil
ad nos: these all are far above our abilities: being evident Testimonies of his
Deity: but only to his Virtues, to be followers of them. For behold, he never
commanded us; saying, Learn of me to fast forty days and forty nights: to
walk upon the waters, to cast out Devils, to raise the Dead, etc. But learn of
me to be meek, and lowly, to love your enemies, to suffer affliction, etc. The
old Eagle for to learn her young Ones to fly, does often flutter and houer
over them: So our Master Christ to teach us how to live, both by his Precepts,
and Examples of Piety, does daily flutter and houer over us in this present
life. In John 13.15. When our Savior would persuade his Disciples and
followers unto Humility and Love; he says, Dedi vobis exemplum, etc. I have
given you an Example, that you should do as I have done to you. And in the 1.
of Pet. 2.21. When as Saint Peter would persuade us to patient Suffering, he
says; CHRIST also suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we should
follow his steps. And in 1. Cor. 11. Verse 1. When Saint Paul would incite the
Corinthians for to follow him, he tells them plainly that his meaning was,
that indeed they should follow CHRIST; saying, Be ye followers of me even as
I follow Christ. And in Ephesians. 4.32. When as the same Apostle would persuade
the Ephesians, to forgive one another, he says; Forgive ye one another, as
CHRIST forgave you. And finally in the 1. of Ioh. 2.6. Saint John lays down
this point of Doctrine most plainly unto us, saying; He that abides in him,
ought himself to walk, even as he walked, still looking to Jesus; even as
Sailors do to their Stern, and as Runners to their Goal. And thus Ab
ipsissima vita Christi, I prove the truth of this my former Doctrine, that in
Running of this our Religious Race, the holy Life of our Lord and Master
CHRIST, must be our Celestial Card and Compass, it must be our only
level and our line for to guide us by.

First, Use is of reprehension to check, and sharply to rebuke the
Spiritually blind, (I mean the ignorant Papists) of these our days and
times, who in stead of their looking unto the life of JESUS, and to his
Precepts, Practice, and Presidents, as this our Text does teach them: look
either to the Pardons, and Indulgences of the holy Father the Pope, or else to
the Diabolical and damnable rules, of his Jesuits (those Iebusites) his
Seminary Priests: preferring most grossly, the rules of his Franciscan and
Benedictine Friars, etc. before this one only most excellent rule of the life
of Christ: or else they look altogether to their own Merits and Works, which
will utterly deceive them at the last, if they renounce not all these, and
look only unto Jesus. For that of the first they are taught by JESUS
himself; That they are but blind leaders of the blind, and if the blind lead
the blind they both shall fall into the Ditch. Math. 15.14. And of their
second, which are our own good works, we are taught out of his most blessed
Book: that Opera nostra per se, nihil mereri possint: the best good Works
that here we can do, deserve rather damnation then salvation in themselves.
First, Quia non sunt nostra, sed Dei opera in nobis. Not our own, but the
works of God in us, as in 1. Cor. 4.7. Quid habes quod non accepists. If a
good Thought, this is Grace infused; if a good Word, this is Grace effused; if
a good Work, this is Grace diffused. Secondly, Quia non sunt gratuita, sed
debita. Not free at our own pleasures to do, or else to leave undone, but
which we must do by bounden duty: as in Luke 17.9, 10. Verses. Thirdly, Quia
non snnt perfecta, sed imperfecta. Not perfect, but full of infinite
imperfections: as in Romans 8.23. We have here but only the first fruits of the
Spirit, and an earnest penie only, and no more. Fourthly and lastly, Quia non
sunt pura, sed multis peccatis sunt permixta. They are not pure, but like
poluted Cloutes. Esaias 64.6. Verse.

So that Eternal life, which we look for in the end of our lives, is not
(...) Debitum, a Debt, or Duty which our God does owe us: but (...) Donum, the
free Gift of our God: as in Romans 6.23. Eternal life is the gift of God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. So that notwithstanding all our own good
Works, yet we must look to Jesus; And only to his Active and Passive
works, which he alone has both done, and endured for us. Concluding with
that Learned Father Saint Austen. Quod meritis quidem nostris damnamur, sed non
saluamur, nisi tantum meritis Jesus Christi. By our own good Works we are
damned, but cannot be saved at all, save only by the Merits and good Works
of our Lord and only Savior JESUS.

Object. But here now me thinks I hear some ignorant Papists say: If we are
not saved at all by our own good Works? Why then is life Eternal styled
Merces, our wages, or our hyre. Math. 20.10. Which is evermore paid amongst
men for their Works sake?

I answer, the wages which is so paid amongst men, is merces Legalis, a Legal
wages or hyre: but this of Eternal life from GOD, is merces Euangelica, an
Evangelical hyre: not merces debita, a deserved hyre, as the Legal is: but
only indebita, altogether undeserved: and yet most truly an hyre, for these
two causes. First, Ob consecutionem, because it follows after our good
Works, although freely given us of Gods favor in Christ. And secondly, Ob
promissionem, because that God himself has Promised it unto all his Saints.

And thus, as most excellently says Saint Austen. Non debendo, sed permittendo
Deus se fecit debitorem. Our good God is now become a debtor unto us, not of
any duty that he owes us at all, but only out of his most Gracious promise,
which he has openly made unto all his Elect. Be ashamed therefore! O ye
ignorant Papists, of all your best good works that you can do, and
notwithstanding all these, yet Oculo fidei, with the Spiritual eye of a lively
Faith, learn and labor with our Apostle in this short Race of your lives,
still to look unto Jesus. In quo omnia habemus. In whom alone we have all
things necessary to Salvation, as Saint Ambrose says; Whose blessed Birth,
was and is our new Birth; whose Victory over the Tempter, was our Triumph; his
Labors, our Peace and quietness; his Prayers, our Intercession; his Poverty,
our Riches; his Soars, our Salues; his Wounds, our Medicines; his
Righteousness, our Merits; and lastly, his Death, our Life.

My second and last use of this my last Instruction, raised from these last
words: Looking to Jesus. Is of admonition to warn us all, in the Running of
this our Religious Race, (wherein every true Christian is a Runner:) that we
may so run indeed, as to enjoy the prize, which is Eternal life with Christ
in Heaven, in our day of Death. Let us now make Christ our only Mark, our
Copy, Goal, and Guide: both in believing, and in living as we ought to do.
So that first, if we would know what we ought to believe, let us look to
Jesus: who is made unto us of God his Father, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30. And who alone is both the Alpha
and Omega, the beginning, and the end, the first and the last of our
Redemption. Revel. 22.13. There being none other Name given under Heaven,
whereby we can be saved, but only the Name of JESUS. Act. 4.12. Secondly, if
we would know how we ought for to live, and lead our Lives here, let us
look unto Jesus. First, for that the most Holy life of Jesus, whiles here he
lived and remained upon Earth, both was, and is, Omnium virtutum perfectissima
idea: The most perfect Pattern of all true Virtues. Insomuch, that whereas
Enoch is commended in the sacred Scriptures for his Piety: Abraham for his
Faith, and Perseverance: Job for his Patience: Isaac for his Celestial
meditation: Joseph for his Chastity: Moses for his Meekness: Phinea for his
Zeal: Samuel for his uprightness: Tobias for his Mercy: Daniel for his
Prayers and Devotion: and lastly, Solomon for his Wisdom; Yet behold though
we put all these together, even as a Cloud of witnesses, the only example of
this our Jesus is in stead of them all. These holy Men having all of them but a
measure of Grace: whereas the Son of Man alone had Grace above measure.

And therefore he is styled Sanctus Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies, as in Heb.
9.3. No marvel, for as in the most Sacred place, was contained the Golden
Censer; the Arc of the Testament; the Golden Pot that contained Manna; the Rod
of Aaron, which being dead, budded again; and the wings of the Cherubins
ouershadowing the Mercy Seat. So in CHRIST alone, is contained that Arc of
the Evangelical Covenant, betwixt God and us; together with the Censer, which
is the acceptance of the Prayers of the Saints; and the Golden Pot, which
contains the Manna; to wit, the blessed Sacrament: and Aarons dead Rod that
budded again; which is the hope of our Resurrection: and lastly, the two
Cherubins that look face to face; which are the two Testaments, the Old and
the New, looking to that one Mercy seat, which is, this our JESUS; Whom Esaias
calls the Prince of Peace. Esa. 9.6. Aggat, the desire of the Nations. Aggai.
2.8. Malachi, the Son of Righteousness. Mal. 4.2. And lastly, the Angel
Gabriel JESUS. Math. 1.21. that is, a Savior: who alone shall save all his
people from their sins.

And secondly, let us look unto this our Jesus, for that Omnis Christi actio
nostra est institutio; Every action of our Lord and Master CHRIST, it is our
instruction. And therefore to whatsoever Christian duty, he has exhorted us
in his Word, as our principal Teacher. In the very same he has also gone
before us for our imitation, as a most perfect obseruer, evermore living as he
taught. In Math. 5.3. as he taught us in his Word, to be poor in Spirit. So
in his life, who ever poorer then he; who became from being equal with his
Father in Heaven, far lower then the Angels; yea, a very scorn of men and
outcast of the people? In Math. 11.29. as he taught us in Word, to be meek
and lowly. So in deed, who ever more meek then he, who was as a Sheep before
the Shearer, not once opening his mouth? In Math. 5.4. as he taught us to
Mourn and heartily to Lament. So who indeed ever mourned and lamented, as he
did: for that as in Heb. 5.7. In the days of his Flesh, he offered up prayers
and supplications, with strong Crying and Tears, unto him that was able to
faue him from Death? In Math. 5.6. as he taught us to hunger, and thirst after
Righteousness. So in this, who ever hungered and thirsted more then he, who
gave his Life for the Righteousness of many? Last of all, as in Math. 10.37.
He has taught us in Word, to leave all for his Love. So first he left all for
the Love of us, when he left his Kingdom and his Throne in Heaven. Thus you
see, as he taught us by his Word, so was he in like manner our Forerunner by
his Works; still leuelling and laying out unto us the way wherein we should
walk, which leads unto Life, whose way if in this Life we labor to make
ours, then shall his joys be our joys in the Life to come.

Wherefore generally from hence forward, in all our sayings, and our doings,
let us ever look unto this our JESUS: so that when we do speak, let us
think how he has spoken: and when we keep silence, let us think of his
silence: and in all our Actions let us look to him for our Imitation, seeing
that his whole life was an Instruction for our lives: who had Modesty in his
Countenance, Gravity in his Behavior, Deliberation in his Speeches, Purity
in his Thoughts, and Righteousness in all his doings.

When Mariners upon the main Sea, do want marks to direct them by in their
course of sailing, they then take their mark (which is the surest) from the
Heavens: in like manner, for us all that are Runners in this Race, our surest
mark to direct us by, is to look up to JESUS, whose habitation is in Heaven:
which will preserve us safely betwixt Silla, and Charibdis, Presumption and
Desperation, all our whole journey, unto the port of Paradise, whom truly to
follow, as to know, is everlasting Life. Every one of us I know, would most
willingly have and enjoy this Jesus in the Life to come, and yet many of us now
make no Conscience to follow him in this present Life. But let us all assure
our selves, that unless we be his Disciples, and faithful followers now, we
shall never be triumphant Christians with him in his Kingdom.

And therefore this our JESUS, is Rubicundus and Candidus, White and Ruddie,
Cant. 5.10. So must we also (beloved) be not only Ruddie by the application of
his Passion, but also White by the daily imitation of his most Sanctified life
and conversation: knowing well, that as a Learned Father says; Non solum
Christi Passio est nostrum meritum, sed etiam Christi actio sit vitae nostrae
exemplum. Not only CHRIST his Passion is our Merit: but also his most Holy and
Virtuous life must be our Example. Who has commanded us, saying: Sequimini
me, Follow me. Luke 9.23.

It was said of Caesar, that in his greatest Attempts, he used not the word of
Authority, Ite, Go ye, but after a better manner, and more loving: Eamus,
Let us go. Which was most true in this our Master CHRIST before all others,
who as we find ever led the way himself before his Disciples, in all
Holiness of Life, in all Trials and Tribulations, in all Conflicts and
Temptations, which are here wont to arise in the life of Man. And therefore
our Apostle wills us here, To run with Patience the Race that is set before
us, looking to Jesus.

The which, that from henceforth we may do, let us evermore most carefully
keep and observe, these four Spiritual steps or degrees in this our
Religious Race. First, Mature, to begin betimes: for that as in Lament. 3.27.
It is good for a man that he bear the Lords yoke in his Youth. Secondly,
Propere, To make have: for that Mora trahit periculum, Delays are dangerous.
Thirdly, Recte, To keep on carefully in this way: for that as in Esaias 30.21.
This is the way, walk in it: turn not aside either to the right hand or to
the left. And fourthly, Constanter, To continue to the Goales end: for that as
in Romans 2. He which overcomes, and continues unto the End, shall not be
hurt of the second Death.

And these four former Steps or Degrees, that in Running of this our appointed
Race, we may now the more happily and comfortably keep and observe, we must
fully and faithfully resolve with our own selves, of these six particular and
principal Points. First, that we have never Run far enough here.
Secondly, that our only aim and mark, must be this JESUS. Thirdly, that we
must forget all our Ground that is behind us: that is, all those steps which
we have trodden in. Fourthly, that we must daily endeavor our selves to that
which is before: which is to the practice of those Christian duties, that we
have left undone. Fifthly, that we must cast off all impediments in this Race.
And last of all, That when we have run here as fast, and as far as
possibly we can, yet that our Reward and Crown is in Heaven. To the which, our
Lord JESUS bring us all, Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

