THE BADGES OF CHRISTIANITY. OR, A Treatise of the Sacraments fully declared
out of the word of God:

Wherein the truth it self is proved, the doctrine of the reformed Churches
maintained, and the errors of the church of Rome are evidently convinced: by
pervsing whereof the discreet Reader may easily perceive, the weak and unstable
grounds of the Roman religion, and the just causes of our lawful separation.

Divided into three BOOKS:
1. Of the Sacraments in general. 2. Of Baptism. 3 Of the Lords Supper.
Hereunto is annexed a Corollarie or necessary advertisement, showing the
intention of this present work, opening the differences among us about the
question of the Supper, discovering the Idolatry and divisions of the Popish
Clergy, and unmasking the insolent bragging of the late Warn-word, touching
the supposed and pretended unity thereof.

By WILLIAM ATTERSOLL, Minister of the Word of God.

1. Cor. 12, 13. For by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether
we be Jews or Graecians, whether bond or free, and have bin al made to drink
into one spirit. August. tract. 80 in Johan. 13. Accedat Verbum ad elementum,
et fit sacramentum; that is, Join the word of Christ's institution with the
outward sign, and thereof is made a sacrament. Printed by W. Iaggard, dwelling
in Barbican, 1606.

To the right Worshipful Sir John Shurley, Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace in the County of Sussex: Grace and peace in Jesus Christ.
RIght woorshipfull, it is not unknown, that fundry means have from time to
time been offered and used, for the reclaiming and recovering of such as
dangerously follow the spirit of error, and daily reuoult to the Romish
religion, which has been advanced by tyrany, defended by lies, and is now
sought to be restored again by trecheries and rebellions. But notwithstanding
the many means which heretofore have been wisely practiced, we see of late
the adversaries of the grace of god as a pestilent brood of vipers mightily to
increase and multiply, sending abroad swarms of their Jesuits and Seminary
Priests, not only to infect the people of the land with the leaven of false
doctrine, and to sow their darnel in the lords field, but to seduce them from
their allegiance and to stir up sedition: for the lessening of whose number
and suppressing of their power, nothing is more necessary then to establish a
godly and learned ministry in every congregation. And howsoever wholesome laws
have been enacted, penalties increased, conferences with them used,
disputations offered, their books answered, and sundry other ways taken by
magistrates and ministers: yet we shall never attain the end of our desired
hopes, until every church have a learned and painful Pastor to be resident
and remaining among them. For albeit Antichrist in this noble kingdom has
long since received a notable foil and fall, and the purple whore been
dismounted from her usurped dignity: yet this monster, having taken this deadly
wound, will be always looking back, and seeking to set his footing again
in this realm, if good corn be pulled up and the weeds suffered to grow, or
if the strongest pillars bearing up the house be removed, and rotten posts
set to under prop it, and unless he be quelled and conquered by the preaching
and publishing 2 These: 2
of the gospel of Christ. Therefore Christ our Savior, having sent out the
70. disciples into every Luke. x, 1
city and place, whether he himself should come, to prepare the hearts of
the people, after their return said unto them, I saw Satan like lightning fall
down from heaven. And the Apostle declares, that when the lord Jesus led
captivity captive Ephe: 4, `8
he gave gifts to men, and ordained pastors and teachers for the gathering
together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ. And until this holy order and ordinance of
Christ, To. 1, 16
which is the power of god to salvation unto all that believe, be set up: we
can conceive no hope how the ignorant should be instructed, and the seduced be
regained out of the hands of such deceitful woorkmen, as under a color of
conversion of the land, do seek the utter subversion of the church and common
wealth. Hence it is that the Jesuits who have gotten the dominion over the rest
of that generation, spare no labor, refuse no pains, let pass no practice by
word or writing, to effect their purposes. In regard of whose unweariable
diligence, it cannot be denied, but many of us have been too slack and
slothful in resisting the approach of these violent intruders. For whiles we
preach the word of (...), 18
reconciliation, even Christ crucified, and build up our people in the doctrine
which is according Titus 1, 1
to godliness, we do not bend our forces (as we ought) to surprise and
suppress the common adversary. Whiles we sow the lords field with good
corn, we suffer Mat 13, 25
the envious man to scatter his tares: accounting it sufficient to teach the
truth to the (...) pet, 5, 2
flock dedending upon us, and esteeming it better service to god to save one
soul, then to overthrow and destroy many adversaries. Not much unlike to
Scipio African the Roman captain, who (as Plutarke witnesses) was oftentimes
wont to say, that he had rather save the life of one Roman citizen, then to
kill and conquer a thousand enemies. But it is the duty of a Plutar. in vita
(...).
good builder, not only to rear up the work in hand, but to remove the
rubbadge and relics that hinder the building. It is the duty of a good
husbandman, not only to sow his field with good seed, but to pluck up the
weeds and gtub up the thorns that choke the corn. It is the duty of a good
1 cor. 3, (...)
watchman, not only to see to them in the city, but to descry and discover
the enemy. It is the duty of a painful shepherd, not only to feed the sheep
but to follow and find out the foot steps of the wolf. Here upon the Apostle
Paul exhorts the elders of Ephesus Ezeck 33
to take heed to themselves and to all the flock, whereof the holy ghost had
made them overseers, to feed the church of god which he has purchased with
his own blood, because after his departure, grievous woolues should enter
in, not sparing the flock, but speaking perverse things, to draw desciples
after them. If then the enemies of god and his people be vigilant and
watchful, to seduce the simple and to subvert religion: how careful and
cheerful ought we to be, not only to teach the people committed to our
charge, but to resist with hand and heart all those that undermine the good
estate of the church among us. Like unto the people of god after the return
from captivity, who did (...), 4, 17
build the wall with one hand, and held their swords and weapons in the other.

For this cause I have put in writing this treatise following, containing the
doctrine of the Sacraments, being the ordinances of god and the badges of
christians, whereby all discreet and indifferent men may perceive the truth of
them clearly opened out of the word of God, as also the gross errors and
palpable heresies maintained by Antichrist and his adherents, with sundry
other points of doctrine serving to teach, to convince, to correct, and to
instruct in the sacraments as are severally discussed and largely handled in
the treatise following: all which, for special causes and considerations, I
here offer unto your Worship, and puplish under the shield and shadow of your
patronage, in respect of your Worcester, in respect of my self, and in respect of
others; of which three, somewhat I will say briefly.

First, because it being the sum and substance of (...) Sermons delivered
upon the beginning of the tenth chap. of the former epistle to the Corinthians,
you vouchsafed to be an hearer thereof For as god has given me my calling,
where your Worcester. have your dwelling: so by your. own presence and good example
attending to the work of the ministry, as to the word of god, you have
countenanced and encouraged many others, whose praise is in the church, to come
into the holy assemblies of the Saints with reverence, and with the affection
of Iacoh, who feared and said Gen, 28
How fearful is this place, this is none other but the house of god, this is
the gate of heaven. This is the way to true worship, to atte^d to his word
which he has magnified Psa. 138,
above all names. This is the path that leads to true honor, to follow the
footsteps of virtue, as the Heathen (...) in one of his Satyrs, Iuuenal. li.
3. Saty. 2


Tota licet veteres exornent undique cerae
Atria, nobilit as sola est, at que vnica virtus.
This the Gentiles by the divine spirit and light of nature saw: and hereunto
gives witness the word of god, which the prophet declares to Eli, 1 samuel 2
Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be despised.
Vouchsafe therefore now to hear me writing, whom before you heard speaking.
And it is mine earnest desire, that all those, which were the daily auditors of
this doctrine, would now afresh examine themselves, and take an account of
their memories, to see what was long ago forgotten, which here again is newly
published. Whereby we shall learn, how easily good things (especially such
things as accompany salvation) do slip from us, and by the tentations of Satan
become fruitless. Besides, the doctrine here delivered is after a sort a plant
of your own setting, and fruit of your own laboring: so that it
acknowledges it self due of right unto your self, flying unto you as to a
sanctuarye and city of refuge, and seeking harbor against the barkings and
bitings of the malicious and enuyous, of whom the wise Philosopher speaks
Male de te loquuntur, been nesciunt loqui: faciunt non quod mereor, sed quod
solent. Quibusdam enim canibus sicinnatum est, vt (...) pro feritate, Senecade
remed for (...).
sed pro consuetudine latrent: that is, Such speak their pleasure of thee, as
have not learned to speakwell: they do, not what I do deserve, but what
themselves are wont. For this is the property of many curs, they baul and bark
rather of custom, then of any curstness.

Secondly, I offer it unto you, to testify a thankful heart for your kindness
and curtesey received at your hands, not only such as is in the open view of
the world and as it were publicly recorded in the minds and memories of many
men living, but such as I have privately enjoyed, and which without the most
heinous and horrible kind of unthankfulness I cannot forget or pretermit. For
albeit, he that either denies, or disembleth, or requiteth not a benifite, be
accounted worthily unthankful, according to the opinion of * the same Seneca.
Multa sunt genera ingratorum, vt furum, homicidarum: quorum vna culpa est,
coeterum in partibus variet as Senec. de Benef. lib 3 cap 1
magna. Ingratus est, qui benificium accepisse se negat, quod accepit. Ingratus
est, qui dissimulat. Ingratus, qui non reddit. Ingratissimus omnium qui oblitus
est. Ileaue therefore this testimony to posterity of my remembrance of your
manifold favors, and cannot bury in forgetfulness either your desire to place
me in the charge, whereby the mercy of god I yet abide, or your worthy travel
and labor to effect it before I did affect it, or your approbation of me
before others, making the way easy to obtain my purpose, and finding me out
when I sought not after any profit or promotion.

Thirdly, I presume to dedicate these my simple labors to your Worship, in
respect of others into whose hands they may hereafrer come. For albeit this
treatise be no great book for your Woorships self, who, having your senses
expert and excercised in the things of god, have not need to be taught the
principles of religion: yet shrowding it self under your countenance, and
coming forth under the sasegarde of your protection, many which otherwise
would never vouchsafe to look into it, shall thereby be imboldned and encouraged
to read the same, whereby god may more and more be glorified, his people
instructed, his truth and saving health enlarged and spread abroad. We see in
these last and worst times of the world, wherein iniquity abounds and gets
the upper hand, how this present age on the one side surfetteth with the trash
and rubbish of folish and filthy writings, such as blot, not only paper, but
heaven and earth with their vanity: and on the other side scorneth and scoffeth
at all treatises of religion and devotion. The very heathen in all their
consultations and deliberations * were not wont to prefer profit before
Cicero de offic. lib. 3
pleasure: but now such as mask under the name of Christians, delight rather to
read legends of lies, then books that may build us up in faith and love, so
that we may justly renew the old complaint * of the poet Persius.

O cur as hominam! o quantum est in rebus inane! Persi, sati. 1

Quis leget haec? min'tu istud ais? nemo hercule, nemo.
Vel duo, velnemo, turpe, and miserabile. quare?
Ne mihi Polydamas, et Troiades Labeonem
Praetulerint. Nugae.
Accept therefore, I most humbly beseech you, this small testimony of my
dutiful goodwill toward your Woorship, rather considering the simple mind and
meaning of the giver, then weighing the worth and value of the guifte,
especially seeing that I have given it in charge not to come unto you uncalled,
nor to interrupt your more necessary affairs. The God of heaven and earth
multiply the graces of his spirit upon you and all yours, adding many good and
happy days unto you, and enritching your heart with true pietye, 1 timothy 4, 8
which has the promise of the life present, and that life which is to come.
Thus commending and committing your Worcester: to God and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build further, and to give an inheritance immortal Act. xx,
32
and incorruptible, among all them that are sanctified, I most humbly take my
leave of you. From Isfield the 12. of June, An. 1606.

Your Worships in all christian duties to be commanded, William Attersoll.

Ad Authorem, in libellum suum de Sacramentis G. S. carmen Encomiasticum.
SItua scripta recepta domiretinebis amice,
Publica nec facies; dic mthi, qualis er is?
Imprimit illa pius quae supprimit impius omni:
Ille bonum patriae respicit, iste suum.
Ecce, bonique malique tibi datur optio: sponte
Impius anne velis, vel velis esse pius.
Sis bonus O faelixque tuis; fac publica multis
Sacramenta: Deus iussit, et ipse doces.
Nonne doces iussisse Deum dare bina duobus
Sexibus; ad caenam lotus vt omnis eat?
Carnifices merito condemn as sacrificantes,
Quod christum comedunt, and sine plebe, bibunt.
Ergo age, facta, (...), ne sint contraria dict is,
Vt, cum signa probes publica, scripta neges.
Scriptum de sanct is fieret commune sigillis,
Conuenit vt cunctis fons sacer atque cibus
Da triadi tua scripta Deo tria: Publica sunto.
Publica priuatis sunt meliora bonis.
Vale.

Others in English.
THough fear of shame false-harted men do curb with bit of sins:
From pressing to the Printers press, where fame or shame begins:
Yet let not undeserved shame an harmless Writer fright
From hardest stamp that Man can make, to bring the truth to light.
The Son of God, which once, on earth for man's salvation dyed,
Imprinted had, with Iron printes, his hands, his feet, his side.
Look how he, looking on the Crown of glory, from the skies,
Endured the Cross, despised the shame, with constant settled eyes:
So look to look for io yes to come, for present pains and spites,
If his example followed be on earth by earthly wightes,
Both bloody Jews and Gentels to, this bloody book of life
Did look upon, with scornful looks, as people full of strife.
But glad was Thomas, when he had this holy book in hand:
And saw, and felt the print thereof, though red and rough, as sand.
There might he read his name in print when opened was the book:
Therefore he cried, My Lord, my God, when he on it did look.
Did not the book which Moses wrote, and sprinkled all with blood,
Betoken this most worthy book, containing all our good?
Did not the prophet mean this book, when in our Masters name
He spoke of grauing in his hands the people of the same?
If this be thus; If any then A commentary write
Of all this Book, from point, to point, as truth does it indite:
Who will backbite (but dogged Jews) The writer, with their chaps?
Who, (but the Gentiles woluish brood) will give him any snaps?
If any do, no more ado, but call him by his name
A Dog, a Wolf, or some such be ast: as he deserves blame.
Wherefore, my Friend, which have describd this Book of life and truth,
With treatise on the sacraments, Fit for both age and youth:
Direct it to the Trinity, as three and yet but one:
Thus much thou may with reverence, though he compare with none.
Past all Compar his nature is, his work is, and his word:
Yet does his scripture, with himself comparison afford.
The Sacraments in general, Do like wise give us light,
The everlasting light to see, Deuoide of any night.
But specially the special two, of water, and of blood,
The gospels sacramental twins, and our celestial food.
As for the five, which many make, and match with these amiss,
They want some parts substantial: as well declared is.
He that with even hand and heart will undertake the view
Of seven sacraments shall find, that only two are true.
These three books are, like three topt ship, full fraught with truth, great
store:
The Catechism, like boat does serve, to bring the load to shore.
Let searcher search thy Merchandise, let Printer print, and sell,
Let al men make the best of al: and so, in CHRIST, Farewell.
W. S.

Ad Lectorem libri, G: Atters: de Sacramentis T. H. carmen protrepticum.
ATRI dum tenebras praebent sine lumine SOLES,
AT-TER-SOL radios sparsit vbique suos.
Nec mirum: (...) caelest is luminis author,
Misit in atratum lumina sacra solum.
Alba manet sterilis plerunque, and languidatellus,
Dum pingue est atrum, frugiferumque solum.
Hortulus est, liber hic qui dulces fragrat odores
Sacra dei multa fertilitate ferens.
Ergo leg as (bone lector) et hic, pastor que fidelis
Quisque, dei sacro gramine pascat oues.
Flores ac fructus, fluuios, herbasque salubres,
Quicquid et expect as, hie paradisus hahet.
Sacramenta (precor modo) sacra mente feruntor:
Dilige scriptorem: perlege, scripta:
vale.

A Sonnet by the Same, containing the subject of the book following.
WHat needs an Iuy bush where wine is good?
To paint this book with praise were vainereci-
Come hungry faithful souls, without inuiting, (ting,
Unto a supper of celestial food.
Look look what costly cheer is here addressed
To feed (...) soul. What Is that? my savior slain?
O dismal (...) O doleful bitter pain!
Be not dismayed (...) only are we blessed.
The painful passion, and the bitter grief
Which Christ sustaind (who all the pain endured)
Is sweet to us, because we sinde relief
In that pure blood which has our lines secured.
Who Is ableto express that sovereign good,
Got by the purple tincture of his blood?
O suck apace (poor soul) that cordial vein
By which Christis infusd into thy spirit,
Cling, cling, to him by faith: no popish merit,
Can to thy soul this precious putchase gain.
Then as the outward signs of bread and wine
(Ordained by Christ as signs, his love to seal)
Thy body cheeres: So Christ thy soul shall heal
And hoise it up, at length to bliss divine.
Lo here is the subject of this golden book,
Full fraught with matter, method, doctrine, uses,
All well applied: which shows what pains he took
In the unmasking of the Popes abuses.
Forward (sweet friend) such feasts make many more,
That men may eat, and surfeit in thy store.
T. Harison.

A general Table of the Contents of these three books.
In these 3. Books the doctrine of the Sacraments is handled:
In General: what a sacrament is. Wherein consider two points: (...) Parts.
Set down Outward Inward
Applied
Uses.
In particular concerning Babtisme, Book 2 the Lords Supper, Book 3.

A Table of the principal points contained in the first Book.
The first Book teaches,
That God in all ages has given Sacraments to his church, chap. 1 What a
sacrament is. 1, a visible sign of an invisible and spiritual gra. a herein
consider 2 things. The nature of the^ The parts are twoefold. chapter 3 Outward
parts are four. Minist. chap. 4 he is to so sanctify the outward (...):
Deliver the^ to the receivers.
Word chap. 5 (...). i (...) to warrant the^. A promise (...) to them.
Sign or outward element, chap, 6. receiver c. 7 who must. (...) the outward
sign apply the same.

Inward parts are four. God the father c 9 who Offers christ to al Gives
christ to the believer
The spirit, chap. 10 he seals up the promise, and makes it eff (...).
Christ Jesus, chap. 1 who is the truth and (...) of all sacraments. the
faithful receiver, c. xii (...) christ apylieth him to himself.


the Uses: see this letter b. the uses of a sacrament are three, to strengthen
and confirm faith, chap. 13 (...) God is true in his promises. Many of the
faithful first believed, before they did partake the sacraments.
to be a seal of the (...) chap. 14 these are the articles of agreement,
between God: who promises Forgiveness of sins. Adoption of son nes.
Possession of Heaven.
Man (...) hoe promises, to believe the promises. to love his Brethren Enemies
to perform Obedsence.

to be badges of our christian profession, chap. 15

the number of them. See the letter a the number of them
that Baptism and the Lords supper are the two only sacraments of the New
testament, chap. 16 that (...) is no sacrament, chap 17 that popish penance is
no sacrament chap. 18 that Matrimony is no sacrament chap 19 that Orders are no
sacrament chap 20 that extreme unction is no sacrament, chap, 21



A Table of the contents of the Second Book.
Baptism is the first sacrament wherein
by outward washing of the body once, in the name of the father, the son and
of the holy ghost, the inward cleansing of the soul is represented chap. 1 In
Baptism consider, the parts are twofold chap. 3 Outward parts. Minister
chap. 3 whose duty it is to Sanctify the water Wash the party.
Word of institution, Baptize in the name of the father, of the son, and of
the holy ghost, chapt, 4 Element of water, chap, 5 Receivers are all such as
are in the covenant, chap. 6. Men and women in years, that are in the faith.
Infantes of them, chap, 7

Inward parts God the father chap, 8. who Offers the blood of his son.
Gives Christ to the believers.
Holy spirit chap, 9, who perfourmeth that which is promised in the word.
Christ Jesus, chap 10, ratifieng our Regeneration Remission of sins
Soul cleansed, represented by the body washed, cha, 11

The uses of baptism, are these 3 To show our planting and ingrafting into the
body of christ, cha, 12 to assure us of the remission of sins, cha, 13
Original. Actual.
to teach to die to sin, and live to righteousness, cha, 14.


A Table of the principal points contained in the last Book.
The Lords supper called by (...) names chapter 1, is the second sacrament,
wherein by visible receiving of bread and wine is represented (...) spiritual
communion (...) the (...) and (...) of (...), chapter 2 In this sacra, observe
the work it self where in observe the parts Outward Minist. chap. 3 whose
duty is To take the bread and mine into his hands. to bless and (...) the
words of institution. to break the bread, and pour out then ine. to
distribute the bread and Wine.
The word of institution and promise contained therein, chap. 4 The outward
signs chap. 5 which are Bread Wine
The co^munica^ts chap, 6. whose actions are to take the bread and cupinto
their hands to eat the bread and drink the wine

Inward God the father chapter 8 who offers christ to al comers Gives christ
for the redemtion of the fat.
Spirit: who assures us of the truth of Gods promises ch 9 the body and blood
of christ, prepared to be the lively food of our souls, chapter x the faithful
receiver chap. 1 (...) hose duties are, to apprehend and receive christ and his
benefits. to appropriate and apply him to the soul.


the Uses: see this letter c Uses are three.
to show forth with thanksgiving the sufferings of christ, chap, 12 to teach
our communion and growth in christ, chap. 13 to declare our communion and
growth with our brethren, chap. 14

Preparation to the work See the letter d preparation to the work: consisting
in Examination of our selves, chap. 15 where in weigh two things,
The necessity in respect of Gods presence, with whom we have to do and to
deal. Our own profit, being rightly prepared. Our own practice, in
preparing and taking our ordinary meats. The sacrament it self defiled, by
vnreuerent receiving. the punishment procured, by want of this care.
the parts. the knowledge of God and our selves: especially of the whole
doctrine of the sacraments chap, 16 Faith in Christ: seeing every one
receives so mnch, as he believes he receives, chap. 17 Repentance from dead
works; daily renewed for daily sins. Reconciliation to our brethren. chap,
19.


THE FIRST BOOK of the Sacraments in general, containing the true Doctrine
thereof, overthrowing the errors ofthe Church of Rome, and delivering the
comfortable use ofthem to all the people of GOD.
CHAP. I. Of the agreement and difference between the word and Sacraments.
GOD even from the beginning added unto the preaching of the word God always
gave his sacraments to his Church.
his Sacraments in the Church (as the Scripture teaches) outwardly
representing and vifiblie offering to our sight, those things that inwardly he
performs to us: as Genesis 2, 9.
the tree oflife, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil in the
Garden. After man's fall, when a new necessity was added, in regard of man's want
and weakness: he testified his love and ratified his Covenant by sacrifices
and Ceremonies to our first Parents. He gave the Genesis 6, 14.
Arc to Noah and his sons, to confirm them in the promise which he made to
them, that they should not be drowned with the rest of the world. He added to
Abraham ( Genesis 17. 11.
) the sign of Circumcision, as a seal ( Romans 4, 11
) of the (...) of faith: and to the Israelites he gave the Passover, Manna,
oblations, purifications, the brazen Serpent, the Rock, and such like
spiritual tipes, whereby he assured them of the promise, that God for the
only sacrifice of Christ wrought upon the Cross, would give to all that
believe forgiveness of sins and everlasting life.

Now the world of God may fitly be resembled to writtings and evidences: and
the The agreement between the Word and sacraments.
Sacraments to seals, which the Lord alone sets to his own letters. They
are as a visible Sermon preaching unto us most lively the promises of God: that
as the word we hear does edify and instruct the mind by the outward ears,
so does the Sacraments by the eyes and other senses. First then, that we may
understand the doctrine and nature os the Sacraments: we are to consider, what
the word and Sacraments have in common, and how they agree one with another:
then, what they have peculiar and proper each to other, and how they differ one
from an other. The agreement between them stands in these points. First,
both are ofGod, and instruments which the holy ghost uses to this end, to make
us more and more one with Christ, and partakers of salvation: (...) that God
needs them, or that he is tied unto them (for as he can nourish without meat
and drink, so he can save without word or Sacraments:) but because we need
them, he uses them when he will, and as often as it pleases him. The same
which is published and promised by the word of God, is signified and sealed by
the Sacraments. For they are not a delivering of new promises and articles of
faith, but seal up such as are offered in the word. Secondly, although god use
them as instruments of his grace, yet the especial working and forcible power
of them, is not in them, but depends on God alone: so that we must not think
that whosoever partaketh them is partaker of grace, salvation, for giuenesse of
sins, and everlasting glory, but the virtue of them flows from him only
as from a fountain. A man may hear the word and receive the Sacraments all the
days of his life and be never the better, except God change the mind, open
the heart, enlighten the understanding, cleanse the conscience, and sanctify
the affections to his glory. Thirdly, as the preaching of the word profits
nothing, unless it be understood, applied, and received, but ( Heb. 4. 1.
) tends to judgment: so the Sacraments, except we bring the hand of faith
with us, cannot give us faith nor grace, but tend to our condemnation. Yet, as
the Gospel is always the savor of life unto life of it own nature, and the (
Heb. 4, (...)
) word lively and of comfortable operation, howsoever the unfaithful turn it
to be the savor of death unto death: So the Sacraments cease not in
themselves to be true Sacraments, although they be administered by unworthy
ministers, and received by vnsaithfull people. For man's wickedness cannot
pervert, much less euert the nature of Gods ordinance. Lastly, as the best
seed springs not up and brings not fruit so soon as it is sown, but
lies a time covered in the earth to take rooting: so the fruit reaped by the
word, and benifit received by the Sacraments presently appears not, but
grows and increases at the time appointed of God, who will bless them in
his elect, at what season himself has ordained.

Thus we see what the word and Sacraments have in common, both are instruments
of the same grace, both have their benifit, blessing, and force depending on
God, both require faith to be mingled with them, without which they are
unprofitable, and lastly they profit not by and by at the same moment they are
published, administered, heard, or received: but God afterward works
oftentimes by them in his children to their great comfort, when all fruit to
come by them seemed to be buried. The disciples at the first understood no more
of Christ's resurrection then the unbelieving Jews, when he said, (3) Destroy
Ioh. 2, 19
this Temple, and I will build it again in three days: but they lay it up in
their hearts, and long afterward remember the words he spoke unto them. So
when they saw Christ ryding to Hcirusalem, the multitude spreading their
garments in the way, and cutting down branches ( Mat. 21, 8
) from the trees, the (...) moved, and Children crying in the Temple, Hosanna
the Son of David: they ( Ioh. 12, 16
understood none of those things at the first: But when Jesus was glorified,
then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that they had
done such things unto him. If then at the present time of our hearing or
receuing, we find not nor feel the fruit and comfort we desire: let us not
doubt and despair, but wait on God, who in his own appointed times will make
his own ordinances available to all his servants. Thus much of the things
that are common to the word and Sacraments.

In the next place let us see Difference betvveen the word and sacraments.
what they have proper and peculiar, and so differ one from another. First,
forasmuch as the Sacraments are appurtenances and dependances to the word, and
are applied to this end to seal up our communion with Christ, and our
fellowship one with another: it appears that in men of riper years the
teaching and hearing of the word preached, and the open confession and
profession of faith did go before participation of the Sacraments, as Math. 28.
( Math. 28, 19
) Go, teach all Nations, that is, make them disciples of Christ, gave them to
the faith (as the o word signifies) and then Baptize them. Thus Phillip
Matheteusate.
taught the Eunuch before he baptized him, Act. 8. to whom when the Eunuch
said, ( Acts 8, 36
) What lets me to be baptized? Phillip answered, If thou beleeuest with all
thine heart, thou may: and he said I believe that Jesus Christ is the son
of God. And act. 10 Can any forbid water ( Acts. 10, 47.
) that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well
as we? In deed touching childrens baptizme, there is another especial respect
to be had, of which we shall speak Book. 2 Chap. 6, and 7.
afterward. But touching others, this is in difference between them, that where
as the word was offered even to such as were out of the Church not having
heard of the name of Christ, and none excluded or debarred from the hearing of
it, whether believers or ( 1. Cor 20, 24
) unbelievers, holy, or profane. 1 Cor. 14. No person being an unbeliever or
infidel, was ever admitted to the Sacraments, although he should offer himself
(for that had bin to give ( Mat. 7, 6
) that which is holy to Dogs, and to cast pearls before Swine) but such only
as were instructed in the faith, and had made public confession thereof as
members of the church. An other difference is in the necessity, end, and use of
the one and of the other. The preaching of the word is the ordinarye means and
instrument of the holy ghost to beget and begin faith in us (except God do
deal extraordinaryly, which of us is not to be looked for) and none has
entrance to Christ but by faith: so that men, if they will be saved, must hear
it. But the Sacraments are of another nature, they cannot engender faith in
us: we must bring faith with us, least we partake them unworthily, so that he
which believes, and could not come to the Sacraments, is yet partaker of
salvation. Wherefore the necessity of them is not simply and absolutely so
great, that without exception a man cannot be saved without them: for it is the
contempt, not the want of them that brings danger and damnation. Thirdly, it
may sometimes fall out, that in a visible Church, the word preached may be
found (as an essential note of the Church) without the Sacraments, and yet be
a true Church of God: so that the word may be without the Sacraments, but
the Sacraments cannot be without the word, as a writing may be without a
seal, but not the seal without the writing. Set a seal to a blanke, and is
it not vain, void, and unprofitable? Last of all, the Preaching of the word
rouseth and affects only one of the senses, to wit, the ears, we fee it
not, we touch it not, we handle it not, only we hear the sound thereof:
but the Sacraments are offered to the eyes as well as to the ears, so that we
do even behold Jesus Christ as it were crucified before us, nay they move and
stir up the rest of the senses, whereby we may understand what they bring and
how they avail unto our faith, making us after a sort to handle christ with
our hands, to see him with our eyes, to taste him and touch him with our whole
body. Wherefore, they do How the sacraments are more effectual then the Word.
more seal up then the word, not that God is more true of his promise when he
works by signs, then when he speaks by his word: but in respect of the
manner of teaching and receiving, because by his Sacraments he represents his
promises as it were painted in a Table, Horat. lib. de art poeti. Segnius
irritant animos, demissa per aures, quam quae sut oculis subiecta fidelibus,
etc.
and sets them forth lively as in a picture before our eyes, that we may not
only hear, but see, handle, touch, taste, and even digest them. Again, the
promise of the Gospel is more effectually declared and sealed up by the
Sacraments then by the bare word, not for the substance and matter it self,
but for the manner of working, which is heedfull, perfect, and more effectual:
so as that which we perceive and receive by many senses as hearing and seeing,
is more sure and certain then that which is (...) by hearing only.

Hitherto of the agreements and differences between the word and sacraments,
and we have showed that so soon as god gave his word, immediately he seconded
the same with his Sacraments. The uses which we are to make hereof are Use. 1.
these. First, seeing God contenteth not himself with the word only, but
adds the Sacraments in all Ages and times of the Church, which proceeds
partly through his own goodness, and partly from man's weakness: we ought to
be so far from d^spising the Sacraments, that contrary-wise we must
confess the benifit, use, and worthynesse of them can never be sufficiently
magnified, and commended, nor they with sufficient reverence be received. We
are dull to conceive his promises and slow to remember them, we are full of
doubting and unbelief: we are like to Thomas ( John 20. 25.
) one of the disciples, we will not believe them until in some sort we see
them, and in some measure feel them in our hearts. Wherefore God has ordained
these mysteries and holy actions, to keep in continual memory his great
benifits bestovved upon man, to seal up his promises, and as it were to offer
unto our sight those things which inwardly he performs to us, and thereby by
strengthens and increases our faith through the working of his spirit in our
souls. Seeing then the word is not sufficient, but the Sacraments were added
for further assurance: we must in this behalf consider the great goodness of
God toward us, who does not only give us faith by his word as by his saving
instrument, but has also added to his word, Sacraments or seals of his
promise and grace, that by the lawful use of them he might uphold and
strengthen our faith through his blessed spirit. For in as much as the Lord not
only sent the blessed seed, for the redemption of mankind, for the remission
of our sins, and for the brusing of the Serpents head, but ordained for us
Sacraments to be pledges of his promises, testimonies of his faithfulness,
and remedies of our distrust: we must confess and thankfullye acknowledge the
bottomless depth of gods endless mercy toward us, who vouchsafes to be our
God, to be reconciled to us being vile and miserable sinners, to make a league
and covenant with dust and ashes, and delyuers his only son to suffer the
shameful death of the Cross for us. And withal we must labor more and more
to feel our own blindness, distrust, infidelity, and perverse nature, we
would easily forget this mercy of God, unless it had been continually
represented before our eyes.

Again, seeing nothing is offered and given in the Sacraments Use. 2.
which is not published in the Gospel, seeing they cannot be where there is
no word, and seeing the same Christ with all his benifits is propounded in
both: it meets with a common corruption and lamentable practice among many
professors, that desire and crave, especially in sickness and extremety, often
to come to the Lords table, but esteem little of the preaching of the word,
and that seem to languish with a longing after the Sacrament, but never mourn
and lament for want of the word: which is as great an error and madness, as
if one should ever look upon the seal of his writings, but never regard the
conueiance of his estate. Is there not one God, the author of both? Is there
not one spirit, that seals up his promises by both? Is Christ divided; that
speaks evidently unto us in both? How is it then, that many desire the
Sacrament of the Lords supper and seem to pine away through want thereof, who
never wish or regard the preaching of the Gospel, which is the food of the
soul, the keye of the kingdom, the immortal seed of regeneration, and the
high ordinance of God to save those ( Romans 1, 16 and 10, 14.
) that believe? And whence proceeds it, but from palpable ignorance in the
matters of God and their own salvation, to be much troubled that the Sacrament
is not brought unto them, and yet never conet to have a word of comfort spoken
to them in due season. Let all such persons understand, that as the minister (
Act. 15, 21 and 19. 4. and 2. 42, 46.
) is charged from God to teach every saboth day, and to preach the word in
season and out of season: to deal the bread to the hungry, and to gie unto
every one in the family his portion: so is it required of all the people to
desire the sincere milk of the word of God that they may grow thereby, which,
howsoever it be to them that perish, foolishness; yet to such as are called (
1 Cor. 1, 24.
) it is the wisdom of God and the power of God. Wherefore, we must not make
account that there is less danger in neglecting the word of God, then in
neglecting the Sacrament of his last supper: but we must take heed, that while
we willingly desire the one, we do not willingly despise the other. For we
must carefully consider, that as the Sacrament is a visible word, so the word
is a speaking Sacrament: and as God lifts up his voice unto us in the one, so
he reaches out his hand unto us in the other. We must as well hear when he
calls, as receive when he offers. Now, by his word preached, he calls: by
his Sacraments administered, he offers his graces unto us: and, as we must
have ears for the one, so must we have hands for the other.

CHAP. 2. What a Sacrament is.
IN every treatise and discourse, it is necessary first to know Arist. poster.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
whether a thing be, before we consider what it is. We have heard before, that
there are Sacraments and ever have been in the Church of God. Now then let us
consider what they are, that Cicero de offic. lib. 1.
first the matter handled, may be defined. For in vain we shall reason and
speak of the Sacraments, unless we understand what a Sacrament is. But besore
we set down any description of it, it shall not be amiss to speak some what
of the word. The name in so many letters and sillables, is The word Sacrament
is not in the Scriptures.
not indeed in the scripture, no more then the word Trinity, catholic,
Consubstantiall, and such like: which being generally received are not to be
rejected, seeing the doctrine contained under them agrees with the Scripture,
and nothing by them is added to the Scripture. Now as the fathers of the Greek
Church called these holy rites by name of Mysteries, because the substance of
them was only known to the members of the Church, and hidden from others: so
the ancient teachers of the Latin Church, called them Sacraments, in respect
of the affinity and neerenesse between them and a Sacrament. For a Sacrament
properly is that solemn oath in War, by which Soldiers, bound themselves to
their chief Captain. Such a regard had the old Romans in the discipline of
their Wars, that it was cicer. de of fic. Lib. 1.
not lawful for any to kill an enemy, or enter into the battle to fight,
unless he were sworn a Soldier. So when we are partakers of these holy
signs which God has appointed in his Church, by which he bestows upon us
spiritual gifts, A Sacrament properly is the soldiers oath: metapherically the
churches ba^d binding them to God.
we do bind our selves to him, we profess openly his true religion, we vow
to fight under his banner against our enemies: so that they are testimonies and
tokens of the covenant between God and us, that he is our god, and we bind our
selves to be his people, to serve him and no other god. So circumcision was a
seal of Gods promise to Abraham, and a seal of Abraham's faith and obedience
toward god. By them man is bound to God, and God vouchsafes to bind himself
to man. Wherefore, the word sacrament, being translated from the camp to the
Church, from the soldiour to a christian, from a civil use to an holy, let us
see in this sense and signification what it is. Now, the word being borrowed
from wars, is A Sacrament considered 2. ways.
taken two ways: first in a general signification, and may comprehend al
manner of signs, whether natural, or myraculous, or voluntary, which God
commanded men to use, to assure them of the undoubted truth of his promise: as
when he gave to Adam in the Garden, the tree of life to be a pledge of his
immortality, the Rainbow to Noah and his posterity; sometimes he gave them
miraculous signs, as light in a smoking Furnace to Abraham; the fleece wet,
the earth being dry, and the earth wet, the fleece being dry, to Gideon: to
promise and perform victory to Gedeon. In this large acception of the word,
we do not entreat of the Sacraments: we speak properly of those, which God has
left to be ordinary in his Church, to be seals of our communion with Christ,
and of the righteousness which is by faith. A Sacrament What a Sacrament is
thus considered is a visible sign and seal ordained of God, whereby Christ
and all his saving graces by certain outward rites are signified, exhibited,
and sealed up unto us. In this description, we are to consider these 3. things.
First the whole kind or general: secondly, the cause or author thereof: and
lastly the use of this doctrine delivered. Touching the first, whereas it is
said that a sacrament is a visible sign and seal, this is proved and
confirmed in sundry places of the scripture as Genesis 17. speaking of
circumcision, (he says) Genesis 17. 11
It shall be a sign, of the (...) between me and thee. And Romans 4. speaking
of Abraham (he says) Romans 4. 11.
he received the sign of circvmcision as a seal of the righteousness of
faith. Indeed a sign and a seal differ one from another, as the general from
the especial: for every seal is a sign, but every sign is not a seal. A
seal certifieth, assures, and confirms a thing: a sign only shows it:
but a Sacrament does both. It is a sign to signify and represent: a seal to
ratify and assure: an instrument to confer and conueigh Christ with all his
benifits to them that truly believe in him: a pledge unto us of Gods promises:
a visible word, and as a notable glass wherein we may behold Agust. de. doct.
christ. lib. 2. cap. 1.
assured testimonies of Gods eternal favor, and of the riches of his grace
which he bestows upon us. This teaches us to acknowledge, there is more inthe
Sacraments then is seen with the eyes, or felt with the hands: and therefore we
must not conceive vnreueretly of them, nor come negligenly unto them, making
them mere carnal and outward things: but we must think reverently, speak
soberly, receive humbly and penitently these holy mysteries. Again, hereby we
are brought to believe the promises of god: for if the Sacraments be not only
signs of his favor but seals of our faith, can we doubt of his mercy and
good meaning toward us, having left such pawnes and pledges thereof with us,
that we might have assured comfort and comfortable assurance of salvation and
eternal life. Is it not among men matter of assurance, and a note of true
dealing, to have a pledge left with us? But behold God has left unto us two
pawnes of his promises, as it were an earnest-penny that our faith should not
waver. If then his alone word be al suffycient, having a noble addition of the
Sacraments, as of his seals, let us believe his promises, and in all
tentations rest upon them with all confidence and consolation.

Secondly, it is said Sacraments were instituted of God alone.
a sacrament is a divine ordinance. Not any Angel or Arch-angell, not any
Prince or prelat, but only God himself is the author and ordainer of the
Sacraments. This appears by many witnesses out of the word of God, Genesis 9.
13. 14. 15.
I have set my bow in the cloud, and is shall be for a sign of the covenant
between me and the earth: and when I shall cover the earth with a cloud, and
the bow shall be seen in the cloud, then will I remember my covenant which is
between me and you. Where we see, that when God determined to be merciful unto
the world, and never to drown the same with water again as he had drowned it,
he gave them a sign of his promise, to wit, His bow in the clouds. When God
would witness and stablish to Abraham and his seed after him the promise of
his mercy, he ordained a Sacrament to confirm the same Genesis 17. This is my
covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, Genesis 17. 10.
let every man child among you be circumcised. And the Apostle says, I have
received 1. Cor. 11 23
of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you. And Christ himself
instituted Mat. 28. 19.
Baptism, and sent forth his disciples to preach the Gospel. All these
testimonies as a cloud of witnesses do confirm us in this truth, that non has
power and authority in the church to institute a Sacrament, but God only. And
the reasons are apparent. First, the Sacraments belong to the service and
worship of god: now it rests not in man to appoint and prescribe a service of
God, but to retain and embrace that which is taught by him, For Mat. 15. 9.
in vain they worship him, teaching for doctrines men's precepts. Again; the
Sacramental signs have Gods promises annexed unto them, confirming us in the
same, which they could not do, but by the blessyng and benefit of him that
promises: so that God only is able to bestow grace, and he alone can appoint
true signs of grace. For as he only has authority to seal the charter and
pardon, in whose jurisdiction it is to grant it: so likewise God gives the
pledges and tokens of his grace which sheadeth the graces of the spirit into
our hearts. Wherefore, the reverent Sacraments of the Church, none can institute
by his authority, but only God: and hence it is, that the signs have the
names of the things signified. None but Christ himself could say of the bread,
This is my body: none but he could say of the cup, This cup is the new
testament in my blood: none but he, breathing on his Apostles, could say,
Receive the holy ghost: none but he could make the water in Baptism to be the
lauer of regeneration.

Let us see what good and profitable uses arise from this doctrine. First, if
the Sacraments be the ordinances of Use. 1.
God, then they depend not one the worthynesse or unworthiness, fitness or
unfitness, vices or virtues of the minister: but all the efficacy and force
hangs on the holy institution of Christ Jesus. The ministers impiety and
wickedness makes not a nullity of the Sacrament, neither hinders the fruit of
the worthy receiver, no more then the piety and godliness of a faithful
minister can profit an unworthy receiver. Indeed, the Church must endeavor,
that the ministers thereof may be holy and unblameable, according to the
apostles 1. Tim. 3. 2. 3.
rule, but we must not mesure the profit of the receiver, by the person of the
minister. If a thief do steal a sack of corn, we see if he sow it, it
grows up and brings forth increase, because the fault rests not in the
seed which is good, but in the sower which is evil: so does the Sacrament
profit the faithful, howsoever he be unfaithful that does administer it. We
see if the seedeman have foul, filthy, and unclean hands that sows, yet if
the seed be clean, sweet, and fair, it prospers: so the holy things of
God (...) (...) may deliver the good things of God.
cannot be defiled by the corrupt and sinful life of the minister, who
delivers nothing of his own, but dispenses the ordinances of God. Thus we
see, that whether the minister be good or evil, Godly or without Godliness,
an heretic or a Catholic, an Idolater or a true worshipper of God, the effect
is all one, the worthiness of the Sacrament depends not on man, but
proceeds from God, and therefore all such as contemn the Sacraments of God
for the Sacraledge of man, shall bear their condemnation whosoever they are.
The two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were 1. Sam. 2. 22 23.
exceeding sinners against the Lord, yet because the people of Israel abhorted
the sacrifices of God, and trod his worship under their feet, the wrath of
the Lord was kindled against 1. Sam. 3. 11
the whole land, and he denounced such Judgment to come upon them, as
whosoever shall hear thereof, both his ears should tingle. So then, the
offense of the Priest, was no defense of the people: but as the Priests gave
the offense, and the people took it, so God bound them together in the same
Judgment. So we must know, God will not bear the contempt of his ordinances
under any pretense whatsoever of the ministers wickedness and unworthiness,
if his hand be corrupt, let thy heart be vncorrupt; though his sins be his
own, yet the Sacraments be gods: he may minister comfort to thee, though he
bring none to himself, as the workmen that builded the Arc prepared a means
to save other but were drowned themselves, or as the belles though they move
not themselves yet serve to bring others to the exercises of religion, or as
the Scribes that pointed the way to the wisemen, but themselves vonchsafed not
to step out of doors to enquire after Christ. The ears of corn do carry the
corn with the chafe to be purged and cleansed in the barn, and though the
chafe be unprofitable, yet it profits the corn, as the Lantern holds the
candle to give light unto others that are the passengers. This appears by the
words of Christ our savior Math. 23. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moises
seat: Math. 23. 2. 3 Phil. 1. 16. 17 18
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but after
their works do not, for they say and do not. Albeit then, the Scripture
condemns such as give offenses, yet such as take offense are not thereby
justified; let us magnify the ordinances of God, and then we may expect a
blessing at his hands. This is that which the 1. Cor. 3, 6. 7
Apostle teaches 1 Cor. 3. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the
increase: So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
watreth, but God that gives the increase.

Secondly, is God the true and only author and appointer of Sacraments? Then
none must add unto, or Use. 2.
take from the Sacraments instituted by him in the Church, no more then unto
the Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
word it self, Deuteronomy 4. Ye shall put nothing to the word which I command
you, neither shall ye take ought there from, that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. And Revel. 22. 18. 19.
If any man shall Revel. 22. 18. 19.
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written
in this book: and if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. If the
Sacraments were the inventions of men, they might also fitly receive the
additions and subtractions of men: but seeing they are the ordinances of God,
we must be content to have them ordered by God. All Ceremonies therefore and
rites (...) by men, as parts of gods worship, are so many abominations, and
innouations of his service. As God only can graciously promise, so he can
only effectually perform what he has promised. Wherefore, we must condemn
those as guilty of rebellion against God, that bouldly break out either to
devise new Sacraments, or to add and detract from them that God has
ordained. We are commanded to rest in those that he has appointed to the
Church in his word: for as well we may devise a new word, as deliver a new
Sacrament.

Thirdly, we learn hereby, that they which condemn the Sacraments, and
will not suffer them to be of Use. 3.
any force with themselves: and making small account of them do esteem them
as (...), or otherwise abuse them contrary to the institution, will, and
commandment of Christ: all these do grievously sin, not against man, but
against the author of them, that is God who has ordained them, and greatly
endanger their own salvation, 1 Cor. 11. 29
as 1. Cor 11. He that eats and drinks vnworthilye, eats and drinks his
own judgment, because he discerns not the Lords body. If a man contemn or
any way contumeliously abuse the seal of a Prince, he is punished: and
therefore such as scorn and make a mock of the Sacraments, which are the
seals of god, cannot go scot-free, but shall be indighted of high treason
against his majesty.

The last point to be considedered in the discrption of a sacrament is the end
of the^, where it is added, Whereby Christ and all his saving graces by certain
outward rites are signified, exhibited, and sealed up to us. This is proved
directly, the 1 Cor. 10. 19
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
christ? So the Act. 2. 38.
of the other Sacrament. Amend your lives and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ve shall receive the
gifts of the Holy Ghost. And all ye Gal. 3. 27.
that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Our souls are washed in the
blood of Christ: his (...), his resurrection, his sanctification, his wisdom,
his righteousness, his redemption is made ours, all his benefits are ours, as
Christ is ours.

Let us make use of this point, and apply it to our selves. Use. 1.
First, is Christ the sum and substance of all Sacraments? Then the Church of
Rome is here condemned, that say we make the Sacraments bare and naked signs.
God forbid that we should say so, or make them to be so: they are the sure
seals of Gods promises, heavenly tokens, spiritual sigues, vnd autentike
pledges of the grace, and righteousness of Christ given and imputed unto us. The
Sacraments and sacrifices of the old testament were not bare signs.
Circumcision was not Romans 2. 28. 29.
a bare sign, as Romans 2. This is not circumcision which is outward in the
flesh but the circumcision of the heart. And in Christ Col. 2. 11 12.
ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, by putting off the
sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ. Even so
Baptism is no bare sign, it were great blasphemy so to speak: it were very
great iniquity so to think. The grace of God does work with his Sacraments,
and therefore the signs are never received in vain of the faithful and
worthy receiver. The water washes not from sin, the bread and wine feed not
to eternal life: but it is the precious blood of Christ, that does cleanse us
from all sin, and purchases for us all grace, which is the life and the truth
of the outward signs.

Again, is Christ Jesus offered by God the Father in the Use. 2.
right use of the Sacraments? then God does not deceive or delude those that
come unto them. If any that come to the Sacraments, depart without grace,
without Christ, without fruit, the cause is in themselves, the fault is not in
God, for Christ is offered to all: but received only of the faithful.
he offers Christ to all, even to the unfaithful, but they have not hands
to receive him. If a Prince should offer a rich present, and he, to whom it is
offered, have no hand to receive it, he goes away empty. When the Sun gives
light upon the earth, if men shut their eyes and be wilfully blind, they
receive no profit by it. When God offers himself and his graces to us by his
word and Gospel, it we stop our ears and harden our hearts, it turns to be
the savor of death to death: so is it in the Sacraments when we come to them,
God does not feed our eyes with naked, vain, and idle shows, but joins
(...) truth with the outward token, and gives the grace signified with the
sign. If we bring the hand of faith with us, which opens the gate of the
kingdom of heaven for us, Christ is both offered and given to us. But
howsoever the sign be alwaie, inseperably joined with the grace, that is
signified, in respect of God: yet hence it follows not that both of them are
of all received. For the outward sign is offered to the hand, to the senses,
and instruments of the body, which because all bring with them, all are
partakers of the outward parts. But Christ, who is signified by the sign, is
offered to the soul and faith of the receiver, 2. These. 3. 2.
which because many want, they lose the fruit of their work.

Thirdly, if the right receivers, receive Christ, and with him all saving
graces needful to eternal life: then the Use. 3.
presence of ungodly men, that come to the same Sacram. with us and meet us at
the same Table, cannot hinder and hurt us in our worthy receiving. The
unbelievers and unrepentant persons come indeed into the assembly of the
faithful, to hear the word of God read, preached, and expounded, and as they
come without faith, so they depart without fruit: yet their company defiles
not the saving hearer. So is it in the Sacraments I confess it were to be
wished, that the church were pure without spot, and perfect without blemish,
Gal. 5. 12.
and they even cut off that trouble the same: yet sometimes it Revel. 2. 14. 20.
wants that good and Godly severity which is required, to separate such as
may infect with the leaven of their life and doctrine.

Again, as the faith of the wise and worthy receiver, cannot sanctify the
conscience of the Hypocrite and offensive (...): so the infidelity or iniquity
of another, shall not bar the faithful soul from fruitful receiving to his
salvation, according to that Ezekiel. 18. 20
saying, Thorighteousnes of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness
of the wicked shall be upon himself. Every one is to prove and examine
himself, not to enter into the consciences and conuersations of other men: we
shall give an account to our own ways and works, not of the deformities of
others which we cannot reform and redress. Furthermore, as in an Army every
man has his standing, so in the Church every man has his calling: it is not
in the private men are not to meddle with the censures of the church
power of private persons, but of the Governors of the Church to draw out the
censures of the Church against notorious offenders, and therefore in their
slacking and negligence, the people must tolerate that which they cannot amend,
or make a separation or rent in the church, as the manner of some is, disturbing
the peace and quietuesse thereof.

Fourthly, if Christ be offered, given, and sealed up to us in the Sacraments:
then the Sacraments must be holden of Use. 4.
us in great price and estimation, for their profits sake, not lightly to be
regarded, but reverently to be esteemed. They that respect Christ in whom the
tresures of algraces are laid up, must regard the Sacraments of Christ: and
such as reject them, reject christ with all his benefits, which who so does,
sins against his own soul. Lastly, if they be signs Use. 5.
and seals of grace offered: then the Sacraments make not a christian, no more
then the seal gives the purchase or possession. The faithful and the children
of the faithful are true christians, differing from Pagans and Heathen before
they be baptized. And whosoever is not a christian before hereceiue baptism,
baptism can make him none, which is only the seal of the graces of God and
his privileges before received. The word of god and the Sacraments of god are
both of one nature but the word is not able to confer grace, but only to
declare and publish what god will confer, inasmuch as to some it is the savor 2
Cor. 2. 16.
of death to death, therefore also the Sacraments of themselus do not confer and
bestow grace, having it tied unto them, or shut up in them. For if the
Sacraments did actually and effectually give grace, by inherent power and
virtue in themselves: it would follow from hence, that every person baptized is
certainly saved and has his sins remitted, or else that his sins remitted
may return and remain and be again imputed. But when God graciously
pardons sin, Ezekiel. 18. 22.
he remembers it no more. Again we see Abraham was not justified by his
circumcision, he was justified by his faith, for Genesis 15. 6.
Abraham believed god, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: and
afterward he received Romans 4. 10. 11.
circumcision, to be the sign and seal of his justification. Not
withstanding, the Sacraments may be said to confer the grace of regeneration
and remission of sins, How the Sacraments may be said to confer grace.
as they are instruments used of God, and as they are pledges and tokens to
us. They are means to offer and exhibit to the believer, Christ with all his
benefits, whereby the conscience is assured of comfort and salvation, as the
Princes letters are said to save the life of a malefactor, whereas they only
signify to him and others, that it is the princes pleasure to show favor.
Again, they may not fitly be said to give us grace, because the sign
exhibiteth the thing signified: the outward washing of the body is a pledge and
token of the grace of god so that whosoever uses the sign aright, shall
receive forgiveness and life everlasting.

Chap. 3. That the parts of a Sacrament are partly outward and partly inward.
WE have seen what a Sacrament is: now we are to consider in it two things,
first his parts, then his uses: for in handlinge these two points, we shall
see what is the nature of a sacrament. The parts of sacrament (...) are of two
sorts, some outward, open, What are the parts of a Sacraments.
sencible, earthly, visible, and signifying: some are inward, hidden,
spiritual, heavenly, invisible, and signified. For the nature of a Sacrament
is Iren. lib. 4. cont. haeres. cap 34.
partly earthly and partly heavenly. If we had been wholly chrisost. hom. 83.
in math.
a spirit without body, he would give us his gifts (...) without a body: but
seeing we are soul and body he gives v, his Sacraments, that so we may
apprehend (...) gifts by sensible things. The outward part is one thing (...)
the inward part is another thing: the outward is applied to the body, the
inward is applied to the soul and conscience. This division and (...) on of
parts Romans 2. 28. 29.
appears plainly, He is not a Jew which is one outward, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one
within, and the circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter:
where we see, he makes circumcision to stand of 2. parts, part in the flesh
and part in the heart, partly in the spirit and partly in the letter. Heereunto
comes Col. 2. 11.
that saying. (...) are circumcised with circumcision made without hands: so
that there is a circumcision without, and there is an other within by the
virtue of Christ. The same we may say of Baptism there is a baptizing of the
body, and there is a baptizing of the soul: the body is washed with water, the
soul is cleansed by the precious blood of our savior Christ, which is the
hidden and mystical part of the Sacrament. This appears by many examples
recorded in Scripture. Simon the sorcerer, though (...) were baptized with
water, yet his heart was not right in the sight of God, he remained Act 8. 13.
21.
in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, so that albeit he
were baptized, yet he was not regenerated. The (...) were (...) of the 1. Cor.
101. 2. 3. 4. 5.
outward signs, not of the (...) grace They were all baptized unto Moses in
that cloud and in that sea: they did (...) the same spiritual meat, they all
drank the same spiritual drink, yet with many of them God was not pleased.
The (...) may be said of Judas one of the (...), he did eat the Paschall
lamb as well as the rest of the Apostles but he did not eat Christ (who is
the (...) filed and without spot) is the other did. This is that also which
John the Math. 3. 11.
Baptist teaches, Indeed I baptize you with water to amendment of life, but
he that comes after me is mightier then I, whoseshooes I am not worthy to
bear, he shall baptize you with the holy ghost and with fire: where, as the
(...) makes two baptizers, himfelfe and Christ, so he (...) their actions, his
own to wash with water, and the action of Christ to wash with the holy ghost.
Neither need we to seek far for reason, to persuade any to believe this
truth, that the nature of a sacrament, is neither wholly outward nor wholly
inward, but takes part of (...), seeing nothing can be a sign of itself, but
a sign is a sign of an other thing, and seeing Genesis 17. Ex. (...)
they are mysteries, they have an hidden meaning and spiritual understanding.
If the (...) in Baptism had not grace annexed unto it, it could not be a
mystery. We see the sign, we see not the grace which is invisible. Now let us
come to the uses.

These parts though distinguished really one (...) another, Use. 1.
that the outward parts cannot be the inward, the earthly cannot be the
heavenly, the seal cannot be the thing sealed, the token cannot be the thing
betokened, nor contrariwise: (for this were to alter nature and to mingle
heaven and earth together) yet in respect of the propoition between the sign
and the thing signified, and of the conjunction of them to the faithful, which
receiu both the one and the other, one part is affirmed of the other. For we must
understand that the Scriptur in regard of this union, speaks of the Sacraments
two ways, to wit, properly and figuratively. Properly, (...) that which
belongs to the sign is given to the sign, and when the thing (...) is
given and applied to the thing itself, and thus each part has his own, as
Circumcision is called Genesis 17. 11.
the sign of the covenant. And the blood of the lamb is called Exodus 12. 13.
a sign: these are (...) (...) proper speeches, and without figure. Again
when (...) says, Luc 22. 19. 20
My body which is given for you, my blood (...) which is shed for many for
remission of 1. Cor. 5. 7.
sins, we must understand the words literally as they lie, figuratively,
when the sign is given to the thing signified, and called by the name of it,
as Christ is called 1 Cor. 5. 7.
the Passover: and the Ioh. 1. 29.
lamb of God: his flesh is also said to be meat indeed, and his blood
drink indeed: the holy spirit is called Ezekiel. 36. 25.
water, or else the name of the thing signified is given to the sign, as bread
is called the Math. 26. 28
body of Christ, the cup is called the new Testament. These speeches Cor. 11.
24.
must be taken figuratively, and understood by a chang of name according to the
intention and meaning of the Holy Ghost: so that we must beware that we do not
take or mistake the sign for the thing, nor the thing for the sign, seeing
the parts are distinguished in nature, though joined in the person.

Again, albeit by gods ordinance these parts be so united, Use. 2.
that by taking of the sign the faithful are made partakers of the thing
signified, no less truly then the outward signs are received of our bodily
senses: yet we must conceive and consider, that these outward and inward parts
remain, distinct and unconfounded, and therefore we must take heed we take
not one for another: we must not ascribe to much to the outward parts, and so
take them for the inward, which has been the occasion of sundry errors from
time to time. Some attribut too little to the outward sign, and some ascribe
too much: both ways the Sacrament is abused and the parts are misapplied.
Hence sprang as a rank weed in the Lords corn, the doctrine of
transubstantiation or carnal turning of the substance of bread into the body,
whereby the sign is swallowed up and the outward substance with them quite
abolished, for their fained Christ has consumed the outward sign, as the rich
deuoureth and eats the poor. Thus the sign is consumed and to little
regarded. Others on the other side, cleave to much too the outward sign, and
rest in the external work, placing holiness and remission of sins in the
deed done: and thus the thing signified is little regarded and wholly
abolished, Genesis 41. 4.
as the evil favored and lean-fleshed kine did eat up the fat and wel-fauored:
this was (...) dream, and the other is man's devise. For these men give all to
the outward receiving, placing holiness and remission of sins therein, and
thinking themselves sure and secure when the bread and wine is taken at the
Lords table. Thus all hypocrites, libertines, and carnal Gospellers do: for
all the religion, devotion, and godliness of these idle and ignorant
professors, stands in outward resorting to the Church, and in an outward
taking of the communion of the body and blood of Christ, which is to make an
Idol of the sign, and to flatter themselves in their evils to their own
destruction. For albeit a man have been baptized and have received the Lords
supper, yet if he live wickedly and walk after his own lusts, the Sacraments
shall avail and advantage him nothing at all, but further his condemnation.
Lastly, has the Sacrament some parts Use. 3.
outward and some inward, some seen and some not seen with bodily eyes? Then
it gives occasion, both to parents to teach their children the meaning of
these mysteries and to declare unto them the ordinances of God, as likewise to
children and the younger sort to ask and inquire of their parents, to hear
and learn of them the doctrine of the Sacraments, thereby to know the
merciful promises that God has made to his people. This appears Exodus 12.
26. 27. and chapter 13. 14. 15.
directly, where the the fathers are forewarned to teach their children the
hidden mystery of the Passover, When your children ask you, what service is
this ye keep, then ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords passover,
which passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote
the Egyptians and preserved our houses. So likewise Chapter 13. 14. speaking of
separating and sanctifiing the first borne for the service of God, he charge
parents to whet this doctrine on their children and to instruct them, how God
with a mighty hand and outstretched arm brought them out of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

Again, Josh. 4. 6. 7. 8 21. 22. 23.
we see when the Lord had parted the waters of Jordan that the people might
pass, he commanded Joshua to set up 12. stones, in memorial of the mighty
and miraculous work of God for his people against their enemies: and when
their children should ask them in time to come, what was (...) by those
stones, they should answer that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the
Arc of the Covenant of the Lord. He would not only have themselves to profit
by (...) wonderful works, but to retain the remembrance of them, he would
have their posterity to know the cause and (...) thereof, and so g'orifie (...)
name for ever. Heereunto we may fitly join Psalm. 78. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
what the (...) (...), I will open my mouth in a parable, I will declare high
sentences of old which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us,
we will not hide them from their children, but to the generation to come we
will show the praises of the Lord, his power also and his wonderful works
that he has done: that the posterity might know it, and the children which
should be borne should stand up and declare it to their children, that they
might set their hope on God and not forget the works of God, but keep his
commandments. All these things serve to this purpose, to show that it is a
duty and burden laid on the shoulders of all parents, to acquaint their
children (...) the works of God, especially with the benefits of our redemption
wrought by Christ for our salvation. If they ask the question, why infants are
baptized and washed with water into the name of the holy Trinity, we must make
plain unto them the meaning of that mystery. We must say unto them, My
children, How to teach our children the meaning of the Sacraments.
this is a sign of the Covenant of Gods mercy to us, and our (...) to God: it
is a mystery of our salvation, and teaches that being in our selves unclean,
unrighteous, (...), y, and sinful, our souls are washed by the blood of Christ
even as the water in Baptism washes our bodies: (...) in the mercy of God is
so much the more marvelous in our cies, insomuch as the (...) were entered into
the covenant by cutting, lancing, and effusion of blood in circumcision Again,
before they come to years to receive the holy Supper of the Lord, we must
inform them at home, and declare the institution of that Sacrament and the
comfortable uses thereof to them, so they may afterward come to this Communion
with better warrant of their work, with greater comfort to themselves, and
with less danger to their souls. We must teach them, that as the bread is
broken and the Wine poured out, so the body of Christ was crucified and his
blood shed for the remission of our sins: and that if we believe in the Lord
Jesus, we are nourished in our souls to eternal life by the passion of Christ
our Savior, as certainly as our bodies are norished with the creaturs of bred
(...) wine Notwithstanding, there is a general defect of this duty in many
parents, neither are children ready to enquire and learn at home, neither are
parents able to answer any thing in these matters of God: way wardnesse in
the one, and wordlines in the other, and ignorance in them both, has taken
away all care and conscience from them, touching these holy duties and heavenly
mysteries, so that neither the one teaches nor the other learneth, neither the
child enquireth nor the father answers.

CHAP. 4. Of the first outward part of a Sacrament.
THe outward parts of a Sacrament are such things, as What (...) parts are.
under a certain similitude and likeness do represent and signify heavenly
things, to assure us they are as truly present and offered us, as we behold
with our cies, and receive with our hands the earthly things given unto us. The
outward parts of a Sacrament are in number Four outward parts of a Sacrament.
four. First the Minister: Secondly, the word of institution. Thirdly the
element. Fourthly, the receiver. All these and every one of them are needful
to the being and nature of a Sacrament: take them away or any of them, and you
take away the substance and bring in a nullity of the Sacrament. If there be no
minister, no word, no element, no receiver: there is no Sacrament. If there be
wanting either minister to deliver it, or word to (...) it, or element to
represent it, or receiver to take it: we cannot assure our selves to have any
sacrament of God, but rather a tradition and invention of our own.

First then, The minister is the first outward part of a sacram.
there is required a Minister lawfully called, chosen, and ordained, having at
the least the approbation and alowance of the church to pronounce the words of
institution, and to deliver the outward signs to the receivers. They are not
makers of the Sacrament, but ministers: not autors, but administators: not
deuisors, but deliuerers. Earthly princes have their letters patents, and their
great seals, and keepers of the same: if another shall set to the seal that is
not appointed the keeper thereof, is it not made an heinons crime worthy of
heavy punishment? So the Lord is a mighty Prince, king of kings, and Lord of
Lords: he has appointed his seals, to seal up his promises of forgiveness of
sins and eternal life: and he has ordained his Officers as it were keepers
of his great seals. God publishes salvation and pardon to all believers by his
word as by his letters pattents, and he adds baptism and the Lords Supper as
two broad seals for greater assurance and confirmation, and appoints the
Ministers to be keepers thereof. Whosoever therefore shall presume to (...) to
any of these seals without warrant, without a caling, without a function and
direction from God, himself being no officer, no Minister, no keeper of them,
prophaneth these seals, and sets to a counterfeit stamp. For as no man may
preach Rom 10. 15.
except he be sent: so no man may administer the Sacrament, except he be
called. This is it the Heb 5. 4. 5.
Apostle teaches. No man takes this honor unto himself but he that is called
of God as was Aron: and Christ took not to himself this honor to be made the
high Priest but he that (...) unto him, thou art my son, this day begat I
thee, gave it to him. Now, to minister the sacraments, is an honor in the
Church, which none can take to himself at his own pleasure, but God must give
it. They should have in their own consciences a witness of Gods calling them
to this office and honor. Wherefore the sacred functions ordained of God must
not be profaned by voluntary officers and usurped offices: no man must take
upon him without a lawful calling to teach hese holy mysteries. Of these Ier.
23. 21.
the Lord complaineh, I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have
not spoken to them, and yet they prophesied. Thus these intruders did thrust
their sickle into other men's corn.

The reasons, Reasons why the ministers only are to administer the Sacraments.
why the ministers and no others are to intermedle with the Sacraments, are
very apparent. First, because every part and member of the church has his
especial office and his proper gifts to execute his (...): we see in a camp,
the Soldiers in War have their standing-place in sight of their captain who
has chosen them to be Warriors: so in the Church (...) every one keep his
several calling in the presence of God, who has in wisdom and mercy called
him thereunto. We see in the natural disposition of the body, See Book. 2. cap.
3.
every member has his special use, the eye to see, the hand to handle, the
foot to walk, the ear to hear, and if one member should incroch upon the
office of another, it must needs tend to the destruction of the body. We see
in the government of an house and famely, the husband and wife, the father and
son, the master and servant know and acknowledge their places to rule, to
obey, to command, to be commanded, without intruding themselves, and
incroching upon the function, as it were upon the freehold, of an other. If we
would ascend a step higher, we observe in the affairs of state cicer. Philip.
13. est asinius quidam senator voluntarius, lectus (...).
and matters of the commonwealth, every man does keep within his own listes
and limits, and no man dare presume to charge any man or enterprise any thing
in the princes name and authority, without a sufficient warrant, from the
prince himself: so may no man take upon him any functions in the church,
unless he have a commission and commandment from the Lord. For, as the
prince appoints by what officers he will be served: so is it in the offices
and officers of the Church, God has placed and ordained the Apostle to plant,
the Evangelist to second and assist, the prophet to prophecy, the pastor to
feed, and has set every one 1 Cor. 12. 12. 14.
in his proper place and standing as i were in his watchtower, out of which he
must not wander and depart, Let every man abide in the same vocation wherein he
Romans 12. 4. 5.
was called: and afterward, Let every man wherein he was called, therein abide
with God. Whosoever therefore medleth without a lawful vocation, as it were
violently inuadeth another man's possession, and cannot do it without the check
and controlment of Christ Jesus, who is the Josh. 5. 14.
captain of his own host, the Ephesians. 4. 15.
head of his own body, the Heb. 3. 5. 6.
Lord of his own house, and the Revel. 12. 5
great king of his own church. Again, Christ the prophet and teacher of his
church and the prince of pastors, has committed the office of administration
of the Sacraments to those alone to whom he has committed the dispensation of
his word and preaching of the Gospel: therefore if any other (...) set to the
seal, it is no true seal but a counterfeit stamp. The truth of this appears
Indeed I haptize Math. 3. 11.
with water, that is, I that am appointed a techer in the church, to make ready
a people prepared for the Lord. And Paul being converted and called to preach,
and to bear the name of God to the gentiles, did without further word,
warrant, or commandment, minister the Sacraments.

Now then as we have seen the truth of the doctrine, let Use. 1.
us consider the uses thereof. First, is the minister of the substance of the
Sacrament, and a principal part of Christ's institution? Then he must consider,
it is his duty, being authorized from God and by his church, to sanctify the
outward elements and administer the same, to deliver the outward signs and
offer them to the receivers. His works therefore are to put a part and
consecrate the signs to an holy use, to open and declare the couenaut of God,
to pray for his blessing promised upon his own ordinance, to give thanks for
the blessed work of our redemption, to offer, give and deliver a right the
creatures so sanctified, in baptism to sprinkle with water and wash the body
to be baptized, and in the Lords Supper to deliver the bread to be eaten and
the wine to be drunk to the spiritual nourishment of the Church. So then the
minister ought not to refuse to baptize such as are brought unto him. Shall the
servant refuse to do the work of his master? Or if the Lord keeper of the
kings broad seal should proudly and presumpteously disdame to set the seal to
the Princes letters patents, were he not well worthy to be displaced and
removed? So if the minister, through envy, or hatred, or any other sinister
affection, shall refuse to put the seal to the Lords Covenant, and hinder
little children from coming to Christ, he deserves justly to be displaced and
to bear office no longer in the city of God, but to be removed for his
contempt, 1. king. 2. 35.
as Solomon put down Abiathar.

Secondly, is it a necessary point of the Sacrament that it Use. 2.
be ministered by a minister? Then, it condemns (...) those that put these
seals into a wrong hand, and all (...) persons that violently rush upon this
calling, and take up on them to meddle with the administration of the
Sacraments with unwashed hands seeing the dispensation of the word and
Sacraments is so linked, annexed, and joined together by God, that a denial of
license to do the one is a denial to do the other, and contrary wise the
license to one is license to the other. Christ never gave to private persons
any such commandment, he never committed to them any such ossice, he never
commended to their care these holy actions, he never called them to this honor,
he never laid upon them this charge, and therefore they have no part nor
fellowship in this business. If, notwithstanding these restrainings of
authority from them, they will run and rush forward, where they should hang
backward, their sin lies at the door, their punishment hastneth and their
judgment sleeps not.

Lastly, if the minister be an outward part of the Sacrament, Use. 3.
we must beware and take heed we ascribe not to the minister that which is
proper to Christ, and so rob him of the honor due unto his name. The minister
may offer the sign, he cannot bestow the thing signified: he may baptize the
body, he cannot cleanse the soul: he may deliver the bread and wine, he cannot
give the body and blood of Christ: John may wash with water, he cannot give the
spirit. Man indeed pronounces the word, but God seals up his grace in the
heart: man sprinkleth the body with water, but God makes clean the soul by
the blood of Christ: man may take away the filth of the flesh, but Christ must
purge the conscience from dead works, who is that blessed lamb of God that
Ioh. 1. 29.
takes away the sins of the world. For as Paul 1 Cor. 3. 6.
planteth and Apollos waters, but God (...) the increase: so the minister
offers the element and outward sign, but God gives the heavenly grace. It
belongs to the minister to handle the external part: it belongs as a
peculiar dignity to Christ to bestow grace, to give says, regeneration, Math.
3. 11.
and forgiveness of sins, and to baptize with the Holy Ghost. This truth
John (...), I baptize with water, but one comes after me, who is mightier
then I, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost. Where we see he makes a flat
opposition between himself and Christ, between his baptism and the baptism
of Christ. As on the one side we must take heed, of the contempt of him that
teaches and ministers the Sacraments, because the contempt of the word and
Sacraments does necessarily follow the contempt of his person: so we must
beware we attribute or give not to him more then his right, least the power of
the word and force of the Sacraments be attributed to his person, whereby men
spoil themselves of the fruit of them both. This was it wherein the 1 Cor. 3.
22.
Corinthians offended, when they said, I am Paul's, I am Apollos, I am Cephas, I
am Christ's. Wherefore, to keep a golden mean between too much and too little,
we must do as if a prince should send us some present by one of the meanest
messengers of his house, we would receive him favorably and entertain him
honorably for the gifts sake which he brings unto us: but the gift it self
we would receive for the kings sake, from whom it was sent. So it becomes
every one of us to do, God has committed to his messengers and ministers the
word of reconciliation, we must have them in singular love for 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13
their works sake that labor among us, but the word and Sacraments we must
receive for the Lords sake from whom they come. Thus much of the first outward
part, to wit, theminister.

Chap. 5. Of the second outward part of a sacrament.
THe second outward part of a Sacrament The word of institution, a necessary
part of the Sacrament.
is the word, necessarily required to the substance of a Sacrament: for August.
in Ioh. 13. Tract. 80.
the word is added and joined to the element, and there is made a Sacrament.
This sacramental word, is the word of institution, which God in each Sacrament
has after a special manner set down; consisting partly of a commandment by
which Christ appoints the administration of Sacraments, and partly of a
promise annexed, whereby God ordains that the outward elements shall be
instruments and seals of his graces, As for example, when Christ says, Math.
28. 19
Go, teach al nations and baptize them, there is a commandment to warrant the
use and practice of Baptism: the promise likewise is in the next words, Into
the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. So touching
the other Sacrament of his supper, when he says, Math. 26. 26 27.
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, do this in remembrance of me, Ioe there is the
commandment, commanding the continual use thereof until the second coming of
christ. the promise is, this is my body which is given for you, this is my
blood of the new Testament shed for you and for many for remission of sins.
Whatsoever signs of holy things god gave to strengthen the faith of his
children, we may see and descern that god always added the word to the seal,
the voice to the sign, and doctrine to the sight, so that when the sign was
seen, the word was heard. When one of the Seraphims, beating an hot coal in
his hand which he had taken from the alter, Esa. 6. 6. 7.
touched the mouth of the prophet, he said, Lo, this has touched thy lips, and
thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sins shall be purged. Now, we
know a coal has not power and force to take away sin, but the word uttered
by the Angel did assure him that he should be purged by the holy ghost, which
was signified by, the (...). Again, when Christ gave to his disciples the
Holy Ghost, he breathed on them and said, Ioh. 20. 22.
Receive the Holy Ghost. The corporal blast and breathing was not the
Holy Ghost, but he added his word and promise with the outward sign, to assure
them that with the breathing, he bestowed a blessing. Thus we see, that the
Sacraments have the word always joined with them: and without the word,
whereby their institution and use is declared, they are as a dead body without
life, as a dumb show without voice, as an empty cloud without water, and as a
barren tree without fruit.

Let us apply this doctrine to our selves, First it teaches, Use. 1.
that they partake not the Sacraments aright, that have not the knowledge of
the word, that are ignorant both of the ordinance and institution of God, and
of the promise annexed to the institution of god: of which sort there are many
in the world, that never labor to know what he has appointed and commanded
them to do. If they do as others of the church do, therein they rest and seek
no further to be able to warrant their own work. If they hear the word
spoken, if they see the body washed, the bread broken and the wine poured out
and receive the outward signs, they regatd no more, they go no higher, they
imagine they have done enough Understanding of the institution, required of al
they never desire to understand the meaning of the words which are necessary
to be known, comfortable to be understood, and profitable to be marked. If a
man have goods befallen, or legacies bequeathed unto him by any will or
Testament, will he not resort to his learned counsel, to be careful to
understand the Testament, and know the meaning of the Testator? Christ Jesus
before his death made his will, he has made his children heirs of his promise,
he promises to them forgiveness of sins in this life, and eternal life in
the world to come. Does it not now behooue every faithful Christian to search
into it, and know what is promised and bequeathed unto him? Men of this world
for the most part make their eldest and first borne heir of all, and leave
little to the other: but a great comfort to all gods children, whether rich or
poor.
every child of God is as the eldest and as the Exodus 4. 22.
first borne most dear to him, he shall receive his double portion, the second
shall have no less then the first, nor the third less then the second, nor the
younger then the elder, the first shallbe as the last, and the last as the
first, for he may do with his own as he list. Again, if a man do leave all
his sons heirs and rich inheritors, for the most part less is (...) on the
daughters: but all the children of God, both his sons and daughters Romans 8.
17. Gal. 4. 7.
shall be heirs, even the Heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ Jesus,
their share shall be as great as the portion of sons. Moreover, when a man has
passed all the days of his life in carke and care, what can he give to his
pofterity but earthly riches, and transitory possession, a fading inheritance,
leaving them inheritours as well of his sorrow as of his substance? It is not
so with the children of God. Christ by his last will and Testament has promised
to make his people sound in faith, rich in hope, blessed in the pardon of their
sins, and heirs of the kingdom which he has promised to them that love
him. This is a great and unspeakable comfort to al Gods children, whether high
or low, whether rich or poor. So then we ought to be much more careful and
earnest to know thoroughly and understand perfectly the will of Christ, then any
natural child is to search the meaning of the will of his natural father. And
if men were not wholly carnal, they would be thus far fpiritually minded.

Again, is the word an outward part of the Sacrament? Use. 2.
Then the Sacraments must never be separated and set a part from the word. They
are not dombe shows and idle signs, but have always the doctrine of God
adjoining unto them, to show the end, use, and profit of them, and the purpose
of God in them. This appears in all places, where God gave signs to confirm
and assure the truth of his promises. When he gave in mercy to Noah and all his
posterity the Genesis 9. 11.
Rainbow imediately after the flood as a sign of his covenant, he adds his
word unto the sign, My covenant will I establish with you, that from
henceforth all flesh shall not be rooted out by the waters of the flood,
neither shall there be a floode to destroy the earth any more. This is it the
Apostle Heb. 13. 4
means, 1. cor. 11. Ye show the Lords death till he come. Where he teaches,
that the Lords Supper cannot be truly delivered and rightly administered,
unless there be a declaration and showing forth of the death of christ.
Wherefore it is no sacrament, except the word and doctrine be joined unto it,
by way of explication and exposition of the outward sign.

Lastly, those Sacraments are proved hereby to be no Use. 3.
Sacraments, which are foisted and brought in without the warrant of the word.
For take away the word, and what is the outward Element but a bare sign? What
is the water in baptism but common water? What is the bread in the Lords
Supper but common bred? What is the wine but common wine, such as men use, and
all men may take at their ordinary tables? Seeing therefore such signs and
Sacraments as have not Gods commandment for their institution: nor promise of
grace and salvation annexed unto the using of them, are void and nothing
worth: heerby the imagined and devised Sacraments of the church of Rome are
condemned, which delivers that it has not received of the Lord, and imposes
that to be believed which it never learned in the word. Hereby the last
anoyling or extreme unction is excluded, wanting the word to warrant the
continual practice of it. Also their confirmation has neither word to
institut the practice, nor eleme^t to assure any grace, nor promise to approve
any use. True it is, they have words to administer it, but they are words of
men, not of God; unwritten, not written: of tradition, not of scripture. The
like might be said of marriage, though we confess and acknowledge it to be an
holy ordinance and Heb. 13. 4
honorable institution of God, yet was it made no Sacrament, having no word of
institution, no promise of sanctification and salvation annexed unto all the
faithful users thereof: neither is it an instrument, whereby God applies
Christ and his saving benefits to the comfort and consolation of his children.
Wherefore to conclude this point, we affirm, that neither the sons of
Romulus at Rome, nor of Remus at Rhemes shall ever be able to show and prove,
that they are to be acknowledged and received as Sacraments of the church,
which have no warrant of the word to command them, nor promise annexed to
assure the saving graces of Christ to the worthy receivers. But such are their
five pretended Sacraments of confirmation, penance, orders, matrimony, and
extreme unction, wanting either the word, or promise, or both: and therefore we
cannot receive, we cannot acknowledge, we cannot believe them. Thus much of the
second outward part, namely, the word of institution.

Chap. 6. Of the third outward part of a sacrament.
THe third outward part of a Sacrament is the The sign is an outward part of
the Sacrament.
element or outward sign. For whersoeuer there is a Sacrament, there must of
necessity be a sign, such as water is in Baptism, and bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper, not of their own nature, but by the ordinance of God, which are
sanctified by the especial word and prayer. Therefore, John the baptist
baptized with water: and Christ when he instituted his last Supper, took bread
and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples: Likewise he took the cup, wherein
was the fruit of the Vine, as appears when he Mar. 14. 25.
said, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, until that day that I
drink it new in the kingdom of God.

Seeing then it is clear, there must in every Sacrament be a visible sign that
may be seen and handled, let us see how Use. 1.
we may profitably apply this to our instruction. First, seeing the signs and
Sacramental rites are outward parts: we must take heed we ascribe not too
much to the outward sign, and so commit idolatry We must not make the sign an
Idol.
to the creature. For the Water in Baptism has not power in it self and
force to wash away sin, but by the ordinance of God it is made a sign and
seal of regeneration. Even as the Water of Jordan where John baptized, was no
better then the waters of other places and countries, neither had any strength
and virtue to cleanse the Lepers that washed in it: yet by the bleising of God,
Naaman the Syrian 2. King. 5. 12. 14.
washing himself 7. times therein, according to the direction of the Prophet,
was cleansed and healed of his leprocie: so the water used in the Sacrament of
Baptism, is in nature and substance the same with ordinary and common Water,
neither has it vig our and virtue to cleanse the soul, yet by the institution
of God it is appointed to seal up the asturance of remission of sins.

Not with standing, this confidence in the outward sign, which in it self is
as nothing, has since the fall of man rested and remained in his corrupt
nature, flattering himself and deceiving his own soul. This fond and salse
opinion was in Adam immediately after his transgression, he did attribute too
much to the tree of life (which had in it self no more life then the rest of
the trees in the garden) and therefore God would thrust him out of the garden,
Genesis 3. 22.
least he should beguile himself with that conceit and immagination.

Thus did the Israelites trust too much in the Arc, a sign of Gods
comfortable presence and protection, attributing salvation thereunto, sayeinge,
y. Sam. 4. 3.
It may save us out of the hands of our Enemies, therefore God overthrew
them, and gave them into the hands of the Philistims.

Again, we are taught hereby, that the Sacraments that Use. 2.
have no sign, no seal, no element to signisie, to strengthen, and to seal
up the promises of salvation. For as we showed before, that every Sacrament
must have gods word to warrant it: so must it have an outward sign to approve
the receiving of it, and to signify the spiritual grace offered by it. Herby
we learn what to hold of transubstantiation, a doctrine teching that the bread
and wine is turned into the very body and blood of Christ, namely, that it is a
very fable to mock fools withal. For Transubstantiation ouerthrown.
whatsoever overthrows the nature and use of a sacrament, is not to be
admitted but omitted, neither to be received but rejected. But
transubstantiation overthrows and ouerturneth both the nature and use of a
sacrament: and therefore not to be admitted and received into the Church. For
touching the nature of a Sacrament it is confessed, Iren. lib. 4. contr. haer.
c. 34.
that it consists of two parts, the one earthly and the other heavenly: but
if after the words of consecration, the bread and wine are transubstantiated
into the body and blood of Christ, then the sign is taken away, the element is
overthrown, the material part is abolished, and consequently the nature of a
Sacrament is ouerturned. And touching the use of a Sacrament, there must be an
analogy and propoition between the sign and the thing signified. As in
Baptism, the element of water washes and purges the body, so the Holy Ghost
through the blood of Christ cleanses and sanctifies the soul. Like wise in
the Lords Supper, as the substance of bread and wine received, strengthens and
comfort the body: so Christ Ioh. 6. 33.
received by faith norisheth and feeds the soul. The very true principal
use of this sacrament is to confirm our faith, that as surely as those earthly
creatures taken and aplyed, feed our bodies to a bodily life: so the body and
blood of Christ received and applied by says, feed our souls to eternal life.
And do not all the faithful seel a swect comfort, so often as they come to the
Lords table by this similitude and agreement, to consider and know assuredly,
that as the substance of bread serves to nourish and does feed our bodies, so
Christ does feed our souls? But if we must believe, that the substance of
bread and Wine is changed and clean gone, that nothing remains but
accidents: where is this comfort and consolation? How can we be assured and
strengthened, that as our bodies are nourished with the material elements, so
in like manner our souls by feeding on Christ? Wherefore, while they take away
the substance of bread which should nourish the body, the nature and use of the
Sacrament is destroyed, and we are spoiled of the comfort of our hearts and
strengthening of our faith, which we should have by this notable comparison and
resemblance of the parts. So then, if we would receive comfort in coming to
this Communion, we must retain the substance of the sign, as a staff to stay
up our faith that it do no fail. And thus much of the third outward part, to
wit, the sign.

Chap. 7. Of the outward part of a sacrament.
THe last outward part of a sacrament is the The receiver is an outward part of
the sacrament.
receiver, which is as needful as the outward sign. We understand and take
here a receiver in general, for every one that comes to the Sacrament,
whether good or eu^ll, godly or ungodly, faithful or unfaithful. Such a
receiver is likewise a necessary part of the Sacrament. For no sign has the
substance and essence of a Sacrament, unless it be received. Though there be a
minister to administer it, a word to warrant it, a sign to represent it, yet
vnlosse there be a fit person to receive it there can be no Sacrament. If the
minister should sprinkle water, and allege the words of institution where there
is no party to be baptized, this were a profaning, not a solemnizing of
Baptism: or if he should take bread and Wine with prayer and thanksgiving,
where none are present to communicate and receive, this were to commit
sacrilege, not to deliver a Sacrament. Wherefore, unless there be a body to
be washed, and except there be communicants to partake the Supper, there can be
no Sacrament. This appears by the words of God to Abraham Genesis 17. 12.
giving unto him circumcision, saying, Every male-child of eight days old
shall be circumcised. This also appears in the Math. 28. 19.
words of Christ speaking of baptism, and charging the Apostles to baptize the
nations in the name of the father and of the son, and of the Holy Ghost. Where
he teaches, that it is not sufficient to take water, but there must be a
washing So. when he speaks of his supper Math. 26. 26. 27.
he says, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye: so that there must not only be bread,
but giving, taking, and eating: there must not only be wine, but giving,
taking, and drinking thereof.

This truth being evidently delivered, let us see how it Use. 1.
may be profitably applied. First of all, must the Sacraments necessarily be
received? Then it teaches that the Sacraments without their lawful use are no
sacraments at all: they are no signs of grace, if they be not used. This
condemns the keeping, reserving, holding up, and carrying about with pomp and
ostentation the Lords supper, offering up, kneeling down unto, and adoring a
piece of bread: all which are horrible prophanations of that comfortable
Sacrament, whereby the people isrobbed and deprived of a precious part of their
peace in Christ. The bread feeds not the body, reuiueth not the spirits,
strengthens not the heart, by looking and gazing upon it, by touching and
handling it, but by eating, digesting, and feeding upon it: so does the
sacrament strengthen faith, not by reserving and keeping it, but by using and
receiving of it. For sacraments are actions not dumb shows. Christ said
not, Hear ye, see ye, gaze re on, but baptize ye, eat ye, drink ye, do ye
this in remembrance of me.

Secondly, are the receivers an outward part of the Sacrament? Use. 2.
Then the persons that are to receive must know, that diverse duties are to be
done and performed of them. The persons then that are to receive, must join
with the Minister in prayer, in quickening their faith in the covenant and
promises ofGod, beholding the former works of the Minister, blessing, breaking,
pouring out, and distributing, ratifieng them in their hearts, and lastly by
receiving and applying to themselves the visible signs. For as we have showed,
if the words of baptism should be rehearsed over the water, and no person to
be present to be baptized, it is no baptism: so if the words of institution in
the supper should be spoken and repeated without eating, without drinking,
without receiving, it were no Sacrament. Wherefore, we must all learn to
detest the Bellar. de sacram. Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 2.
absurd opinion of Bellarmine and other procters of the Romish religion, which
teach that the bread and Wine being once consecrate, whither they be received
or reserved, whither they be distributed to be eaten and drunk, or whether
they be kept in boxes and vessels of the Church, for days, months, and long
times, and carried solemnly in procession: are notwithstanding still the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Against which dotage we spoke in
the former use, and shall speak Book. 3. chapter 6 Use. 3.
more in the third book following.

Lastly, if the receiving be an outward part then we are not to rest in the
outward participation, for so far went Judas in the Passover: so far went
Simon that sorcerer in baptism: and so far went 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 5.
the Israelites, as the Apostle shows. They were all baptized unto Moses in
the cloud and in the sea: they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did al
drink the same spiritual drink, etc, yet with many of them was not god
pleased, but they were overthrown in the Wilderness. And therefore John
Baptist said to the Pharisees and Saduces, when he saw them come to his
baptism, Math. 3. 7. 8.
O generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the anger to
come, bring forth therefore fruit worthy amendment of life.

Now our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, if we would enter into the kingdom of heaven. Let us all
therefore have this profitable meditation, so often as we deal with the
Sacraments and come unto them: we must look further then to the outward sight,
we must consider more then the external sign, otherwise as we approach without
preparation, so we depart without edification. And thus much of the four
outward parts of a Sacrament, to wit, the minister, the word, the sign, and
the receiver.

Chap. 8. Of consecration.
BEfore we proceed to the inward parts of a Sacrament, answerable to the
outward by a fit proportition: it shall not be amiss in this place to speak
somewhat of the Consecration of a sacrament. First we must consider what it
is: for the truth being known, it will cast down error, as the light
scatters the darkness. To consecrate then What Consecration is.
is to take a thing from the ordinary and common use, and to appoint it to some
holy use. This therefore is Consecration, sanctification, and dedication of the
outward signs, to apply them to an holy purpose. This is done, partly by the
minister, partly by the people, and partly by them both. The minister takes
the water in Baptism, which signifies the blood of Christ, and he pours it
on the person of the baptized: he takes the bread in the Lords supper, and
breaks it, he takes the wine and pours it out, he delivers them both:
the people take and receive, they eat and drink in remembrance of Christ: and
both minister and people ioynein prayer and thanksgiving unto God the father
for the mystery of our redemption accomplished by Christ our savior, so that
the sacrament is consecrated by the whole action of the minister and people
together. This makes the difference between common water and the water in
Baptism: this makes the difference between that bread and wine of the
Supper, and the bread and wine which is used for ordinary meat and drink.
True it is, in nature, in essence, in substance there is none: but in the end
and use. Common water we use for the washing of our bodies: but the water in
Baptism is sanctified by prayer to an other use, to be a sign of the clonsing
of the soul. Bread and wine at men's tables in their houses are set before them
for the nourishment of their bodies: but at the Lords l'able they are ordained
of God to an higher and holier use, even to be signs of the body and blood of
Christ. This is noted by the Evangelists and by the Apostle Paul, that Math.
26. 26. Mar. 14. 22. Luc. 22. 19. 1 cor. 11. 24.
the Lord Jesus before he brake the bread and gave it, he blessed and gave
thanks to his father, that he had appointed him to be the redeemer of the
world, and given him authority to institute this Sacrament in remembrance of
his death and passion. For whereas the Evangelist Matthew says, he blessed: the
other by way of exposition say Hegaue thanks: so that the blessing here spoken
of, is Giving of thanks, Luc. 9, 16,
which also appears compared Ioh, 6, 11.
with Ioh. 6, 11. And the Apostle says. 1, Tim. 4,
Every creature of God is good, if it be received with thank sgiuing, for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. We see then that Consecration is,
when a thing is separated from a common and civil use to a more special use,
which is done by justin. in apoll. 2,
the authority of the word, and by the virtue of prayer, whereby it has his
full force, power, and virtue.

The knowledge of this point, serves to clear our Use. 1.
doctrine, and to overthrow sundry errors of the church of Rome. First, it
shows that we hold and teach a consecration, that is, a sanctifieng of the
water in Baptism, and of the bread and wine in the Lords supper, by the word,
by prayer, and by thanksgiving. The bread and wine are changed, not in nature,
but in quality: not in substance, but in use: not in essence but in the end:
not by force of certain words, but by Christ's institution. We acknowledge and
confess a consecration, not a conversion: a sanctification of the signs, not
a transubstantiation of the substance into the body and blood of Christ. He
blessed and praised his father as mediator of the Church, for the mystery of
the redemption of mankind: and he 1 cor. 10, 16,
blessed the creatures, that they might be effectual signs, and serve for the
confirmation and increase of our faith.

Secondly, we are taught, that consecration is not a magical Use. 2.
charm and incantation by force of certain words, as though these word, This
is my body, being murmured and spoken over the bread, and This cup is the new
testament in my blood whispered over the wine, did fully finish a consecration,
and made the elements to be immediately changed into the body and blood of
Christ, without any other observing of the institution. And hence it is, that
the form of Christ's giving of thanks is not set down by any Evangelist,
because our corrupution and superstition is so great, that if we had the words,
we would ascribe power and force to the words, sillables, and letters, and
therefore the manner of his thanksgiving is pretermitted. This inclination of
the heart is apparently seen in the Romish church, who ascribe efficacy and
operation to the pronouncing of certain words, which is a part of sorcery and a
part of witch craft. Whereas we avouch, that the whole action of taking,
breaking, pouring out, distributing, eating, drinking, praising and rehearsing
the institution of Christ, are the consecration, that is, the separation of
these creatures to this use.

Thirdly, if after the Sacramental actions, if after thanksgiving Use. 3.
to god, if after prayer, that we may use the creatures to the confirmation of
our faith, there do follow consecration, sanctification, and change of the
elements to another use: then the power, effect, and working of the Sacrament
depends not upon the intention of the minister, and therefore the council.
Trident. sess, 7, can. 11.
popish opinion is to be refused and reproved, that holds it to be no
Sacrament, if the minister have not an (...) faciendi quod facit Ecclesia,
Bellar, de sacra lib. 1, cap, 27.
intent and purpose in the ministration thereof, at least to do that which the
church does, that is, to consecrate the elements and to make a Sacrament. If
his mind be not on his matters, and his heart on his business in hand, they hold
it can be no Sacrament. For otherwise says Bellarmine. If a priest should read
the Gospel at the table of prelates and religious men, and in reading should
pronounce these words, This is my body, this is my blood, then all the bread
and wine upon the the table should be consecrate and changed into Christ's body
and blood: which is not so, because his intent is wanting. Again, if a father
should lead his son to the bath, and there dip him in the water, And say I
wash thee in the name of the father, and though he think nothing of Baptizing
him, yet it should be baptism, if an intent of baptizing were not required.
But I would gladly have him answer this question: what if a father should
intend Baptism by dipping his child in the bath, whether that were baptism or
not? Or suppose the priest we spoke off, reading at the prelates table, should
have a mind and meaning to consecrate all the bread and wine upon the table
must (...) of necessity be a Sacrament, and real change of all? Or admit the
former priest being in the said prelates wine seller, supposing himself to be
in the Church and to stand at the alter, should pronounce there words of
consecration with a purpose and intent to make a sacrament, should all the wine
in that (...) be turned into the blood of Christ? Or if he being in a bakers
shop should there solemnly say, This is my body with the foresaid
resolution, should all that bread be changed into the body of Christ? Let them
speak plainly, let them tell us directly what they hold. I think they will
not say so: I am sure it is not so. For other things are wanting, that are
needful in this matter. We have showed, that a Sacrament is not made by bare
pronouncing of certain words, ascribing force to them after the manner of
enchanters, but the whole institution of Christ must be observed, The Sacrament
depends not upon the intention of the minister.
there must be distributing and receiving, there must be prayer and
thanksgiving, and from the use of these follows Consecration: all which are
wanting in the former examples and suppositions, there is no taking, no
breaking, no distributing, no pouring out, no receiving, no praying, no
thanksgiving. We see touching the word of God, with what intent and under what
pretense soever Phil 1. 18. Math 23. 2. 3.
it be preached, if the minister teach Christ crucified, howsoever he be
affected, it may have his effect in the heart, and work says in (...) hearer:
so is it in the Sacraments, they have their efficacy and operation howsoever
the heart of the minister be disposed. And as Isaac intended not to bless Jacob
but Esau, Genesis 27. 1. 4. 33.
yet it hindered not the purpose and determination of God: so the corrupt
intent, the wandering imagination, and rouing conceit of the minister, cannot
hinder the blessing of god in the sacraments, being his own ordinaces. For the
force of the Sacrament depends no more upon the intention of the giver, then
it does upon the intention of the receiver. Again, if the right receiving of
the Sacrament depend upon the intent of the minister: what assurance can any
man have, that he has ever received or shall ever receive a Sacrament? What
persuasion can we have in our hearts that we ever were baptized? What knowledge
that we were ever partakers of the body and blood of Christ in the supper of
the Lord? Does not this leave us uncertain and unsettled, without comfort,
without fruit, without benefit by coming to the sacraments, and sets the
poor distressed consciences of men upon the rack? Alas, we cannot kno 1 cor.
2. 11.
the heart and understand the intentes thereof, For what man knows the things
of a man, save the spirit of man which is within him? Furthermor, were not this
hard dealing and extreme cruelty in God, to hang the salvation of men upon the
pleasure of the minister, whereby our faith and salvation shall always be
doubtful? and should it not be unjust in God, to make the evil of the
minister to hurt the receiver? To draw to an end of this question, Bellar. lib.
1. de sacra. c. 28.
the adversaries themselves confess, that the church cannot judge of things
that are inward: whereupon we fiame this reason, If the church cannot judge of
things inward, then it cannot judge of the intent of the minister: but they
confess it cannot judge of inward things, therefore not of the intent of the
minister, and consequently although they be present at the action, they
remained doubtful of consecration. Wherefore, Bellarmine foreseeing the
inconvenience and absurdity of this unreasonable and uncomfortable assertion,
confesses that if one of their mass priests in his ministration, Bellar, lib.
1, de sacra, c. 27,
intend to do as the church of Geneua does, it suffic eth to make a Sacrament
effectual and of sorce. This is the confession of a known and sworn enemy:
Whereby we see, that howsoever they say we have no ministers, no ordination, no
consecration, no church, that our sacraments are no better then the feasts of
Ceres and Bacchus, and lay many false accusations to our charge, that the
Supper of the Lord with us is no Sacrament, but a bare sign without grace,
without effect, without virtue: yet they are constrained to confess and yeald
thus far, that if a Masse-munger purpose to do as the reformed churches do,
his doing is effectual, and the Sacrament is good. The effect of this point is
this, that if we desire to be comforted and assured of Gods favor when we come
to his supper, we must not hang the profit of his ordinances upon the weak
and unstable foundation of Popish intentions. Thus See more Book. 3. c. 7.
much of consecration.

CHAP. 9. Of the first inward part of a Sacrament.
THe outward parts of a Sacrament have hitherto been declared, by a diligent
perfourmance whereof consecration is performed: now the inward parts follow to
be considered, and handled of us, in which the very soul and life of the
Sacraments consists. For the outward parts profit nothing without these, as
the word profits nothing, except the inward and true husbandman give the
increase according to the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 3. 7,
He that planteth and he that waters is nothing; but God that gives the
increase: so the force of the Sacraments is to be looked for, from the creator
that did institute them. Peter says, 1. Pet. 3. 21.
Baptism does save us, but he adds, not Whereby the filth of the flesh is
washed away, but in that a good conscience makes request to God. So the
Apostle Paul teaches, that 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Bodily exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable to all things:
so the outward signs profits little, but the inward parts being applied and
received, are profitable to all things.

Behold the creatures which God uses, as instruments of his mercy toward us,
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, fire, water, herbs, and such like: we
ought not to put any confidence in them, nor admire them as first and chief
causes of any benefits. So our trust ought not to be in the outward signs
though ordained of God as holy helps unto us (which were to conucie his glory
to them) but our faith must be lifted up to God being the author of the
Sacraments, and the creator of all things. The inward parts of a Sacrament
are such invisible and heavenly things as are signified under the earthly and
outward parts. We heard before, the outward parts of a Sacrament to be these,
the minister, the word, the sign, and the receiver: so the inward are What are
the inward and invisible parts of a Sacrament.
four in number, answerable to the outward, to wit, 1. God the father second
the spirit. 3. Christ. 4. the faithful. Now there is a notable proportion and
worthy agreement between the outward and the inwarrd parts, The proportion
between the parts.
these resembling each other, as one face answeareth another in the waters. For
even as the minister by the word, offers and applies visibly the outward
element and sign to the body of the receiver: So GOD the father, by the
spirit, offers and applies JESUS CHRIST inuisibly to the faithful receiver.
This is the resemblance and likeness between the external and internal
parts: whereby we see, that God the father is represented by the Minister: the
spirit, by the word: christ, by the outward element: and the faithful receiver
by the outward receiving. The first inward part is god the The first inward
part of a sacrament is god the father.
father, osfering and applying Christ and his saving graces to the faithful.
The minister offers and delivers the outward signs to the receivers, and
can go no further: herein he represents God the father, who offers Christ
to all, albeit the reprobate receive him not. He does not dally and deal
falsely with us, but truly offers in the sacraments Christ with all his
gifts and benefits, if we have hands to receive him, he is given to us.

The use of this doctrine is, first of al to distinguish between Use. 1.
God and the minister: the outward signs are given by the hands of the
Minister, whether he be good or evil, but the truth and substance of the
sacraments is given by God the father. Whosoever confounds these parts and
works, robs God of his glory, depriueth himself of the grace of Christ
offered, and makes flesh his arm. Wherefore, as the works of God and of the
Minister are distinct, so must these parts remain distinguished, howsoever to
the faithful they are not separated and sundred, as in the publishing and
preaching of the gospel, the Minister speaks unto the outward man, and the
sound thereof enters into the care, act. 16. 14.
but it is God that opens the heart and speaks to the conscience of the
faithful hearer.

Secondly, it serves to strengthen our faith and help our weakness when we
come to the sacrament. So often as we Use. 2.
see the ministers of God appointed by him, delivering the signs and setting
them a part to their ends for which they were ordaind: we must behold with the
eye of faith, god the father offering his son to those that can receive him.
For if we come aright, we may assure our own hearts, that what the Minister
does outwardly, the same the sather performs inwardely, then which there
cannot be a greater comfort. Let us therefore behold with our eyes, the
Sacramental rites: let us hear the promises that God makes unto us: God the
father will verify them, who has John. 6. 32.
sealed up his son unto us. My father gives you that bread from (...). He
will as surely give Christ, as the minister delivers the bread and wine.
Albeit the sacraments should be ministered by some hypocrite and wicked man: yet
they have as much force and as a great efficacy, as if they were ministered by
faithful and godly men. The virtue of the sacraments hangs upon the
minister no more, then the goodness of seed depends upon the sower: which
if it light in good ground, will bring forth plentiful fruit, (...) it be
(...) of an ungodly and unskillful man.

Chap. 10. Of the second inward part of a Sacrament.
HItherto of the first in ward part: The second part of a Sament is the holy
(...).
the second part of a sacrament is the holy spirit, as Math. 3. He shall
baptize you Math 3. 11.
with the holy ghest and fire. So in Christ's Baptism, when he was baptized
and prayed, the Luc. 3. 22.
holy ghost descended in a visible shape like a Dove upon him. And By 1. Cor.
12 13
one spirit we are al baptizd into one body, whether we be Jews or greacians,
whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one spirit
And the Apostle lays down the circumcision of the heart by the spirit: He is a
Jew which is one within, and the circumcision is of the heart in the spirit. So
the same A postle Tit. 3. 5. 6, According to the mercy of God he saved us by
the washing of the new birth, and the renewing Tit. 3 5. (...)
of the Holy Ghost which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our
savior. Nothing can be fruitful and profitable without his gracious work in
us, he works and sets the word of promise in our hearts, and therefore we
must necessarily hold the blessed spirit to an inward part of the Sacrament.

Now let us proceed to the uses of this point, being the second inward part. Is
the spirit of God the sealer up of the Use. 7. 1
promises after that we believe according to the doctrine of the Apostle. After
that ye believed, Ephesians. 1. 13.
ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise? then as often as we hear the
promise uttered by the Minister, it confirms us that the father by his spirit
woorketh the same in our hearts. The Water in baptism, cannot by any force and
virtue inherent in it, wash our consciences from dead works to serve the
living God, as it has power to wash away the filth and corruption of our
bodies. The bread and wine in the Lords supper have no inherent strength to
nourish the soul to eternal life, as they have to strengthen the body: they
are instruments of the Holy Ghost, who works by them to the great comfort of
the faithful. Grace is not contained and shut up in them, as water in a
vessel, or as a medicine in a box: the spirit helps our infirmities,
sealing up to our consciences the fruit of the word that is heard and of the
Sacrament all signs that are seen.

Again, is the spirit of God an inward part of the Sacraments? Use 2
then we must learn and remember, that we can never hear the word or
receive the sacraments with fruit and comfort, without the special assistance
and inward operation of the spirit of God. Therefore the Prophet joins the
spirit and word together. I will make this my covenant with thee (says the
Lord) Esa. 59 21.
my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed from henceforth and for ever.

A man indeed has power to hear the word and to receive the sacraments, his
will is free in these outward works: but he has no power or strength to do
them with profitte and comfott, except it be given him from above. Though we
hear never so much, though we communicate never so osten, the spirit must open
our hearts, as he opened the heart of Lydia. So 1 Ioh. 2. that (...) h which ye
received of him dwells in you, and ye need not that any man (...). Ioh. 2.
27.
teach you, but as that same anointing teaches you of all things, and it is
true and is not lying. Likewise Act 10. Peter preached the Gospel to Cornelius
and his household, and while he yet spoke to them, The act. 10. 44.
Holy Ghost fell on them all which heard the word. So also the Apost. being
sent out with their commission, and commanded to preach the Gospel to every
Mar. 16. 20.
creature, it is noted that they went forth, and preached every where, and the
Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signs that followed. And
Ioh. 14. The Ioh. 14. 26.
comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things and bring all things to your remembrance which I
have told you. Pharaoh often heard Moses and Aaron, but he harkened not, but
hardened his heart, because there was no inward touching or teaching of the
spirit.

The Israelites had heard and seen the wonderful things of God, yet they
profited not in faith, in repentance, in regeneration: and the reason is
rendered, (...). 29. Ye have seen all Deuteronomy. 29. 2. 3. 4.
that the Lord did before your eyes in the Lands of Egypt unto Pharaoh and unto
all his servants and unto al his Land, the great tentations which thine cies
have seen, those great mycacles and wonders: yet the Lord has not given you
an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. When we
come to hear the word, which is a word of power, of life, and of salvation,
when we come to receive the sacraments, which are signs of Gods graces, and
seals of his promises, we see many return as ignorant, peruers, corrupt,
froward, rebellious, hard-harted, and disobedient as they came to these
ordinances of God: and whence comes this? How falls it out? And what may be
the reason hereof? Surely it is not in him that Luc. 13. 24. Romans 9. 16.
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, who gives
eyes to see, ears to hear, and heart to understand, to whom he thinks good
in heavenly pleasure. Wherefore our duty is, seeing the natural man perceives
not the things that are of the spirit of God, to pray unto him to give us
wisdom to see our corruptions, blindness, ignorance, and hardness of heart.

Thirdly, does the spirit work in us by the word? Are Use. 3.
the word and spirit joined together? And does he teach us by means of the word
and Sacra. then we must not separate the spirit from the word and Sacraments,
as the Anabaptists do, Against ana baptists depending on revelations.
which depend upon revelations, and inward inspirations, upon private motions
and divine illuminations without the word. They will not be taught by the word,
they will not be strengthened by the Sacraments: but take away the use of both,
following their own foolish fancies and deuilish dreams. They boast of the
spirit of God, and are led by the spirit of the devil. We must for our
direction and practice learn, that as to rest upon the spirit without the word
is fantastical and heriticall, and the mother of all errors: so the word and
sacraments without the spirit are no (...) then a dead carcass without life,
an empty sound without substance, a naked show without truth, an empty casket
without the (...) and there sore we must knit them together, and assure our
selves that the spirit speaks evidently in the scriptures, the spirit
works effectually by the Sacraments, and the spirit helps our (...) to
profit by them.

CHAP. II. Of the third inward part of a Sacrament.
THus much we have spoken touching the holy spirit, being the 2. inward part:
the (...) inward part Christ is (...) 3. inward part of a Sacrament.
is Jesus Christ crucified, the very subject and substance of all Sacraments.
He was represented by (...) meision and the pascall lamb: and he is
represented in Baptism and in the Lords supper. When we receive the outward
signs, God the father offers his son and all his graces with him, to
confirm our (...) thereby. The sign is but a figure and token: Christ is the
truth and substance. This we showed before, Chapter 2. in the description of a
sacrament, that therein Christ and all his saving graces are truly offered,
sealed up, and given to the faithful that (...) in his name. Heereunto comes
the doctrine of the Apostle, where he teaches that the Jewish Sacraments
being in the truth of them the same with ours, did signify 1. cor. 10. 1. 2 3.
4. 5.
Christ, for They drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and that
rock was Christ. So he does teach (...), that by Baptism we Gal. 3. 27.
put on Christ, we are buried into his death, and are planted Romans 6. 4. 5.
into the similitude of his resurrection. Wherefore, this is the use and end of
the sacraments, to lead our says to the only sacrifice of Christ once offered
upon the cross, as to the only groundwork and (...) of our salvation: as
touching the other Sacrament, the same Apostle shows, that the breaking of
the bread seals up the 1 cor. 10. 16.
communion of his body, and the pouring out the wine the communion of his
blood. So then, this is an evident, plain and manifest truth, confirmed by
testimonies of the Scripture, that Christ is the matter and substance of a
sacrament.

Hereby, we gather great strength of faith. If Christ be Use. 1.
offered withal his merits, then let us lay hold upon him and not let him go:
let us stretch forth the hand of faith, and receive him into our hearts.
Wherefore, when Satan assaulteth us, touching our faith in christ and assiance
in his promises, persuading us we are not elected, justified, and endued with
faith, and thereby seeks to cut off our hand from aplying, or to blind our eye
from looking upon the brazen serpent, that is, Christ sitting at the right hand
of his father: let us run unto him, let us hunger and thirst after his
righteousness, let us acknowledge him to be our wisdom, our rightiousnes, our
sanctification, and redemption, and let us look for our salvation from him and
in him. What though our faith be frail and weak? What though it be as a grain
of a Mustard seed, which is very little and small? What if it be but as the
groth and strength of a child, which is ready to fall except he be stayed up?
yet this weak, this small, this little, this frail, this feeble faith, is able
and sufficient to ingraft us into christ. A child taking a staff in his hand,
is able to hold it, as truly though not as strongly as a man: so if we lay
hold upon christ by faith, though we do it with many wantes, and much weakness,
yet it shall serve and suffice us to salvation. For God looks not so much to
the perfection as to the truth of faith, neither so much to the measure as to
the manner of our believing. Even as Mar. 8. 24.
the blind man in the Gospel, when he began to perceive the moving of men,
and saw them walking as trees, when yet he could not discern their bodies,
did as truly and certainly see them as other did, though not so clearly,
plainly, and distinctly: So when we have the least spark of faith, it will as
truly assure us of our salvation as a stronger.

The poor prisoner that (...) in a deep and dark dungeou, may as well
discern the light of the Sun at a little hole and creuisse, as he that
walks in the open air, so albeit we be compassed about with ignorance,
doubtinges, Weakness, and manyfolde fraylties of the flesh, yet by a dim
light and sight of faith, we may certainly apply unto us the mercies of GOD
and the merits of Christ, as well as if we had a strong and perfect persuasion
of our election and salvation before the foundations of the world. Thus we see,
howsoever the faithful may be afflicted, yet 2. cor. 4. 8. (...)
they are not distressed: though tempted, yet not overwhelmed: though cast
down, yet they perish not, For 1. John. 5. 4.
this is their victory that has overcome this world, even their faith, whereby
they apprehend Jesus Christ, who is offered of GOD the father in the
Sacraments to all the faithful.

Again, if Christ be given us, how should not the father with him give us all
things else? as the Rom, 8. 31.
Apostle concludes. Use 2
If God spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death: how shall
he not with him give us al things also? when we enjoy him we enjoy al things:
if we want him it is nothing, though we abound in all things else. Wherefore,
when the father gave him for us, it is more then if he had given to us heaven
and earth For having right and interest in him, we have possession (...)
of al things, his righteousness, his sanctification, his obedience, his
innocence, and whatsoever he has is made ours. He that has Christ who is the
Lord of al, cannot doubt but he is made partaker of that which is his. He that
has Christ who is heir Heb. 1. 2.
of all things, may assure himself to be made fellow heir with him.

This is it the 1 Cor. 21. 22. 23.
Apostle says. Let no man rejoice in men: for all things are yours, whether it
be Paul or Apollos, or Cephas, or the the world, or life, or death, whether
they be things present, or things to come, even all are yours, and ye Christ's,
and Christ Gods. When a parcel of ground is purchased and made ours, thereby
the profit and commodity thereof is made ours also: so when christ by the free
donation of god the father is given unto us, his righteousness and obedience
becomes wholly ours together with him. He then that has christ, has all
things: he that has not christ, has nothing, howsoever he think himself to
be something.

Chap. 12. Of the fourth inward part of a Sacrament.
THe The last inward part of a sacrament is the faithful receiver.
last inward part of a Sacrament is the faithful receiver, desiring,
apprehending, receiving, hungring and thirsting after Christ. There is required
a faithful receiver, if we would receive Jesus Christ, faith must of
necessity go before, without this there is no justification, without this,
there is no salvation, as Romans 14. Whatsoever Romans 14. 23 Heb. 11. 6.
is not of faith, is sun. And Heb. 11. Without faith it is impossible to
please God. Judas executed the function of an Apostle, he was partaker of the
Passover: yet he ceased not to remain an Hypocrite, a devil, and the child
of perdition, John 17. 12.
that the scripture might be fulfilled. Neither was he bettered or sanctified
by that sacrament, or by the use thereof Ananias and Sapphira his wife, act. 5.
4. 9.
being in the number of Disciples, were no doubt baptized of the Apostles, and
had also received ofttimes the Lords supper, yet they continued in their
wickedness, lyinge, and hypocrisy, the sacrament did not take away their
wickedness, nor give them a justifying and saving faith, act. 15. 9.
which purifieth the heart by repentance and woorketh new obedience in the
soul. The like we have said of Simon the sorcerer, act. 8. 23.
who albeit he were baptized, yet remained in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity. Wherefore, the Apostle teaches, that the word profited not,
Heb. 4. 2.
because it was not mingled with faith in those that heard it. If the signs be
received without faith, they hurt: not that Gods gifts and ordinances hurt of
themselves, but not being received aright, they hurt through our sin and
default. As the word not received by faith is an empty sound without force: so
the sacrament is an unprofitable and a naked show without substance. Wherefore,
the Sacraments in regard of the unbelievers and ungodly are no Sacraments to
them, because to them they are not seals of the righteousness of faith. True
it is, they remain Sacraments, in respect of God who offers his own son,
but they lose their strength and force toward the unfaithful, that do abuse
and contemn them, Romans 2, (...)
as the Apostle expressly teaches, Circumcision verilyts profitable if thou
keep the law: but if thou be a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision is
become uncircumcision, the same Apostle speaks of such 1 Cor. 11, 20
as used the Lords Supper without true godliness and due preparation, says,
This is not to eat the Lords Supper, denying that to be, which was not done as
it ought to be.

Wherefore, seeing the right use of the Sacraments is, Use. 1.
when such as are truly converted use them aright, we learn diverse
instructions that flow and follow from hence. First, that the reprobate (though
God offer the whole Sacrament to them) do receive the signs alone without the
things signified: they have the bare title without the thing, the vanishing
shadow without the body, the outward letter without the spirit, the empty box
without the ointment, and the creature without the creator. They are washed
with the element of water, but not with the grace of regeneration. They eat
the bread and drink the wine: but they are not partakers of the body and blood
of Christ Jesus to salvation. They eat Panem domini, non panem dominum.
August, hom, in Ioh. 65,
the bread of the Lord, but they eat not the bread and the Lord: because the
sign, without the right and holy use thereof, is not an auailable Sacrament to
the receiver of it. We see therefore the wicked partake not CHRIST, although
they partake the signs of Christ, Ioh, 20, 6, 7,
as they that found his clothes, but missed his body.

Secondly, we see hereby, that the elect ordained to eternal Use. 2.
life, but not yet called and converted to the Lord, and to the obedience of
his will, though they come often to the sacraments: yet do in like manner
receive the bare signs without the things signified, because as yet they want
faith and repentance. What then? Do they nothing differ from the reprobates? In
this they differ not for the present time from the reprobate. Not with
standing, that receiving of the Sacrament which for the time present was
unfruitful and unprofitable, shall after in them have his good effect, as the
corn that lies long covered in the earth, at the length does come up and
flourish. For the Sacrament received before a man's conversion, is afterward to
the believer and penitent sinner ratified, and so becomes profitable: whereby
the use of the Sacrament, which before was utterly void and unlawful, does
then become lawful and comfortable, as we see in the word heard without fruit
and faith by an unbeliever, is made a word of salvation afterward when he is
converted. Lastly, the elect already converted Use. 3.
and sanctified by the spirit of God, do to their profit, comfort, and
salvation receive both the sign and the thing signified together: yet so, as
that for their unworthy receiving thereof (which happens through their manifold
infirmities and often relapses into sin) they are subject to temporal
punishments for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 cor. 11, 30
For this cause many are lick and weak among you, and many sleeps: for if we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. Where the Apostle
teaches, that God brought a judgment upon his own house, and punished this
church with weakness, sickness, and death it self, for their vnreuerent,
unworthy, and disordered receiving of the Lords Supper. Although, many among
them (no doubt) were elected, and all of them professed the Gospel of the
kingdom: yet god visited their want of preparation and reverence with diverse
diseases and great mortality, Leuit, 26, 14 15, 21 Deuteronomy, 28 15 16, 20, 21
according to the threatening annexed to the law, If ye will not obey me, nor do
all these comcaundements, if ye shall despise mine ordinances, or your soul
abhor my laws, then will I do this unto you, I will appoint over youfearfulnes,
a consumption, and the burning ague to consume the eyes and to make the heart
heavy. And if ye walk stubbornly against me and will not obey me, I will then
bring seven times more plagues upon you, according to your sins. Wherefore,
when we have received grace to believe, and have tasted the first-fruites of
the spirit to the comfort of our souls, we must not be puffed up in our
knowledge, we must not grow secure, but stir up the gifts of God in us when
they begin to wax faint: let us seek to prevent his judgments before they com,
which we may do, by judging our selus, by making inquiry into our own ways,
and by searching the reins of our hearts, with purpose to condemn all
ignorance, error, security, and ungodliness, and as it were to take punishment
of our selves: then this would follow thereupon, we should not be judged and
punished of the Lord. This then is the remedy to avoid the sin of unworthy
receiving. A man thus visited with sickness, weakness, and diverse kinds of
diseases, and smitten with the stroke of Gods own hand, cannot possibly be
restored by any creature in heaven or earth: and yet behold the Lord has not
left us without means to remove them and take them away, to wit, by taking
away the cause, that we may remove the effects. The cause of these punishments
is taken away by judging our selves. Now a man in judging of himself What we
are to do in judging our selves.
must perform four things 1. he must examine himself of his sins 2. he
must confess them, and himself to be guilty, as the poor prisoner that
stands at the bar. No denying of the fact, no defending of the fault, no
hiding of the offense, no justifying of our person can procure our pardon: the
way to have for giuenes, is to acknowledge our own wickedness 3. he must condemn
himself, and give sentence against himself without partiality, 4. he must
plead pardon for the remission of his sins, and never rest, until he give him
peace of conscience, and restore him to the ioyof his salvation.

Chap, 13. Of the fir st v se ofa Sacrament.
HItherto of the parts of a Sacra. both outward and inward: now we come to the
uses thereof. For unless we know the use, and understand the end why they were
ordained, it shall not profit us to know the parts. Every thing must be referred
to his right uses and propper ends: so must the Sacraments be. The ends are
especially Three chief uses of the sacraments,
these three. First, to strengthen faith. Secondly, to seal the Covenant
between God and us. Thirdly, to be a badge of our profession. Touching the
first end, the Sacraments serve for the better confirmation of our faith, as
appears. Where the Apostle having set down the drowning of the world, and the
preserving of Noah by the Arc, he says our baptism Pet. 3, 21,
directly answers that tipe, which is a taking to witness of a good
conscience, and saving us by the resurrection of Christ. So then, by faith
confirmed in Baptism, we have an infallible assurance in the death of Christ
of our salvation. Many indeed come to the sacraments, are present at Baptism,
are partakers of the Lords supper, that feel no strength of faith, no increase
of Gods graces, no spiritual groth in the body of christ, so that they work
not salvation in them, but further their condemnation. For the sacraments (as
we have showed) give not grace, but more firmly, surely, and comfortably
confirm faith, they apply and seal up Christ crucified. The sacraments cannot
give faith to the faithless, neither were they instituted to the end men
should believe but because they do believe: as meat was not given that men
should learn to eat, but that the eating might be nourished. Faith indeed
receives them, august. (...), dei, lib. 25, cap. 25,
and then they serve to nourish it. And they confirm not faith by any inherent
power included in them, but the holy spirit applies Christ to us, and frames
this comfortable conclusion in our hearts, All such as are converted and do
rightly use the sacraments, shall receive Christ, and al his saving graces: But
I am converted and do rightly use the sacraments: Therefore I shall receive
christ and his graces. Thus does the co^forter comfort al those that come
rightly and religiously to the Lords table.

Now, if we would enquire and search after the reasons of this first end, we
should find that one cause why they confirm faith is, because god is true in
his promises, he confirms and makes good that which is gone out of his
mouth. All the 2. cor, 1, 20,
promises of God in Christ are yea and are in him Amen, unto the glory of God
through us. For (...) Princes seals confirm their charters, assure their
grantes, and make certain their pardons: so do gods sacraments witness to our
hearts and consciences, that his words and promises are true and are
established to continue for ever. For as he declares his mercies by his word,
so he seals and assures them by his sacraments. Again, this appears by
the example of Abraham, who first believed the promise, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness being yet uncircumcised, and afterward received the sign
of circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of faith, as the Apostle Rom,
4, 5, 10, 11,
teaches We say that faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness: How was
it then imputed? when he was circumcised, or uncircumcised? Not when he was
circumcised, but when he was uncircumcised, etc. Where he shows that Abraham
was justified in uncircumcision, but yet was afterward circumcised, that the
gift of righteousness might be confirmed in him. The Act, 8, 36,
Eunuche likewise believed before he received baptism, and therefore it
sealed up the increase of his faith and of Gods graces. And Act 2. They that
gladly received the words of Peter, act, 2, 41, and 10, 44, 47, 48 and 22, 16.
were baptized. And. as Peter preached to Cornelius and others of the Gentlies,
The Holy Ghost fell on them all which heard the word, and he said, Can any
forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have received the
Holyghost as well as we? So he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the
Lord. Wherefore, when the minister washes with water, it represents our
burial with Christ, into his death, and our rising again with him into newnes
of life. As bread norisheth and strengthens man: so the body of christ taken
by faith, feeds the soul. We take the bread and cup into our hands, we eat,
we drink, we are refreshed: so we feed on Christ, whose flesh is meat indeed,
and whose blood is Use. 1.
drink indeed, and we are comforted. Let us now come to the uses, as we have
seen the reasons. And first of all, do the sacraments serve to strengthen our
faith? then let us all acknowledge our failings and infirmities: Let us labor
more and more to feel the weakness and wantes of our own faith. True it is,
if our faith were perfect and entire lacking nothing, Chrisost in Math. hom, 83.
we should not need the sacraments. We must not therefore abstain from them
for the weakness of our faith, but for that cause come to God and to the
Sacraments of God, praying for strength and confirmation thereof, Mar. 9, 23, 23
as that father did, whose son was possessed with a dumb spirit when Christ
said to him, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that
believes he answered crying with tears Lord I believe, help mine vnbeleese.
And Luke 17. the Apostles Luke 17, 5
say to the Lord, Increase our faith. Undoubtedly he that never doubted, never
believed: For whosoever in truth believes, feels sometimes doubrings and
wauerings of his faith. Even as the sound body feels oftentimes the
grudginges of a fever and distemperature of the body, which if he had not
health he could never find and feel: so the faithful soul finds sundry
doubtings, which if his faith were not sound, he covld not diseerne. For, we
feel not corruption by corruption, nor sin by finne, Luke 11, 21, 22
because when the strong man possesses the house, all things are in peace: but
we feel sin and perceive corruption in us by a contrary grace of gods
spirit. The lesser and smaller measure of grace we have, the lesser is our
feeling: and the more grace we have the more quick we are in feeling of
corruption. What is the reason, that many have no light of sin, no feeling of
their corruption, no tentations, no trembling, no terror, no fear of gods
wrath, but wholly live, lie, and dye in their lusts? Surely, because they are
without grace, without gods spirit, and without his inward work in them. But
the faithful, who are not led by the slesh but live by the spirit, are often
tempted, assailed, tormoyled, tried, and provoked to many evils, according to
the Luke 22, 31, 32
words of our blessed savior, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to
winnow you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not,
therefore when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. Asa man carried up
and set upon an high to were or on the pinicle of a temple, and there fast bound
in chains of Iron that he cannot fall although he would, when he looks down,
fears, and al his joints tremble, because he is not acquainted and accustomed
to mount up so high in the air, and to behold the earth so far beneath: but
when he remembers himself and perceives himself fast bound and out of all
danger, then he conceiueth constant hope of continuing, and casts away all
fear of falling: So when we look down-ward upon our selves and our own
ways, we have doubtings, wauerings, astomshments, horrors, terrors,
tremblings, and fears: but when we look upwards, to be hold the sweet
consolation which god has promised, Christ has purchased, the word has
published, the Holy Ghost has sealed, and every believer has tasted, we
feel our selves sure, and cease to doubt any more. For faith though assaulted
with doub tings, may be certain. The Sun always shines in the firmament,
though the clouds have covered it, and the light appear not. The tree has
life in it, though it be not in winter discerned. So faith has his assurance
and persuasion, though it be shaken with doubtings and assaulted with
tentations. Wherefore, so often as we feel these doubtings and imperfections,
let us set against them the certainty of gods truth: let us set before us the
vnchangablenes of his promises: let us draw near to the holy Sacraments, and
thereby seek strength and increase offaith. Moreover, was Use. 2.
this one end of the Sacraments to strengthen faith? Then god refuses and
(...) none for weakness of faith. For a weak (...) his a true faith, as well as
a strong faith. A Leprous hand can hold that which is offered unto it, as well
as a sound and strong hand, albe it not so strongly: so is it with faith,
though it be feeble and as a grain of mustard seed, yet if it be unfeigned, it
will aply christ effectually, which weakness leaves God in us as a means to
stir us up to go to the sacraments. We read that David called lame 2 Samuel 9, 7,
8
(...) to his table, thereby honoring the son for the fathers sake: so does god
receive us al deformed and defiled to his heavenly supper. And as Mephibosheth
professed himself unworthy to eat bread at the kings table, saying, What is
thy servant, that thou should look on such a dead dog as I am? So must we
confess our unworthiness, and be Math, 15, 26, 27.
contented with the crumbs of his grace, that fall from his heavenly table. And
thus acknowledging our selves to be blind, he will restore us: to be poor, he
will enrich us: to be wounded, he will cure us: to be captives, he will deliver
us: to besick, he will heal us: to be weak, he will strengthen us: to be lost,
he will save us: to be hungry and thirsty, he will resresh us: to be
brokenhearted, he will bind us up: to be sold under sin, he will ransom and
(...) us.

Thirdly, it reaches us to abhor the absurdity of Bellarmine, a factour and at
turney of the church of Rome, Bellar. de sacram. lib. 1. cap. 14.
who Use. 3.
denies that the Sactamentes are seals of the promises, or serve to (...) and
confirm our faith, and to assure us of free remission of sins by the death
of Christ. Contrary to that we heard before, in the example of Abraham, who
received circumcision to seal up and assure his justification, by faith, whose
example is set forth to show how all men are (...) before God, Romans 4. 11.
and what is the use of the Sacraments in all that are partakers of them. So
does Baptism seal up to us Gods promises in Christ, and assures the
remission of sins, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
as Peter teaches.

Lastly, if the chief end of the Sacraments, and of the ordinance of God in
the institution of them, be to confirm Use. 4.
faith, and to assure us of regeneration, mortification, sanctification,
justification, remission, and salvation: then how say so me, we cannot be
assured in this life of our standing in the estate of grace, of the forgiunesse
of sins, and of our adoption in Christ? Does not the Romans 8. 15. 16
holy ghost testify unto us particularly the adoption of children, the
remission of sins, and salvation of our souls? As Romans 8. We have not
received the spirit of bondage to fear, but the spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry Abba father: the spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the
children of God. In these words, gods sanctifieng spirit, and our sanctified
spirit, are made the two witnesses of our adoption. This we must certainly
believe by faith. And this made the Apostle Romans 8. 38. 39.
most confident in the end of the same Chapter saying, I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is Christ Jesus our Lord.
If any object, we may hope well for forgiveness of sins, but we cannot
believe the same. I answer, faith and hope cannot be separated, they do (...)
as loving friends accompany each other, they are never sundered and divided, so
that if we may be assured of our salvation by hope, it follows we may be
certainly persuaded. True hope follows true faith, as the effect does the
cause, and no man can truly hope, that is not truly assured. Besides, this is
the property of hope, Romans 5 4, (...)
it never makes any ashamed, they shall not be confounded and disappointed,
they shall attain unto the thing hoped for, according to the doctrine of the
Apostle, Experience brings forth hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us. Hitherto of the first end of a Sacrament.

Chap. 14. Of the second use of a Sacrament
THe second end of a Sacrament is this, The 2 use of a Sacrament is to be a
seal of the Covenant.
It serves to be a seal of the Covenant between God and us, that he will be
our God, and we will be his people, as Genesis 17. I am God Genesis 17, I, II.
all susficient, walk before me, and be upright. The Sacraments are assured
testimonies and confirmations of the favor and goodwil of god, who is well
pleased toward us in christ his son. By them as by certain pledges given and
received, God of great mercy does as it were bind himself to us, and we bind
our selves to him to remain his people and to walk in obedience before him.
(...) was a seal of gods promise to Abraham, and a seal of Abraham's faith and
obedience toward God. But let us see what what the covenant is, between God
and man.
this covenant is, what are the Articles of agreement between God and us, and
what things each part interchangably couenanteth and contracteth each toward
other. The covenant of God in respect of himselse, has 3. parts. He promises,
Rom, 11, 26, Ier. 33, 8, Esa. 43, 25,
first of all, forgiveness of our sins. The deliverer shall come out of
Sion, and shall turn away the ungodliness from Jacob, and this is my covenant
to them, when I shall take away their sins. Secondly the adoption Ier. 31,
31, 32. 33
of sons and acceptance of us to be his children, joined with the promise of
his continual favor, love, grace, and protection, as Ier. 31. 2. Cor. 6. 16. 18
Behold, the days come, (says the Lord,) that I will make a new covenant
with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah, not Zach. 8. 8.
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, when I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, the which my covenant they
brake, although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord: but this shall be
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those dates
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Be hold, the
indenture of covenants written by the finger of God, wherein for better
assurance he has bound himself to forgive our sins, and promised to be our
merciful God. And to the end there might be a pair of these indentures,
interchangeably given each to other party; the Lord by the hand of the Apostle,
has drawn as it were the counterpane of the former word for word, expressed as
it is in the Prophet, IIeb. 4. 10 11 12.
so that we have a pair of indentures of covenants, to show the stablenes of
Gods counsel. The 3, part of the covenant in respect of god is, Revel. 21, 4. 7.
the promise of the full possession of the heavenly inheritance and of
eternal glory after this life. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither
shall there be any more pain, for the first things are passed: he that
overcomes, shall inherit al things: Again to him that Revel. 27, 28. 26. 27.
and chapter 3. 5. 12. 31.
overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of
the Paraolice of God, he shall not be hurt of the second death: he shall have
power given him over the Nations, and rule them with a rod of iron: he shall be
cloaethed with white array, and I will not put his name out of the book of
life: he shall be a pillar in the temple of God, and shall go no more out. I will
grant to him to sit with me in my throne, even as I ouercam, and sit with my
father in his throne. Thus we see, how God on his part, by writings and
evidences promises to give to his people remission of sins, adoption of sons,
and possession of heaven, he has couenanted by word and by oath to perform
these things: neither is he as man that he should lie, nor as the son of man
that he should deceive. These are great gra^ts, of great blessings by our great
god, to the great good and comfort of his children. For what greter blessings
can there be, then being miserable sinners, to be graciously pardond? being
(...) enemies, to be freely accepted as sons? being bondslaues and prisoners
of hell, we are made heirs of heaven and salvation? Again, the covenant on our
part requires 3. conditions. First, faith to God, Ioh. 3. 16. and 14. 1.
to believe his promises. God so loved the world, that he has given his
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, hut
have euerlastiug Romans 10. 9. 10. 11
life. Again let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in
me. And with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation: for the scripture says, whosoever believes in him,
shall not be ashamed. Secondly, god requires of us love toward our brethren:
for seeing he has showed so great love toward us, 1. Ioh 4, 7, 9 10, 11
he exacteth love of us again, as Io. exhorts, Beloved, let us love one
another, for love comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of God,
and knows God: herein was the love of God made in unfest among us, because
God sent his only begotten son into this world, that we might live through
him: beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Thirdly,
he requires as a necessary covenant to be kept on our part, holiness and true
obedience throughout the whole course Josh. 24, 24, 25
of our life and conversation. This is repeated and urged in many places of the
word of God, when they said they would serve the L. their God and obey his
voice, Joshua made a covenant with them 2 King. 23,. 3
the same day, joining God and the people together. So also 2 Chro, 15, 12 13
(...) stood by the pillar and made a covenant before the L. Luk, 1 74, 75.
that they should walk after the L. and keep his commandments and his
testimonies and his statutes, withal their heart and withal their soul. Likewse,
to the same purpose we read, 2, Chron. 15. They made (...) to seek the L. God
of their fathers: and whosoever will not seek the L, God of Israel, shall be
(...), whether he be sinal or great, man or woman. Thus we see the conditions
of the covenant, both what he promises to do, and what he looks for at
our hands. He requires of us faith, love, and obedience to become his people,
if we will have him to be our God. All these three parts of the covenant, 11.
roh. 3. 23. 24.
are mentiioned and expressed, This is his commandment, that we heleeue its
the name of his son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave
commandment: for he that keeps his commandments, (...) in him, and he in
him: and hcereby we know that he adideth in us, even by the spirit that he has
given us.

The uses of the second end of a Sacrament are, first to Use. 1.
behold the exceeding love of god to ward his people unworthy of his favor.
Can there be a greater love then this? Certainly such as know the great rigor
of the Law, the infinite Justice of God, and the heavy burden of sin: and feel
god to arraigne them, the law to endite them, their consciences to accuse them,
and their hearts to condemn them, do find nothing sweeter then to be eased of
that burden, to be acquitted of that judge, and to be freed from that
condemnation. For of all burdens sin is the heauiest, of all afslictions it
is the greatest: of all pains it is the sharpest, and often presses down to
the gates of hell. Wherefore, such as feel gods mercy in their misery, Psalm,
32, 1, 2.
May cry out with the Prophet in the rejoicing of their spirit, Blessed is he,
whose wickedness is lightened, and u hose sin is covered, Blessed is the man,
unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquitse.

Again, let every one be careful to keep the former conditions of the
Covenant, which are, to love him again, Use. 2.
and our brethren for his sake, Luc, 1, 74, 75
and to walk in holiness and righ eousnes before him all the days of our life.
Our savior Christ directing our love to our brethren, and teaching that the
ftreames there of should slow unto our enemies, she weth that if we love them
which love us, Math, 5, 44, 46, 57.
the Publicans do the same: and if we be friendly to our brethren only, this
is no singular thing.

Behold 1. 10h. 3. 1
what love the father has given unto us, that we should be called the sons
of god: he loved us graciously and free'y: he loved us when we were enemics
nvto him, and spared not his own son but gave him to death for us all: do
not these things deserve love again? are we not bound to show duty for these
mercies, and love to our brethren for this love of our God? and yet many
regard, neither these blessings of god, neither to walk in vprightnes of heart
before him.

Chap. 15. Of the third use of a Sacrament.
THus much of the second use: the third use of the Sacraments, The third use
of a sacrament is to be a mark and badge of our profession.
is to be badges and marks of our Christian profession, that thereby one of us
should acknowledge an other to be of one household and of one family, of one
society and as it were birds of one feather. For hereby we do manifest whose
we are, whom weserue, to what house we belong, and to what people and church:
we are thereby gathered into one religion, and distinguished from other sects:
August cont Faust, lib. 19. cap. 11.
we are gathered into one church, and knit together in one, as Ephesians. 2. Remember
that ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. 14.
and called uncircumcision of them which are caled circumcision in the flesh
made with hands, ye were at that time without Christ, without God, without
hope, but now in Christ Jesus ye which once were far off, are made near by
the blood of Christ. The Jews by circumcision were distinguished from other
people, 1. Sam. 19. 36.
and the name of vncircumcifed was reproachful, they were accounted unclean
and unholy persons, for the vncircum cised males were to be Genesis 17. 14.
cut off from the number of the people of god. So by baptism we are separated
from all other religions, and are consecrated only to christian religion: and
such as continue vnbapti sed with contempt of that sacrament, we take them not
for our brethren, nor for the people of god, nor for members of his church,
because they refuse to take the sacrament of baptism, as the badge and
cognizance by which they should be known: such as are Athiests, Infidels,
Sarazens, Turks, Persians, Moors, Jews, and other nations that want this
mark to be discerned to belong to the family of christ. Christ Jesus sending
out his Apostles bad them teach and baptize the Gentiles, Math. 28. 19 Mar. 16.
16. Act. 2. 39 41. 42.
to whom he directed them: therefore where the word and Sacraments are, there
is a church and congregation of the people of god. And he that believes and is
baptized shallbe saved. And hereunto comes that saying When the Apostles had
exhorted the people to amend their lives, and to save themselves from that
froward generation, Then they that gladly received the word were baptized: and
they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread,
and prayers, and the same day there was added to the Church three thou sand
souls. Thus we see that by the sacraments as by certain bands and chains,
God knitteth and binds his people to himself, and keeps them in his
covenant, least they should fall away to infidelity. And the people are warned,
that by these outward signs they differ from the barbarous and unbelieving
gentiles, and consequently should endeavor and provide that they likewise
differ from them in those things that are signified by those signs.

This osfereth to our considerations very good uses. First, Use. 1.
hereby we are put in mind of our dignity and excellency. Such is our
privilege and prerogative, that we do bear the badges of christ our Lord. How
do men in this world desire to wear the cloth and shroud themselves under the
badges of great persons of countenance to protect them? how much greater
preferment is it to be the servants of Christ, to be gathered under his wings,
and to be his disciples, whose service is perfect 1. Cor. 7. 22, Ioh. 8. 36.
freedom and protection from all evils? and whose badges are instruments of
his saving graces? If this be the glory of the faithful, let us seek to
maintain our dignity and freedom, Ioh. 3, 1. 2. Ioh. 1. 12, 13
according as John teaches, Behold what love the father has given to us,
that we should be called the sons of god, for this cause the world knows
you not, because it knows not him. And again in his gospel, As many as
received Christ, to them he gave prerogative to be sons of God, even to them
that believe in his name, which are borne not of blood, nor of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of god. Whereas on the other side, the estate and
condition of ungodly men is base, vile, miserable, and contemptible, they live
to themselves and to sin, they die to judgment and condemnation. What can be
more fearful? what can be more wretched?

Secondly, if we wear the cloth and badge of Christ, then Use. 2.
we must be bold in the faith, and hold out our profession notwithstanding
dangers and fear of death. For we serve one that is able to bear us out. We
see how men belonging to those that are of high place, are many times imboldned
there by in lewd practices: How much more ought we that have learned christ, to
be incoraged in the faith, and not to shrink back for fear of offense? This was
the commendation of the church of Reu. 2, 13,
Pergamus. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's throne
is and thou keep my name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days,
when Antipas my faithful martyr was slain among you, where Satan dwells. So
Christ our savior Math 10. 32, 33.
taught his disciples. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him (...) I
confess also before my father which is in heaven: But who soever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven.
Wherefore, this condemns those that say, I will keep my conscience to my
self, none shall know my religion but God and my self, I will not be to
forward for fear of after reckonings, nor any way countenance such as be
forward. These men, while they suppose to keep their religion to themselves, do
indeed proclaim openly that they are of no religion. For if they did truly
believe in their hearts, they would likewise confess with their tongues,
according to the saying of the Rom 10. 9. 10.
Apostle, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that god him raised from the dead, thou shall be saved:
for with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation. And Iam 2. 18.
the Apostle James teaches us to try faith by works, as gold by the
touchstone, Chap, 2. Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will snew thee my
faith by my works. So then, let us not be ashamed of the Romans 1, 16.
Gospel of Christ, Which is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes, and not shrink for troble as deceitful cloth in the wetting, least
our master be ashamed of us before his father and the holy Angels.

Th'rdly, if the Sacraments be as badges to show forth our profession: then it
condemns those that speak evil Use. 3.
of men as too precise, too nise, too pure for, their profession, because they
run not into the same excess of riot with others. These are not too precise
but such as scoff at al profession are too profane. It is good to be earnest
in the matters of god, provided that our zeal be tempered with discretion, and
all Newtets be odious to God, Revel. 3. 15 16.
as it is said to the Church of the Laodiceans, I know thy works, that thou
art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest cold or hot: therefore
because thou art Luke warm and neither cold nor hot, it shall come to pass;
that I shall spew thee out of my mouth. Wherefore, let us not be discouraged in
well-doing, but walking through good report and evil report, let us remember
that as christ is our Lord and master, so our profession and the sacraments are
our badges.

Lastly, we see what our estate and condition is, that we use. 4.
are not our own, but are subject to Christ to serve him. For we do bear his
badge? then he is our master. If he be our Master, Mat. 1 6.
where is the fear and reverence due unto him? Is it not meet we should show
our selves thankful for so great mercies and gifts? Were it not intolerable
unthankfulness and insufferable pride, for any man to wear the cognizance of
another, and yet to scorn his service, and deny him duty? Might not one
worthily check and control him as Christ did the (...), who unwillingly paid
such taxes and tributes as were laid upon them? He called for a penny, Mat.
22. 19. 20. 21.
and said unto them, Whose image and superscription is this? They said unto
him, Caesar's. He ansuered, Give therefore to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and give to God the things that are Gods. So likewise might one say
fitly, whose badge wearest thou? whose Arms bear thou on thysleeue? Does
not this put thee in mind of thy state and condition, and of the service and
honor thou owe thy Master? In like manner may it be said to us, whose badge
bear thou? Is it not Christ's? we are not therefore our own men, 1. Cor 6.
19. 20.
as the Apostle reasons and concludes, 1. Cor. 6. Know ye not that your
body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, whom ye have of God?
and ye are not your own. For you are bought with a price, therefore, glorify
God in your body and in your spirit, for they are Gods. So many therefore as
come without knowledge and true repentance: break their faith given to Christ,
and betray the body of christ as much as in them lies Wherefore to the right
use and partaking of the sacraments, there is required the knowledge of god in
three persons, especialy of the person of christ, perfect God and perfect man,
and of his three offices to save his people: to be their Priest, perfectly by
his sacrifice to reconcile and justify them: to be their king, by the
government of his church, to kill sin in them and to sanctify them, to be
their teacher, to instruct them in the will of his heavenly father. After these
is required true faith, and earnest repentance, otherwise we, cannot receive
Without faith and repentance we cannot receine Christ.
christ in the sacraments. Put food into the mouth of a dead man, it cannot
nourish him: so if one that is unworthy and unfit, lying dead and rotting in
his sin do come to the sacraments, certainly they do not give him life and
worthiness, 1. cor. 11. 27. 29.
but such a one does lade himself with a greater burden of sin and punishment.
Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall
be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, he eats and drinks his
(...) judgment, because he discerns not the Lords body.

Chap 16. Of the number of Sacraments.
HItherto we have spoken of the chief uses of the sacraments: now we are come
to speak The number of sacraments.
of the number of sacraments, according as we take the name and have declared
the nature of them. Let us see then how many such visible signs and seals
of spiritual grace in the new testament, were iustituted of God to set forth
the benefits of christ, for the continual use of the church. Many live in the
bosom of the church, hear the word, come to public prayer, take themselus to
be goodly christians, offer themselves to the lords table, and are made
partakers of the Sacrament, who yet are ignorant how many sacraments there are,
and what they are. None almost so simple but can number his sheep and cattle:
he knows their marks. he knows their differences: but ask him how many
commandments of the law, how many Articles of faith, how many petitions of
the Lords prayer, or how many Sacraments of the New Testament, he can answer
nothing. Such have their wits wholly exercised on the world, and on wordly
things which iustle out religion and the knoledge of heavenly things. If we
have ears to hear let us hear what is the faith os the Church in this point,
grounded upon the infallible rule and rock of the word of God. The sacraments
of the church ordained by Christ, to assure our communion with him are only
two: christ instituted only two Sacraments.
baptism, whereby we are received into the covenant of God in steed of
circumcision: and the Lords supper, whereby we are nourished, maintained, and
retained therein, instead of the Passover. For albeit the covenant be but one,
yet the seals there of are two, to assure us that by union with Christ, we are
regenerated and shall be nourished to eternal life. He has delivered us a few
sacraments insteade of many, he could have instituted more if he had thought it
good for the benefit of the Church These are as it were the two eyes whereby we
see and behold the promises of God. These are as the two hands, whereby we
after a sort do handle Christ crucified and lay hold on the graces of
salvation. Christ has appointed no mo sacraments, he has laid on us an easy
yoke and a light burden.

That these two, are the only sacraments of the new testament, may appear by
these few reasons Reasons why there are only two sament.
following. First christ taught no more to his Apostles, the Apostles delivered
no mo to the churches, the churches embraced no more for many years. When the
Lord Jesus lived on the earth, Luke. 1, 76. and 3. 3.
he instituted baptism by the ministry of John baptist, who as he was sent to
prepare the hearts of the people, so he preached the baptism of repentance:
Afterward the Lord Jesus established it with his own mouth, in the commission
given to his disciples, he appointed and himself first administered his last
supper in remembrance of his death, until his 2. coming again with power and
great glory. These two true sacraments of the church, to wit, baptism and the
lords supper were instituted and warranted by the mouth of christ himself, and
none other beside these. These we receive because christ ordained them: other
we receive not, because he ordained them not.

Secondly, the Apostle Paul admonishes the Corinthians to beware of idolatry,
not to slatter themselves, or to think themselves the members of christ, and
therefore should escape the judgment of God, because they had the sacraments:
for the church of the Israelites had as great privileges as they, they had the
same sacraments, (...) 1. cor. 10, 1. 2. 3, 4.
the same baptism, the same supper in substance and effect, yet God was not
pleased with them, but overthrew them in the wilderness. If then the Corinthians
had any more then these two, they might have justly replied, we grant indeed, in
respect of these they are equal with us, but we have other which they had not,
wherein they are inferior to us, and we superior to them, and therefore are
preferred before them. If then the Apostles reason conclude strongly, we may
hence gather directly, that there are only two and no other Sacraments,
because the Apostle mentions no more, where he purposes to set forth the
privileges of the Jews, and to make them equal with the Gentiles. Wherefore
we must receive two Sacraments only, or else the Apostle has reasoned weakly.

Furthermore, the same Apostle, 1, Corinthians 12. purposinge to show that
many members of the church are one body in CHRIST coupled by him as by
joints, proves this point by a full enumeration of the sacraments, being
pledges of our settinge into the body of CHRIST and continual nourishment in
the same, when he says, 1. cor. 12. 3,
As by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles,
so we have al (...) made to drink into one spirit. Where the Apostle shows,
that all the faithful by the effectual woorking of the Holy-ghoast are made
one body in Christ, which he confirms by the two Sacraments of baptism and
the Lords supper, without mention of any more.

Moreover, another reason may be framed, by comparing the Church of the Jews
with the churches of the christians in regard of their ordinary sacraments.
There are no mo sacraments delivered in the Gospel, then were prefigured under
the law: for their sacraments were (...) (...). 3 21.
types answering to our sacramenst, as 1. Pet. 3. Our baptism answers the
figure of the waters, representing the same that our baptism does. True it is,
the sacraments of the old Testament were not Jewish sacraments not figures of
christian sacraments.
figures of the sacraments of the new Testament, for then their sacraments
should be the sign, and ours should be the thing signified: and so there should
be sacraments of Sacraments, which were foolish and absurd. Again, the Jewish
Sacraments should be signs of things altogether unknown unto them and not
given them of God, for they were utterly ignorant of Baptism and the Lords
Supper. Besides, that ancient people should be saved by believing baptism and
the lords supper to come: for doubtless they were saved by believing that
which their sacraments did signify: but they were not saved by believing
baptism and the Lords supper, but by believing in Christ to come. Lastly, the
old sacraments should have one signification, and the new another; for the old
should signify the new, and the new should signify christ and his benefits.
Notwithstanding, the sacraments of the new testament succeed in the room of
those of the old, and signify the same things that they do, baptism col. 2.
11. 12
came in place of circumcision, and the Lords supper is come in place of the
Paschall lamb, as appears in that it was administered presently after it, Luke
22. 14. 15.
to declare the abrogating of the one and establishing of the other. As then
there was the same faith and the same way of salvation by christ, Revel. 13. 8.
who was the lamb slame from the beginning of the world, Heb. 13. 8.
he was yesterday and to day, and the same for ever: so had the Jewish rites
respect to 1. Cor. 10. 3 4
Christ, and all of them are reduced to our two Sacraments. Wherefore, as the
Jews had only two ordinary Exodus 12. 48
Sacraments, circumcision and the Passover, as appears. If a stranger
dwell with thee, and will obseiue the Passover of the Lord, let him circumcise
all the males that belong unto him: so the ordinary sacraments of Christ's
church are baptism and the Lords supper agreeing to the same. Now the 5. other
sacraments newly invented, were not prefigured in the Law, they succeed not in
the place of their ceremonies, they are not an swerable to any types of Jewish
rudiments, therefore they are no sacraments.

Fifthly, these two sacraments, baptism and the Lords supper, are altogether
perfect and sufficient, not only to enter and plant a Christian into the
church, but also to retain him in it: and therefore all other are frivolous,
vain, and superstitious, as superfluous branches to be pared away. Now, that
they are sufficient to these purposes, appears by the effects and uses of
them. What other grace can we have, then to be borne again in Christ, to have
justification, forgiveness of sins, and all privileges of eternal life; and
then afterward to be norished and kept continually in him. Al these are fully
represented and sealed up to us in these two: wherup on it follows, that
christ, who ordained the fewest and best sacraments under the gospel,
appointed these and no more. Thus then we may gather, that by the institution of
christ, by the argument of the Apostle, by comparison of the Jewish ceremonies,
and by the sufficiency of the two sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper,
that these are the only two sacraments, the rest are forged and counterfeit
sacraments, they seal not up christ, August, in Psalm. 40.
they never flowed out of his side, Ioh. 19. 34.
from whence issued only water and blood.

Lastly, this number of 2. sacraments appears, not only by the testimony of
ancient fathers, but by the confession of the adversaries. For howsoever in
many other controversies, their words are many, and their arguments probable
and very specious: yet for the auouching of 7. Sacraments, they are dumb and
silent, and are not able to produce the reverent witnesses of the elder time.
Bellarmine proves the word Bellar. de effect, sacr. lib. 2 cap, 24.
Sacrament, sometimes to be given to all the (...): but this is when the word is
taken in a large and general signification, for any mystical sign and token,
(...). coloni dial. 7, page, 248
which may signify some other thing, and may more properly be called a sign
then a Sacrament, as the covering of the head in the woman was a sign of
subjection: laying on of hands in ordination of the ministry is a sign of
(...) separation to that work, and of gods presence to assist them with his
grace and blessing: the Saboth day was a sign of the heavenly rest. In this
sense Augustine calls the Aug, de sim, lib. 3, cap, 9.
mystery of the Trinity a Sacrament; and fire a Sacrament, because by the heat,
light, and shining brightness thereof, the Trinity may be shadowed out.
Besides, (...), Encount. 1, (...), 13.
the late Warnword, Page 91. handling this controversy of the number of
Sacraments, does not prove the number of 7. Sacraments out of the Scripture,
neither goes about it, neither is able to derive it further then the counsel
of Florence holden in the year 1440. and from Peter Lumbard, sentent, lib, 4,
dict, 2.
who was indeed the father and first finder and founder of this number
ofseuen. Augustine, when he speaks of Sacraments in the strict and proper
signification, and takes them for holy signs and seals, not only signifieng,
but representing and exhibiting spiritual graces, commanded by christ,
succeeding in the room of the Jewish two ordinary Sacraments, and offering
Christ to all faithful receivers, reckneth them as we do, august. de simb, ad
catechu.
Haec sunt Ecclesiae gemina sacramenta. 1. These be two sacraments of the
church. And in one other place, august, de doctr. christ. lib 3. cap. 9.
Christ and his Apostles have deleuered unto us a few sacraments in stead of
many, as Baptism and the Lords supper. So S. Ambrose entreating purposely
ambros, lib. 1 de sacram, cap. 1,
of the Sacraments, speaks but of two, as the reformed churches hold at this
day. Innocentius the third speaking also of them, c. Firmiter,
only makes mention of those two which we receive, not of the rest which we
refuse. Yea Thomas of Aquine the chief doctor of the papists holds herein
the truth, In lib. 4. sent did. 28 qu, 4
teaching that the form of Bapt. and of the Lords supper is found in the
Scripture, but not of the other pretended sacraments, and namely of extreme
unction. To conclude, Bessar, de sacra., (...)
cardinal Bessarion confesses this, Haec duo sola sacramenta in Euangelijs
manifest tradita legimus, that is, we read that these two only sacraments
were delivered us manifestly and plainly in the Gospel.

Now let us come to the uses of this division. In that Use. 1.
Christ has appointed so few sacraments in number: hereby appears the great
love of God toward us: he has not laid a burden upon us which neither we nor
our fathers were able to bear, but charged us with two sacraments only:
whereas he might have delivered other more unto us. The Ceremonial law was a
very heavy burden pressing down the fathers of the old Testament, and keeping
them act. 15. 10.
in great bondage: now the yoke is broken and we are delivered. As we see the
like mercy of God, in teaching a short for me of prayer, as a perpetual
direction to the church, and in delivering the ten commandments divided into
two tables: so he has not troubled us with many sacraments: whereby also our
nature prone to Idolatry is respected, and the grace of the new testament is
wonderfully amplyfied. We see how superstition and gross Idolatry have
prevailed in the church of Rome, and infected with deadly poison one of the
Sacraments: how much greater danger were it, if more sacraments had been
commanded and commended unto us.

Again, hereby we may perceive and conceive the difference between the old
and new testament, between Use. 2.
the Sacraments under the law and these under the Gospel, Difference between
the Sacraments of the old Testament and the new.
between those given to the Jews and these retained among Christians. For
ours are few in number, theirs were many in number, the Arc, circumcision, the
Passover, Manna, the cloud, the sea, the rock, many purifications and
oblations which are not easy to be numbered. But the Gospel acknowledges
only two, as two twins of the same father. He reunto we may add not
unprofitably, other material differences to be acknowledged. They (...) in
time: ours show forth our communion with Christ already come and so are more
firm and durable as those 1 cor. 11, 26.
which are not to be changed, to the end of the world, Ye show the Lords death
til he come. Their Sacraments were ordained only until the coming of Christ,
because they showed and pointed out Christ to come, so that the work of grace
was more obscure to them. Again, they differ in variety of Sacramental signs
and rites, as the cutting of the foreskin, the lamb of the Passover,
iournying through the sea, saving by the Arc, drinking of the rock, lifting up
the brasent Serpent, raining down of Manna, washing of their body, they had
calves, sheep, Gotes, doves, bread, wine, Oil, and such like: we have only
water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords Supper. Thus the signs do
greatly vary. Fourthly, they differ in easiness. For the Ceremonies committed
to the people of the Jews were hard, combersome, painful to the slesh, and
some of them were administered with effusion and sheding of blood, partly of man
and partly of beasts. Of man, as in circumcision: of beasts, as in the
paschall lam be and in the sacrifices. But our Sacraments, though Sacraments
of Christ's blood shed for us, yet of themselves be void of blood. Fifthly, they
differ in measure of signification. For our Sacraments have a more plentiful
and full representation of grace offered, and stir up a greater measure of
says then the Sacraments of the old Testament (which were more dark and
obscure) the Lord reserving a fuller measure of knowledge unto the blessed
times of the Gospe'l. For as the exhibiting of Christ Jesus in the flesh and
fullness of time, and as it were in the old age of the world, is of more
efficacy to move us then the expectation of him to come: so we have better
helps and an holy advantage to raise and rouse up our faith to a greater
assurance of grace and mercy, by how much the accomplishment is more then the
promise, and the fulfilling greater then the foretelling. Lastly, they differ
in respect of the people to whom they were given, and for whom they were
ordained: ours belong to all people dispersed over the face of the whole earth
(that are ingrafted into the church) whereas theirs were tied to one Nation, to
one people, to one place, to the posterity of Abraham. Notwithstanding these
differences which are in signs and circumstances: touching the chief thing
even the matter and substance of the Sacraments they are equal, Wherein the
Sacraments of the old and new Testament agree.
having the same end and the same signification, and being of one esficacy, as
also the word of the prophets and Apostles is. One and the same God is author
of them. One and the same mediator between God and man, even the man Jesus
Christ is represented in both, being the lamb slain from the foundation of
the world. They signify and show forth the same communion of Christ, by which
all the clect are saved, and seal up salvation and remission of sins to all
that do receive them by faith. For they were given to be signs and seals of
grace and of the promises of God, to distinguish the faithful from all other
sects and religions in the world, and that they should be received with profit
only of the faithful. In these and such like things, the Sacraments of the
Jewish and Christian church are not unequal: although in the outward signs
and circumstances they be diverse, yet in the substance and in the thing
signified there is no difference.

Thirdly, we are bound to believe his promises, and to have strong consolation,
seeing he has given us 2. signs. Use. 3.
If we had only had one sign as a seal of the mercies of God in Christ, it
had been a great sin not to have believed the promise, and not to have
rested therein as in a thing unchangeable. For he is not as man that he should
ly, or deceive: 2 cor. 1, 10
his only promise is assured payment: yea all the promises of God in him are
yea, and are in him Amen, unto the glory of God. But seeing the goodness of
God has abounded, in granting unto us two Sacraments, that where doubting
abounds, there faith might abound much more: our sin is the greater, if now
we waver like I am. 1. 6.
a wave of the sea tossed of the wind and carried away. One tree of life served
Adam to assure him life: one raine-bowe sufficed Noah: One return of the fun
back ward was enough to Hezekiah, and they believed. If then we seek a sign,
behold we have two given unto us, that having two unchangeable sacraments as it
were two witnesses of his word, we might have strong consolation. The
unbelieving Jews said to christ, Math, 12. 38. and, 16. 1.
show us a sign and we will believe thee. Behold the Lord shows us two
visible signs, of his spiritual and invisible graces, and shall not we
believe, being steadfast in faith? We desire forgiveness of sins and assurance
thereof: by these two, the Lord promises, couenanteth, and indenteth to give
the same unto us, setting the seals to his own writing.

Lastly, this division and numbering up of the sacraments Use. 4.
serves to teach, that there are not seven sacraments of the church, and so do
condemn the five supposed and falsely named sacraments Council. Trid. sess. 7.
de sacra in gen can. 18 11, and 13.
maintained of the church of Rome, to wit, confirmation, penance, Matrimony,
orders, and extreme unction. Baptism we embrace: the Lords supper we
acknowledge: of these two we move no question, we make no controversy: the
other five, whole father is unknown: we refuse as bastards, and cannot admit
them into the number of sacraments, the reasons whereof we will render in the
chapters following.

Chap. 17. That confirmation is not a sacrament,
THe Apostles as the maister-builders of the churches, planted the Gospel
where the name of Christ had not bin heard. Now because many seducers arose
that trobled the peace of the church, and the faith of many believers began to
waver: the Apostles agreede together to go again to the churches where they
had laid 1. cor. 3. 12.
a golden foundation (howsoever other had builded hay and stubble thereon:) to
see how they act, 11. 22. 23. and 15. 36.
increased or decreased, as Act. 11. and they confirmed their hearts and
established them in the faith which they had taught. And Chap 15. Paul said
unto Barnabas, Let us return and visit our brethren in every City where we
have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. And we doubt not, but
when the Gospel was reueiled, the Apostles by laying on hands gave the gifts
of the Holy Ghost to the believers in Christ. This practice of the Apostles we
find, this we confess, this we approve and allow. But of any sacrament of
confirmation we read not, and therefore allow not. Again, it was a laudable
custom (in the primitive church) of christian parents, to bring their children
to the Bishop, who examined them in the principles and fundamental points of
religion, Heb. 6. 1.
he asked them a reason of their faith, he instructed them farther in the
mysteries of godliness: and that this action might have the more reverence and
dignity, they laid their hands upon them, and prayed unto God for them, that he
would increase and continue the good things that he had begun in them. This
confirmation is no sacrament.
imposition of hands, with prayer to be strengthened in the Holy Ghost, and to
have increase of grace, corrupted with annointings, depraved with crossings,
and defiled with sundry superstitions, is no sacrament. First, every sacrament
should have warant and appointment from Christ: but this has none. Secondly,
it has no word of institution in the scripture, nor commandment to continue
the use of it until the coming of Christ and end of the world, and therefore
no sacrament. For the word must be added to the element, and so it is made a
sacrament. True it is, they use a forged and counterfeit form in their
confirmation, I sign thee with the sign of the holy cross, and I confirm
thee with the oil of salvation, in the name of the father, and the son, and of
the holi-ghost. These indeed are words, but no word of God: they show an
intolerable presumption, and not to be excused. But indeed a counterfeit
Sacrament, and there is a good agreement when both writing and seal are
suitable, that is, both forged. Thirdly, it wants an outward sign instituted
by Christ. We read oftentimes that the Apostles used laying on of hands, but we
read of no oil or chrisme. Besides, we know they gave thereby, the miraculous
gifts of the holy ghost which now are ceased, as Act. 8. where we see, when
Samaria was converted to the faith by preaching of Phillip, and baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus, the Apostles sent thither Peter and John, who prayed
for them, act. 8, 5, 14. 15, 16, 17.
That they might receiu the Holy Ghost (for as yet he was fallen down on none
of the^) then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.
This confirmation thus used, had then a profitable use in the church of God.
But as the brazen Serpent commanded by Numb 21. 89
God, and set up by Moses for good purpose, was afterward abused and 2 king.
18. 4
incense offered unto it, and lastly was by that good king Hezekiah destroyed
and demolished: so popish confirmation hith many intolerable abuses mingled
with it, it is ministered in a strange tongue that none understand what is
spoken and meant: they call the oil, the oil of salvation: they acount him no
perfect Christian that is not anointed by the Bishop: they prefer it before
baptism, because Censur. colon dial. 11. page 326. 327.
any of their piiests may baptize, nay private men, nay women in their supposed
time of necessity, but confirmation may be given among them only by the hands
of a bishop: and lastly, they blow and halow their oil, that it may be made a
spiritual ointment to purify soul and body. These errors are so gross, that
of every one they may be seen: they are so palpable, that they may be felt.
Wherefore, seeing their confirmation is wrought by anointing, seeing it has no
word of God but a word of their own, seeing they have no commandment for it,
nor promise of the presence of the Holy Ghost, and last of all seeing it has
many abuses joined with it; we have very just causes to thrust it out of this
place and rank of the sacraments, and throw it down from that high seat
which (...) has long usurped.

Chap. 18. That popish penance is no Sacrament.
THe doctrine of repentance and turning from all our sins to God, to bring
forth fruits of amendment of life, is taught in the Sacraments Joel. 2, 12, 13
Genesis 6, 5. Romans 7. 18. Psalm. 51. 5. Ioh. 1. 6.
and commended unto all, Joel. 2. Turn you unto me withal your heart, and
rent your heart, not your garments. There is none that lives and sins not,
we are corrupt and become abominable, the imaginations of our heart are only
evil, and that continually: in us, that is in our flesh or unregenerate part
there dwells no good thing: we were conceived and borne in sin, and therefore
whosoever says, He is without sin, deceives himself, and there is no truth
in him. This corruption of our nature that has taken hold on all mankind (for
there is none that does good no not one) must be mortified, and the new man
which is spiritual and regenerate by the holy ghost must be quickened.
Repentance therefore consists in an Esa. 1, 16, 17 Psalm. 34, 15. Math. 3, 8
Act. 2, 38, 2 cor. 7, 10, 11
inward sorrow for our sins, in an hatred of the^, in suppressing the
corruptions of nature in a purpose to obey God, in a care to sorsake our sins,
in confessing the greatness of them, in condemning our our selves for them, in
acknowledging the desert of them, in an holy indignation and anger against our
selves, that we have been so careless in looking to our own ways, in
fearing least we run into the same sins again, in desiring ever hereafter
to please God, and to walk more carefully before him in zeal touching the
service of God, and in taking revenge sometimes and punishment upon our selus
for former offenses. For we confess plainly and deny not, but some outward
penalties and chastisements of the body may be used and do please God, not of
themselves, but because they are profitable means and good helps to further
and forward true repentance. As for example, he that has offended grievously
in surfeiting and drunkenes, and has great heaviness of heart and sorrow of mind
that he has sinned against so gracious a God and merciful father: may
prescribe and appoint to himself without appearance of superstition, or error
of satisfaction, or opinion of (...), some fasting or abstinence for a certain
time, that he may be better fitted to gods service, and further strengthened
against those sins into which he is fallen. This doctrine we receive as the
doctrine of Christ, and agreeable to the prophets and Apostles, as appears, 2
Cor. 7. where Paul sets down the effects or fruits of true repentance.

Now the question Penance no Sacrament.
arises between the church of Rome and us, whether this repentance which is a
dying to sin, and a walking in newness of life, and whether reconciliation
to the church and absolution from sin be a Sacrament of the new Testament,
institvted by Christ to assure his saving graces to us? We answer, it is not.
First, it was in time of the old Testament from the beginning of man's fall and
transgression: it was continually preached and published by the prophets, and
therefore before Christ's coming in the flesh, and cannot be a sacrament of
the new Testament. Secondly, it wants an outward sign such as water in
Baptism, such as bread and wine in the Lords supper: now every Sacrament must
have an outward element and sign to represent the spiritual grace: therefore
penance can be no Sacrament.

Thirdly, it has no word to command it, no particular promise of God which is
the chiese stay and staff of a sacrament. Bellarmine affirms, that Bellar.
lib. 1. de poenit. cap. 10.
Christ instituted the sacrament of penance when he breathed upon his Apostles
after his resurrection, and said unto them, Ioh. 20. 22.
Receive the holy ghost, whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose
sins ye retain they are retained. And he says, the words of absolution are
the sign, and that remission of sins is the the promise of grace which is
signified. For answer to this assertion, I would gladly ask this question,
whether the apostles had this ministerial power to forgive sins to repentant
sinnets, when they baptized to remission of sins? If this power were here
first instituted and given unto them? Do they not by tying the authority of
remitting finnes to this time, make their baptism of none effect? Besides, we
have showed, that it is not sufficient to have a sound of words that may be
heard, to make an outward sign: there must be a visible sign that may be
seen, to warrant a sacrament. Now, to make a Sacrament without such a sign,
were to make a sacrament without a sacrament. Lastly, as they take and
understand penance, it is neither sacrament, nor sacred: it is neither holy
sign nor holy thing: it is neither an institution of God, nor any way of God.
For they mean not thereby, amendment of life or inward sorrow and grief of
mind for the life past, which is sometimes testified by weeping and mourning,
by sackcloth and ashes, by fasting and humiliation: but they understand by
penance (...) external discipline, satisfaction for our sins to God by our
own sufferings: and that wearing of sackcloth, sprinkling of ashes, chastising
of the body, whipping of the flesh, putting on rough apparel, lying on bourds
and hard places, abstaining from flesh, and aflicting our selves by such
outward exercises, are a paying of the pains due to sin, part of amends
made to Gods justice, and meritorious before him. This punishment, this
penance, these penalties we abhor, as an horrible blasphemy against the blood
of Christ, which is the only satisfaction to God for sin. For if we satisfy
for our selves, then has not Christ satisfied for us, nor paid the price due
unto our sins. Besides, they charge God the father with injustice, in that
having laid the guiltiness of our sins upon his own son, and punished
them in him, they make him not satisfied with that punishment, but to exact the
debt of us again, Esa. 53. 5. 7
for which his son as our surety has fully and sufficiently answered, as
Esa. 53. He is punished for our transgressions, he is bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace is lated upon him, and by his stripes
we are healed: the Lord makes the punishment of us all to light upon him.
Likewise 1 Ioh. 1. 7 Reu. 1. 5.
the Apostle John says. The blood of JESUS CHRIST does purge us from all
sin. And in the Revelation he adds, Christ has washed us from our sins
in his blood. Whereby we see we are taught to believe, that we are pardoned and
reconciled to God, not through our own satisfaction, not for our own works,
not by our own sufferings, but only through the death and blood sheading of
Christ. Wherefore, their penance is to be acknowledged to be sacrilege, and
accepted as a Sacrament.

Chap. 19. That Matrimony is not a Sacrament.
THe Counsel of Trent under Pius 4. Sess. 8 decrees, Council. Trid. sess. 8.
can. 1.
If any shall say, that Matrimony is not truly and properly one of the 7.
Sacraments instituted by Christ, but was brought in by men into the Church,
and does not confer grace let him be accursed. Hereby, they would seem to
set forth the dignity of marriage above us, seeing they lift it up into the
number of the Sacraments of the Church. Yet (as a liar seldom agrees with
himself) they complain that we too highly magnify the married estate, and
themselves cannot abide it in their clergy, because for sooth it is written, Be
ye holy for I am holy: they which are in the flesh cannot please God. Marriage
therefore is too holy an ordinance for their unholy clergy, inasmvch as they
teach in this point 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2, 3.
the doctrine of devils, and are led by the spirit of error, that forbid
marriage which God has left free. We confess touching marriage, so much as the
word of God teaches us, that it is an ordinance of God, instituted before the
fall of man while he was without sin, Genesis 2, 18
and blessed of God, who said, It is not good for man to be alone, let us make
him an helper meet for him. This estate Christ did not abrogate and disanull,
but repeated and confirmed, Math. 19, 16, Ioh. 2, 1, 2 Heb. 13. 4.
not only by word, but by his own presence, and has left it as a lawful
remedy against fornication and uncleanness. We account it an honorable estate
of life among all, and the bed undefiled, but cor. 6, 9, 10.
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, and cast into utter darkness,
where their worm shall never die, and their fire shall not be quenched, as the
Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 6, Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor drunkards, shall inher it the
kingdom of God. Notwithstanding, Reasons why marriage is no Sacrament.
we cannot call and account it a Sacrament, for diverse weighty reasons, and
evident causes. First, it was not instituted by Christ, but was from the
beginning of the world, and therefore it was before the law and under the law,
how can it be a Sacrament of the new Testament? Again, matrimony may be among
infidels and unbelievers, out of the Church and society of the faithful. For
the matrimony of infidels is lawful. God did institute it for all mankind. The
commandment is general, increase and multiply. The Apole teaches, that if
the unbelieving woman will dwell with the believing husband, Grati. in dec. c.
28. qu. 1. Lumb. lib. 4 did. 39.
he must not put her away for her infidelity: and marriage is honorable among
all persons. Seeing therefore it was before the fall of man, before the giving
of the law, under the government of the law, and made honorable among all,
it cannot be a Sacrament of the church of Christ and for the members only of
the Church. Thirdly, it is not common and commanded to all the faithful, for
it is not needful and necessary that all in the church should be married. 1
Cor. 7, 7 Mat. 19, 11 12
Every one has his proper gift, some one way some another. And albeit God have
not tied grace to the sacraments, yet they in some sort How the Sacraments
are necessary for the church
are necessary for the Church, and to be partaked of the children of the
Church, whether we respect the commandment of God, who requires them: or
whether we regard our own weakness, who stand in need of all holy means
and profitable helps that tend to the confirmation of our faith. Seeing then
matrimony is not commanded to al, neither serves to confirm faith, it cannot
be received as a sacrament. Fourthly, the sacraments are ordinances of god
aplying Christ and his merits to all the faithful: but matrymony is not an
instrument whereby God applies Christ and al his benifits: much less is it a
common instrument of the common salvation and benefits that all have in Christ
Jesus. Furthermore, we have showd how the Roman church is contrary to itself
in this point: for ou: adversaries call matrimony a profanation Greg. Mart. d:
s. Chap. 15.
of holy orders. And Pigghius.
another says, it is more tolerable for a priest to keep many Concubins,
then to marry. If matrimony be an holy sa. how should the sacred order of your
Priesthood be profaned, polluted, and defiled thereby? Lastly, it (...) no
promise of salvation joined to it (as it ought to have) though it be lawful and
used lawfully: in every Sacra. there must be likewise an outward sign or
element, as water in baptism, and bred and wine in the Lords supper, together
with a san ctisieng word to warant it: but in this supposed sacra. there is
neither matter, nor word, therefore no sacra. The answer that Belarmin makes to
this last reason is as absurd as their doctrine it self, namely, that the word
of iustitution is, bellvr. lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 6
take thce, which are the words expressing their mutual consent: and that the
matter or sign are the parties married. For, not every word can consecrate and
sanctify 1. Tim. 4, 5
but the word of God. Again, the married persons are receivers of this pretended
and supposed Sa. so that they cannot be the matter or sign: For the sign and
the receiver are two distinct outward parts of a Sa, so that they cannot be
consounded or mingled together, as besore we declared, Chap 3. The matter
cannot be the receiver: the receiver cannot be the matter. The thing received,
cannot be the receiver: the receiver cannot be the thing received. If then the
persons matied be the receivers, they cannot be the sign received. If any
farther object and say, Marriage is the sign of an holy thing, to wit, of the
spiritual conjunction between Christ and his church: I answer, it was not
instituted to confirm our faith in that point, but for other ends which we
named before. Besides, if we should call al signs of holy things sacraments: we
should treble the number of 7. for so many comparisons as we find in scripture,
we should have sacraments, and then the stars, a grain of mustard seed, leaven,
a draw-net, a shepherd a Vine, a door, nay a these, a murderer, and infinite
other, things should be Sacraments; which sometimes are made signs of holy
things. This were not so much to increase the number of Sacraments, as to
multiply absurdities. Lastly, the Sabbath was ordained to the Jews to be a
sign between God and his people in their generations, Hob. 4. 8
and signified the spiritual rest in Christ, yet was it no ordinary sacrament,
albeit it were blessed and sanctified of God. Wherefore al mystical and
signifieng signs are not Sacraments.

But the greatest reason where of they are most confident is, where the vulgar
translation and the Rhemish interpretation Ephesians. 5. 3 (...)
reads, This is a great Sacrament. I answer, first the word signisieth a
mystery or secret: but not every mystery or secret is a sacrament: neither will
they admit a sacrament, wheresoever a mystery is named. Secondly the Apost
speaks not of Matrimony, but of the spiritual conjunction between Christ and
his church, as the words following do declare, This is a great mystery: but I
speak of Christ and of the Church.

Where the Appostle preuenteth this very objection, and shows in what
respect he spoke of a mystery. For where one might happily object and say,
Do thou call marriage this mystery? he answers, I speak not this of
Marriage, I speak it in respect of Christ and of his church. This appears
likewise in that he calls it a great Mystery; that is, A great secret. But
the conjunction of man and wife is sensible, not secret, much less a great
secret. Now the Sacraments are called mysteries, Why Sacraments are called
(...).
in respect of the sacramental union between the sign and the thing
signified, between the representation and the thing represented, so that at the
same instant that one is present to the eyes, the hands, the mouth, and every
part and member of the body, the other by the power and working of Gods spirit
is as present in a wonderful, mystical, and secret manner to the faith, being
the eyes and hands of the soul. Wherefore Cardinal Caietan not so gross as
many among them, (...) in (...) cap. 5.
confesses that these words prove not matrimony to be a Sacra. Further, it is
evident to all that consider the circumstance of the text, that the Apostle not
forth marriage in this place as a similitude to represent the near conjunction
between christ and his church, Ephesians. 5 23, 25 28, 29, 32
but (...) he brings forth the exceeding and eminent love of christ as a
(...) to declare and enforce what should be the love of the husband toward the
wife. For the main point of exhortation is set down, verse 25. Husbands love
your wives This is argued and enforced by the example of Christ, As Christ
loved the church and gave himself for it. Again, The man is the head of the
woman, as Christ is the head of the church. And afterward, He that loves his
wife, loves himself, for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes
and cherishes it, even as the Lord does the church. By all these things it is
plain and manifest, that if they will needs in this place dream of a
sacrament, consisting of a sign and thing signisied: Christ and the church
must be the sign, representation, and consecrated mystery to represent man and
his wife, and their mutual love each to other, and not marriage a consecrated
sign of him. Last of al, I would know of them, whether so often as the old
translator uses the word sacrament, they will have it taken strictly, properly,
and particularly for the Sacraments of their church? I think if they be sober
minded and well advised, they dare not say so: for 1 Timothy 3, 16 Ephesians. 1, 9, and
chapter 3, 9
then godliness shall be a sacrament, Gods will shall be a sacrament, The calling
of the Gentiles shall be a Sacrament, Yea iniquity shall be a Sacrament. For in all these places the word Sacrament is used, as well as in this place to the
Ephesians Revel. 17, 7
by the old Interpretor, and sometimes in the good part, and sometimes in the
evil: conc. Trid. ses. 4. decret. 2 Melch. canus. lib. 2. cap. 13. Andrad. lib.
4 defens. Trid.
to whom notwithstanding they cleave, and must cleave under pain of the censur
and curse of the council of Trent.

Chap. 20. That orders are no Sccrament.
BY orders we must understand the offices and ministry of the church, Lumb.
sent. lib. 4, did. 24 cap. 3
as also Peter Lumbard does. We confess, when Christ led captivity captive, he
gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4, 11
and ordained Some to be Apostles, some prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some pastors and teachers for the repairing of the saint, for the work of the
ministry and for the edification of the body Ier. 7. 25.
of Christ. By these he declares his will unto us, he gathers Luc. 10 16.
together his scattered sheep, and publishes the glad tidings 2 cor. 5. 19. 10
of salvation, as Ier. 7. I have sent unto you all my servants the Prophets,
rising up early every date. And christ our savior says, Luc, 10. He that
hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, aespiseth me and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me. And the Apostle Paul, 2. Cor, 5,
teaches, God was in Christ and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing
their sins unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation: Now
then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us we
pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. This we hold, this we
believe, this we teach touching the degrees, orders, and offices of the
ministry of the gospel.

But the popish orders of the Popish churches, sentent. lib. dict. 24. cap. 1.
they say are seven, whereof some are greater and higher offices, some are
lower, lesser, and inferior. The greater are three, the office of Priesthood
to offer up the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ upon the Altar: of
Deaconship, to assist the priests in all things which are done in the
Sacraments, to bring in the oblations, to set them upon the Altar, to cover it
with clothes, to bear the cross, and to read the Gospel and Epistle to the
people: of the subdeacons, to bring the chalice and patten, to bring the cruet
with water and the towell to the Altar, and to pour out water to wash their
hands. These are their higher Offices above the rest, as the higher trees among
the lower shrubs. The lesser orders are four in number. First of dore-keepers,
these receive the keys of the church door to open the same. Secondly of
readers, to read the Bible to the people.

Thirdly of Exorcistes, to call upon the name of the Lord, over such as have
unclean spirits, adiuring and coniuring them to come out in the name of god:
which power of commanding evil spirits is ceased in the Church. Lastly, A
Colythes, to prepare and carry torches and tapers when the Gospel is read to
the people, or the sacrifice is to be offered.

These seven popish orders, or rather plain disorders and consusions, we
cannot receive Reasons ren dred why orders are no Sacraments.
into the number of Sacraments of the Church. For (...), orders are so
fruitful, that this bird has hatched seven young ones. This Sacrament is so
rich, so rank, so riotous, that it has ingendered and brought forth seven
petty and pretty sacraments, and therefore these being numbered and patched up
to the sormer, we should have 13. Sacraments. A goodly brood of a gallant egg.
For if every one of these orders of doorekeepers, readers, exorsistes,
Acolithes, subdeacons, deacons, and priests be Sacraments: we should multiply
the number of Sacraments according to the number of these orders, and so
indeed of seven, we should have 13. Sacraments, which were a very disorderly
order, or if you list to call it, an orderly disorder.

And so Peter Lumbard master of the Sentences, sent. lib. 4 (...). 24. cap. 1
calls not orders a Sacrament as speaking of one, but Sacraments as speaking
of many, saying, Orders are called Sacraments, because in receiving of them
grace is conferred, which is represented by those things that are there
performed. Neither can they say they al make but one sacrament, sceing they are
distinct offices one from another, diverse in offices, in institution, in
calling, in ordinatio^, in ceremonies, and in form of consecration: so that
they may by as good right and as great reason make baptism and the Lords
supper one sacrament, as all these orders so diverse and distinct the one from
the other.

Secondly, sacraments have their institution from christ: orders have not their
institution from Christ to be Sacraments of the church: therefore orders are no
sacraments. Nay as they are retained and used in the church of Rome, they are
no ordinances or institutions of christ at all. For touching the osfices of
priesthood to offer up the body of Christ for the quick and dead: of deacons
to serve these Baals priests at their Idolatrous alters: of subdeaco^s, of
readers, and of the rest, they are not found in scripture, neither were
ordained by the apostles, neither were they received into the church for many
years after Christ and his Apostles. The new Testament as it does acknowledge
no other sacrificer and sacrifice but Christ, so it admits no priests, no
priesthood, but spitituall priests and a spiritual priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving unto God, Revel. 1. 6 1. Pet.
2. 5. 9
as appears Revel. 1. 6. Christ has washed us from our sins in his blood,
and made us kings and priests unto God even his father. And the Apostle Peter
in his first epiftle chap. 2. says, Ye also as lively stones be made a
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrisices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And again afterward, Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a people set at liberty, that
ye should show forth the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness
into his marvelous light. Whosoever brings in another priesthood then this,
and makes new priests, abolisheth as much as in him lies the priesthood of
Christ. Again, what will they say, of offices and dignities in the Church
greater then these, the office of pope, of cardinal, of patryarch, and the
rest of that unholy hierarchy? Will they discharge and cut off these from being
sacraments, and advance the baser orders of hedge priests and dombe deacons to
so high a dignity? What? Do they abase and disgrace those greater places, and
think their popes and cardinals not worthy of that honor and authority? or do
they think this Sacrament to vile and base to agree to those princelike
dignities of the church? Or dare they prefer their priesthood, their
readers, their decons, there doorekeepers, their dog-keepers, and the rest of
that rabble before the pope dome, the cardinalship, the Patryarchship? Is not
this high treson against their holy father, and petty treason against the
cardinals and other of that generation? Lastly, Sacraments must have an outward
element and word of institution, as has been often declared and proved: but
their orders have neither outward element, nor word of institution: therefore
orders are no sacra. Seeing therefore they can show no material sign added to
the promise, nor gracious promise added to the sign: there can be no sacrament
of orders to seal up and assure any mercy of God granted unto us. To omit that
reason, which we might (...) upon them, namely, that orders are peculiar and
proper to the ministry, and are no sanctified instrument aply any general and
common grace of the Church. Wherefore, as much as orders have neither outward
sign, nor promise of grace, nor institution from Christ, but disgrace the
higher dignities of their Church, and overthrow their own chosen number of
seven Sacraments: we conclude necessarily from these premises that orders are
no Sacrament.

Chap. 21. That extreme unction is no Sacrament.
THe last feigned Sacrament is the last annoynting (as they call it) performed
by the priest in extreamety, where by they teach that Bollar. lib. 1, de extr.
vnct. cap. 2.
God assures forgiveness of sins, and promises ease of bodily disease, if
it be so exped ent: if not, the salvation of the soul in the life to come.
They use this form of words, By this holy anointing and his most holy mercy,
God does forgive thee whatsoever that have offended, by seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, and touching.

This unction cannot be a sacrament for Extreme unction can be no sacrament
sundry causes. First, themselves confess, that it has not his institution
from Christ. For the Rhem'stes in their heretical, Rhem. testam.
Annotations upon Mar. 6 confess, that there is only a preparation unto it.
And Peter Lumbard says, sentent. lib. 4. (...). 23. cap. 2
It was instituted by the Apostle James. By this doctrine, Christ should only
be a preparer of sacraments, not an appointer: a beginner, not a finisher of
them. Now, these men are all accursed by the Conuenticle of Trent, Council.
Trid. sess. 7 can. 1 and 2.
If any man shad say that the sacraments of the new law were not all instituted
by Jesus christ, let him be accursed. Again, the place of the Apostle James,
makes nothing for this sorged sacrament: for there is a great difference and
contrariety between the anointing that James speaks off, and the popish
anealing. Their priests have not the miraculous guist of healing, whereof this
(...) was an outward sign in the primitive church, which custom afterward
ceased when the (...) of healing ceased: being for a time granted to the church
for the credit of the Gospel. As then the guist was temporal and for a
reason, so must the sign be of the same standing and continuance: and the
gift being taken from the church, if the sign should remain in use and
practice, it should be but a lieng sign. For by the same reason, Ioh. 5. 4,
and 9 6, 7
the brook of Siloam, the poole Bethesda, the clay and (...) which were
sometimes used in healing the diseased, might be accounted sacraments as well as
this, being all signs of healing for a certain season, as also annoynting
with oil was for the first times of the church while it was in planting.
Thirdly, the Apostle would have al sick persons anointed: these do anoint with
their greazy oil, only such bodies as are in manner half dead, even while
they lie in extremity, and the life is striving to come forth. The Apostle
would have all the elders called: but one Masle-priest only with them brings
the box, and annoynteth the sickman. The Apostle assures health to Iam. 5. 14.
15 Mar. 6, 13
all that are thus anointed, as I am. 5. The prayer of faith shall save him
that is suke, and the Lord shall raise him up. So also Mark. 6. They cast out
many deuels, and they anointed many that were sick with oil, and healed them:
whereby we see, that restoring and recovering of health was certainly promised
to follow the anointing. But not one among many receives health after their
popish anealing. The Apostle speaks of bodily health, of the gift of
miracles, and of common oil: they prattle of forgiveness of sins, of a common
and continual gift, of charmed and consecrate oil, and balm (whereof
notwithstanding can none be found) of bowing their knees and saluting it,
saving, Hailholy oil, hail holy ointment, hail holy balm, nay which is
more blasphemous, their oil they call The oil of salvation, which is to
renounce salvation by Christ, and to deny the holy spirit to sanctify the
people of God. Furthermore, every sacrament must have a word of institution:
but the words which they use in anealing are a strange salvation of a dumb
and deaf creature, not warranted nor found in scripture, as the words of
consecration in the true sacraments are: and therefore we cannot receive it for
a sacrament, but must account it an apish imitation and a popish tradition.
Moreover, we have proved before chap. 8. that the element is consecrated when
the sacrament is ministered, by praying, thanksgiving, eating and drinking,
delivering and receiving, breaking and pouring out, blessing and reciting the
institution: therefore the oil hallowed long before by the Bishop, heated with
breathing upon it, charmed with much murmuring, saluted with bowing of the
knee, and other like trumperies, that hallowing I say is fond, superfluous, and
superstitious. Lastly, the effect and virtue of a Sacrament is spiritual grace
in Christ: but extreme unction has no spiritual grace in Christ sealed up:
for the Apostle ascribes Iam. 5, 16
not the forgiveness of (...), to the anointing with oil, but to the prayer of
faith. Acknoledge (says he) your faults one to another, and pray one for
another that ye may be healed, for the prayer of a righteous man avails much
if it be fervent. And again, The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the
lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven
him. Where we see, that the effect of pardon is ascribed to the force of prayer:
therefore extreme unction is no sacra. and so this greazing, houseling, and
anointing is to be abandoned of the people of God.

What then, will some say, do you leave the sick without al comfort and
consolation? No, How the sick are to be anointed.
we visit the sick among us: and although we do not housse and anoint them
with material oil, we anoint them with the precious oil of the mercy of
god, we instruct them how to prepare themselves to leave the world, to depart
this mortal life, and to strengthen themselves in the assured hope of
everlasting life. We say, dear brother, God sends his messenger death to
summon, and arrest you to come into his presence. Genesis 3, 19 Job. 14, 1, 2
All the children of Adam are dust, and to dust they must return. Man that is
borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full of trouble, he shoots
forth like a Flower and is cut down, he vanishes also as a shadow and
continues not. Death is common Psalm. 89, 48, Heb 9, 27
to all flesh, it is appointed to all men once to (...). It is the gate through
which we must enter into heaven. If we would live for ever, we must die: for
the way to live eternally, is (...) to die. Though the time be vncettaine,
where, or how we shall die: yet nothing so certain as that we must die, we know
not how soon. This must not seem strange unto you, for the whole life of a
Christian should be nothing but a meditation of death, being the end of all
flesh: we should make account of every day of our life as if it were the instant
day of our death You must consider that nothing befalls us by chance or
fortune, al things are ruled and guided by the sovereign providence of
almighty God: all the hairs of our head are numbered: not one sparrow falls to
the ground without the will of your heavenly father: humble your self therefore
under his mighty hand, Heb. 12, 5, 6
he conecteth every child whom he loves, My son, despise not the chastening of
the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the L. loves.
he chasteneth: and he scourges every son whom he receives. Heerby then God
tries and proves your obedience, patience, and faith Iam. 5, 11 Job 13. 15.
as we see in the example of Job, who praised the name of God in all his
miseries: and if the Lord would kill him, he would not cease to put his trust
in him.

We exhort them to set their houses in order before they die, thereby to cut
off hatred and contention, and to stay quarrels and suites after their
departure, whereby oftentimes more is spent then was left: then, to forget the
world and the things of the world, and wholly to give themselves to the
meditation of the life to come, where this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on imortality, 1 cor. 15, (...)
according to the exhortation of christ and his Apostles in many places, as
Mat. 6. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
things shall be ministered unto you. And 1, Cor, 7. This I say brethren because
the time is snort, hereafter that both they which have Wives be as though they
had none: and they which weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice as
tho they reioysed not, and they that buy, as though they possessed not: and
they that use this world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of this
world goes away. And Phil 3. 20;
the same Apostle. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for
a savior, even the Lords Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile (...), that
it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working,
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. So 2. Cor 4. etc.
Therefore we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man
is renewed daily. For our light affiction which is but for a moment, causes
unto us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory: while we look
not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not (...) for the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be
destroyed, we have a building given of God, that is, an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens: for therefore we sigh, desiring to be
clothed with our house which is from heaven, because if we be clothed, we
shall not be found naked. And the Eccl. 1. 2. 14
wiseman Eccle. 1. Vanity of vanities says the Preacher, vanity of vanities,
all is vanity: I have considered all the works that are don under the sun, and
behold al is vanity and vexation of spirit. So 1. Ioh. 2. Love not this world,
1 John. 2. 15. 16 17.
neither the things that are in this world. If any man love this world, the
love of the father is not in him: for all that is in this world (as the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the father,
but is of this world: and this world passes away and the lust thereof: but he
that fulfilleth the will of God, abides ever. And the same in his reave lations,
I heard a voice from heaven, saying, write the dead which die in the Lord are
fully blessed: even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more,
(...) shall the Sun light on them, neither any heat, for the lamb which is
in the midst of the throne shall govern them, and shall lead them unto the
lively fountains of Waters, and God shall wipe away al tears from their eyes.

Moreover, we put them in mind to examine themselves and their lives passed,
how they have offended God and their brethren, and admonish them to make an
humble and hearty confession of their sins to God, that that they have not
lived as they ought to do, to be sorry and grieved for the same, and to
promise ammendement of life if they recover. Thus the faithful Psa 51. 1 2. 3
4, 5 and 32, 3, 4. and 38, 3, 4,
have done, as we see in David. Psalm, 51. Have mercy upon me O God according
to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy compassions put away
mine iniquities. I know mine iniquities and my sin is ever before me: against
thee, against thee have I sinned and done evil in thy sight, that thou may
be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest. Behold, I was borne in
iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. And psalm, 38. There is
nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there rest in my
bones because of my sin: for mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and as
a weighty burden they are too heavy for me. This practice we see also in
Daniell, in Nehemia, in Ezra, in Manasses, and in many others. We move Dan. 9,
7 Ezr 9, 6 Nehe. 9, 16
them to labor to be at one with God, to be reconciled to their brethren, and
to remember the poor. Especially we stir them up to prayer, in regard of
their present necessities, and of the merciful promises of God, resting
themselves on the perfect and all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ. Gracious Psa.
145, 18
and precious are the promises that God has made to all that come to the throne
of his mercy, as p. al. 145. The Lord is near to all that call upon him, yea
to all that call upon him in truth: he will fulfill the desire of them that
fear him, he will also hear their cry, and will save them. And psalm, 50. Call
upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify
me. And our savior Math, 7. Ask and it shall be given you: seek, and ye
shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for whosoever asks,
receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened, So the Apo. James. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the
Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him: acknowledge your faults one to another, that ye may be healed:
for the prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent Now when they
are sufficiently humbled for their sins, we move them to hunger and thirst
after the merits of Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 30.
who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. We allege unto them Mat. 11, 28 29.
these and such like comfortable places of Scripture, Come unto me 1 Timothy 1, 15
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease yon. This is a a true
saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. These things write I unto you
that ye sin not: if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ the just, whose blood cleanses us from all sin: he is the (...) for
our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.
He is evermore about those that are his, he makes their bed in all their
sickness, (...). 8, 3 Romans 14, 7, 8
his left hand under their heads, and with his right hand he does embrace them:
so that whether they live, they live unto the Lord, or whether they die, they
dye unto the Lord: whether they live or dye they are the Lords. This is true
happiness.

Furthermore, we raise them up with sweet comforts and consolations of the word
of god against 1 cor. 15. 54 55, 56, 57
alterror and fear of death, Death is swallowed up in victory. o death where
is thy sting? o grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and
the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be unto God which has Romans 8, 1,
38 39.
given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. And Romans 8. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which Phil. 1, 12 Job. 11, 25
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: I am persuaded Tim. 4, 7, 8
that neither death nor life, nor Angels, principalities, powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, neither any creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Christ is to us
advantage, whether in life or in death. Such as believe in him, yea though they
were dead, shall live. Death is to us as a sleep, and the grave as a bed of
rest. A crown of righteousness is laid up for us, which the righteous judge
shall give unto us: so that an evil death can never follow, where a good life
has gone before, forasmuch as he cannot possible die ill, who has lived well.
Death indeed is a Scorpion or serpent: but his sting is pulled out, he may well
hiss, but he cannot hurt: he may well threaten, but he cannot destroy, for
Christ has quelled and conquered him.

Now, How sick persons may put away the tediousnes and pains of sickness.
to put away the grief and tediousnes of sickness, we will and wish them to
meditate on the things they have heard and learned by the ministry of the word
from time to time in their health: to consider with themselves how God
sometimes suffers the wicked to prosper for a time, and flourish like a green
Psalm. 37, 39 36, 37, 38
bay tree, and how he punishes them in the (...) wrath and judgment for them:
how he blesses or corrects his children in this life: how he has prepared
eternal torments for the wicked, and unspeakable glory for the Godly: but
above all the works of God, 1 cor. 2, 7 8, 9
we teach them deeply to think upon the glorious and gracious work of our
redemption, (wherein the infinite mercy and justice of God do meet together
and kiss Psalm. 85, 10 11
each other) taking delight and comfort therein withal thanksgiving.
Wherefore, we persuade them to bear the pains and griefs of sickness with
patience and constant perseverance, because all sickness is Gods hand, who being
the god of the spirits of al flesh, 1 Samuel 2, 6, 7
kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and raises up again.
There by we are indeed chastened for our sins, but they are nothing in
comparison of that anguish and agony which Christ suffered for us, neither are
they worthy of the exceeding glory which shall be showed unto us. God has
predestined us 2 Timothy 2, 11, 12.
to be like the image of his son: so that the deeper we sink down in
sorrows, the more perfectly we resemble christ: it is the great mercy of God
we are not utterly consumed, and that his loving kindness is not at an end
toward us. The sickness of the body is physic for the soul, for the striking
of the one is the healing of the other: by the Cross we must enter the
kingdom of heaven, and learn to loath the pleasures and profits of this
present life. If they fall to despair and doubting (...) against doubting and
despair.
of Gods favor and love toward them in Christ, (...). 34, 4
we labor to strengthen the weak, and bind up the broken hearted; we are
ready to leave ninety and nine in the wilderness, and seek that lost one. We
bring them to God that has stricken them and made the wound, Luke 19. 10
considering that the son of man is come To seek and to save that which is
lost. God is merciful and his mercy endures for ever, he desires not the
death of a sinner, but that he turn unto him. His mercy is over all the
works of his hands, it is like the Ocean-sea, where no bottom can be found or
founded. It is the express commandment of God, 1 Ioh. 3. 23
that we should believe in Christ who has tryumphed gloriously against sin,
against Satan, against hell, against death, against damnation, against
desperation. The promises of the Gospel exclude no man, Esaias 55, 1. 2 Matthew.
11, 28
unless we exclude our selves. Infidelity, doubtfulnes, and despair are very
grievous sins, and strike at the very heart of God. We must under hope believe
above hope with faithful Abraham. The mercies of God and the merits of Christ's
obedience are infinite, Esaias 54, 10
higher then the heavens, deeper then the earth, broader then the sea, stronger
then the law, mightier then the Devil, and greater then all the sins of the
world.

Besides, God does measure the obedience due to him, Romans 7, 20
rather by the affection then by the action, rather by the desire to obey, then
by the outward performance of it. Moreover, when one sin is forgiven, all
the rest are likewise forgiven: even as (...) of one sin, brings with it
repentance of all known sins, Romans 11, 29
For the gifts and calling of God are without repontance. Last of al, we
admonish them to consider, that grace and faith (howsoever they may be
smothered) are never wholly taken away by sins of infirmity, Romans 5, 20
but thereby are manifested and magnified.

Touching their families, we say unto them, call them before you, exhort them
to cleave How sick persons are to behave them selves in respect of their
families.
unto god with full purpose of heart, to love him, to walk before him in fear
and reverence, and to serve him in righteousness all the days of their life:
give them charge to learn, believe, and obey the true religion and doctrine of
salvation set down in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. God
commended Abraham for this, saying, Genesis 18, 19
I know him that he will command his sons and household after him, that they
keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham that he has spoken unto him. David gave Solomon his son a
notable and right noble charge before he died, 1 chr 28. 9
speaking thus to him standing before him and before the princes and peers of
the kingdom, Thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy fathers, and
serve him with a willing mind: for the Lord searches al hearts, and (...) all the imaginations of boughts, if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but
if thou for (...) him he will cast thee off for ever. I each them that
child-hoode and youth are vanity, Eccl. 1, 13
teach them to remember (...) creator in the days of their youth: teach them
to read the scripture, and to practile in their lives and conuersations what
they have read and learned. Instruct them to avoid idleness, to eschew evil
company, to give themselves to prayer, and hearing the preaching of the word.
Warn thy children to love God, to reverence their mother, and to love one
another. Warn them to speak evil of no man, and beware of taking Gods name in
vain. Put them in mind that God is their father, their creator, their
preserver, their redeemer, their sanctiher, yea, their judge that shall come to
judge the quick and the dead, and reward every man according to his works We
must all appear before the judgment seat 2 Cor. 5, (...)
of Christ, that every one may receive the things which are done in his body,
whether good or evil. Put them in remembrance, not to oppress or defraud any
man, Psalm. 41. (...)
for the Lord is an auenger of all such things, who will not bless
euil-gotten goods, but send his curse upon them, and they shall not prosper.
Admonish them to show forth their faith by good works, and to show mercy
according to their powers: Lastly, to honor their princes, parents, masters,
and all superiors.

Thus we instruct men to live and to die, that dying they may live with God in
his kingdom. Thus we anoint the sick with precious balm that 1 These. 4.
(...)
shall not break their head, and with the inward and invisible oil of Gods
grace and mercy. Thus we warn them to prepare the oil of faith in their
lamps, and to keep a good conscience toward God and man, that they may with
joy and comfort depart in peace, render up their souls into the hands of god,
cheerefullie meeting the bridegroom, and entering with him into his kingdom.
So then the people loose nothing by (...) of the material oil, the want
thereof being supplied with exhortations, admonitions, reproves, consolations,
prayers and supplications, more desired of the sick, and more available for
the sick. And thus much of extreme unction and the other forged Sacraments,
whereof some wanting the outward sign, some the spiritual grace signified,
some the word of institution, some the promise annexed, and all of them the
commandment of Christ, and testimony of the scripture: we cannot admit them
for any Sacraments; and so we conclude, that there are only two Sacraments of
the Church under the Gospel, which are, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK of the Sacrament of baptilme, being an honorable Badge of our
Dedication to Christ, containing the true doctrine thereof, overthrowing the
errots of the church of Rome, and delivering the comfortable use of this
Sacrament to all the people of GOD.
CHAP. 1. Of the Word Baptism, and what it is.
HItherto we have spoken of the Sacraments in General; together with the
parts, uses, and number of them: now we come to the first sacrament, which is
Baptism, being an Honorable badge whereby we are dedicated unto Jesus Christ
The word baptism is taken many ways.
This word in Scripture has many significations. First, in the native and
proper signification, it signifies to dippe, to diue, and plunge under water,
as Mat. 3, 16. John 3, 22, 23 Act, 8. 38, 39. Secondly, to cleanse and wash any
thing with water, even when this sacrament is not administered, as Mark. 7 where
it is said, the Pharisees did not eat, except first they washed. So Heb. 9, x,
the old tabernacle did consist in washings. Thirdly, it signifi th the Cross,
afflictions, myseries, persecutions, and inward vexations of the spirit, as
Luk, 12, 50. where Christ says, I must be baptized, and how am I grieved (...)
I be baptized? And (...) 12. 22. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I must
drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that I shall be baptized withal?
Fourthly, it is taken for a liberal and plentiful distribution of the graces
and gifts of God, as Act. 1 5. John baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized
with the Holy Ghost within these few dates, that is, ye shall receive a greater
measure of the gifts of God then ye have done before. Fifthly, the word is taken
for the doctrine of John, which he delivered before he administered the
Sacrament of baptism, as Act. 18. 25. Where Apollos is said to be an eloquent
man, and mighty in the scripture, knowing nothing but the baptism of John.
Lastly, it is taken for the whole work and action of the sacrament of
baptism, as Math, 28, 19. Go unto all nations, teach and baptize them: and in
this last sense we are now to speak of it.

Let us therefore see What baptism is.
what this Sacrament is. Baptism is the first Sacrament, whereby, by the
outward (...) of the body with water once into the name of the father, of the
son, and of the Holy ghost the inward clensing of the sonle by the blood of
Christ is represented. This description of baptism is to be opened and farther
expounded unto us: The description of baptism proved.
wherein five points are to be considered of us. First, it is called the first
Sacrament, both in respect of the other Sacrament of the Lords supper: and
because when the nations were converted to the says, and believed in the name
of Christ, they were immediately baptized, as we see the practice of the church,
Act. 2. 4. and Chap. 10. 47. and Ch, 8, 12. Where after embracing the faith, we
see the partaking of baptism, and the sealing up of their conversion.

Again, it is said there must be an outward washing of the body with water,
because the Ephesians. 5, 26 Tit. 3, 5 Mar, 1, 4.
Apostle declares thereby the nature of a sacrament of baptism, Ephesians, 5. Calling
it the washing of water through the Word: and it has a just proportion or
relation to the spiritual washing of our new birth, Tit. 3, 5. being also
called the baptism of repentance and amendment of life for remission of sins.
Dipping into the water is not necessary to the being of a sacrament: sprinkling
of water is not necessary to the being of a Sacrament: but wetting and washing
with water is necessary to the being of a Sacrament. Now whether the whole body
should be washed, or the face only: and whether it should be done once or
thrice, is not greatly material, but left indifferent to the church to decree
and determine, what shall be thought fittest to be received and practiced.

Thirdly, it is added in the former description, that baptism is once only to
be administered. For as in natural generation, man is once only borne: so it
is in spiritual regeneration. And as circumcision was once only received in
the flesh, whereby the foreskin was circumcised: so is Baptism once only to
be administered, not oftentimes to be repeated. Wherefore, the Apostle Ephesians. 4.
says, There is one Ephesians. 4, 5, 6
baptism, one faith. Again, Christ willed the Apostles to minister Baptism,
not Baptismes. Lastly, in baptism the death of Christ is represented, and he
died but once: so that as his death was not to be repeated, no more is baptism
to be reiterated. Fourthly, the form and manner of doing, is said to be Into
the name of the father, and of the son, and of the Holy Ghost. Whereby is
meant, that we have fellowship with God in three persons (as a wife has with
her husband, who passes into her husbands name) to be subject to him, to obey
him, to acknowledge and call upon him, to worship no other god but the true
Iehoua. This therefore is not to be understood only of using the name of the
Trinity in baptizing, but by it also is meant, that the persons baptized are
received into the grace and fellowship of God, to become his people, and to be
pertakers of his covenant to their spiritual comfort. Lastly in the
description before remembered, it is affirmed that the outward washing of the
body, Represents the inward clensing of the soul by the blood of Jesus
Christ. This Gal. 3, 27 Tit. 3, 5, 6 Romans 6, 4
appears expressly Gal. 3. All that are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. And Titus 3. 5. 6. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing
of the new birth, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
aboundaintly through Jesus Christ our savior. So also the same Apostle, We are
(...) with him by baptism into his death. These testimonies out of the word of
truth do evidently teach, that this is the principal scope and end of
Baptism, to assure our consciences by external washing, of the inward
clensing of our souls by the blood of Christ for remission of sins. This being
the description of baptism, let us see what good uses may be made thereof, and
every part in order, as they have been laid before us. And first, touching the
The use of the first part of the description.
first point mentioned before in the description, that Baptism is the first
Sacrament. This teaches that such as are gained to the faith, and children of
such as are in the profession act 18. 8
are immediately to he baptized. So was the Eunuch when he was instructed: so
was Paul when he was converted: so were the Jews when they repented. And
indeed this is a true saying, that August. cont. Faust. lib. 19. cap. 11
men cannot be incorporate into any religion (whether it be true or false)
unless they be combined together by some communion and fellowship of visible
Sacraments. Again, Is baptism the first Sacrament of the new Testament? Then
it follows, that he which is not baptized, is not to be admitted to the Lords
table: he that has not received the first Sacrament, is not to be made
partaker of the second. As in the old testament, circumcision was the Sacrament
of entrance and admission, and none was admitted to eat the Passover but such
as were circumcised, Exodus 12 48
as we see Exodus so none has this right and privilege to come to the supper
of the Lord, unless first they be entered, and the door opened to them by
baptism. For a man must be known to belong to our family and household, before
he presume to eat of the childrens bread, that belongs not to strangers.
Touching the use of the 2. point, to wit, Use of the second part of the
description.
that there must be washing with waters we learn that washing with water is of
the necessity of baptism. Indeed there may be a washing without baptism, but
there can be no baptism without washing The Ephesians 5, 26
washing of water through the word. So that this washing is necessary, because
of the fit similitude that is between it and our regeneration or new birth. The
water is apt to cleanse us and leaves no silah behind: so is our justification
(...) sanctification repressented by the blood of christ, as shall be
considered. Therefore such as used sand, or blood, or such like matter not fit
for washing, did not indeed baptize, but horribly profane the Sacra. of
baptism. The third point in the description is, Uses of the 3. part of the
description of baptism.
that baptism is once only to be administered which affords unto us these
three uses. First, it shows a difference between it and the Lords supper. The
Apostle Paul speaking of the supper of the Lord says, 1 cor. 11. 26 25. 23
As often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this cup: and Christ our
savior, Do this as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me, therefore it must
be often received of the church. But baptism once ministered, is not again to
be repeated. As we are once only borne into the world, but after our birth are
daily nourished: so we are but once baptized, but there is continual use of
the Lords supper, where at we are fed to eternal life. Secondly, this
teaches, that all rebaptizing is unlawful, as we see by the examples of the
Apostles, act. 2, 42, and 19, 4. 5
who baptized not the believers and members of the church the second time. For
Act. 2. it is noted, that such as believed the gospel, continued in the
apostles doctrine, in fellowship, in breaking of bread and prayer: but not in
baptizing again, or being baptized again. And chapter 19. 4. 5. the disciples
which were baptized, and had not received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Paul
instructed further in the doctrine of Christ, and does not rebaptize them, but
lays his hands upon them, and they receive the visible gifts of the holy
ghost. The reason is plain against rebaptization, because it signifies and
seals up our once being born again, our once setting and settling into the
body of christ, Ezekiel. 16, 8 Hos. 2. 19. 20
and our spiritual marriage once with him, who is the spiritual husband of his
Church. Whereby we see, that such as have been baptized Such as have been
baptized by heretics, are not to be rebaptized.
by heretikers or other wicked ministers, are not to be rebaptized. It came in
place of circumcision: but none were twice circumcised, therefore none to be
twice baptized. Again, it is a Sacra. that represents our spiritual
incorporatio^ into the church: but it is sufficient once to be ingrasted, and
consequently sufficient have it once administered. This error of rebaptizing,
arose upon a corrupt understanding and interpretation of the place. Act. 19.
When they heard it, act 19. 5,
they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. The difficulty of this place
is taken away, if we consider they be the words of Paul continuing his speech
of John's baptism, not of Luke declaring what Paul did. But of this place we
shall have better and fitter occasion to speak farther in the chapter
following, where it is at large expounded. Furthermore, if baptism be
administered once for ever, it shows that he which comes to Christ once
truly and indeed, shall never be cast away, Ioh, 13. 8 Romans 11, 29
whom Christ Jesus loves once, he loves for ever, because his graces and
gifts are without repentance. What shall separate us from Christ, when we are
by his working adjoined unto him? Wherefore, this outward washing, being not
often repeated, but once only used, does effectually seal up our once joining
to God, who has made an ever lasting covenant with us, he shall never turn
away from us, to do us good, we shall be his people and he will be our God for
ever. Indeed if we could clean fall away, from the grace of God, we should
have another regeneration and another baptizing to be the seal thereof: but
because we are built upon the brazen pillar of Gods election, the gates of hell
shall not preualle against us, for this foundation remains sure, 2 Timothy, 2 19
20
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his. This Psalm. 51, 10, (...)
appears in David, Psalm. 51. He desires to have a clean heart, be prays
that the holy spirit be not taken from him: thereby declaring that the spirit
was within him, and that he had a sensible feeling thereof, howsoever the
flesh for a season had gotten the vpperhande. Here then is a great comfort
sealed to all Christians, in all tentations, against all the tetrours and fears
of conscience, where with they are ready to be swalowed up and overwhelmed.
This must strengthen and stay us up, that although we may fall greevously, yet
we shall not fall finally from the state of grace. He that is once a sound and
lively member of Christ, can never be wholly cut off. True it is, sin may
lesson our conjunction and weaken our comunion with christ: but if we be truly
in him, the band shall never be dissolved, 1. Ioh. 2. (...)
we shall never be wholly severed and fall from him, as 1, 10. 2. They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if they had bin of us, they should have
continued with us, but this comes to pass, that it might appear, that they
are not all of us. Now if any man by falling into sin, were totally separated
from Christ for a time, surely in his recovery and rising from sin he were to
be baptized the second time: for baptism is the Sacrament, initiation and
ingrafting into Christ, and an universal falling would require a new
ingrafting. But it were most absurd to say, we should be as often baptized as
we fall into sin: and therefore howsoever Satan may buffet, molest, tempt, and
wound us grievously, yet he can never ouermaister us wholly and overcome us
finally, 1 Ioh. 3. 9
as the Apostle declares, 1 Ioh. 3. Whosoever is borne of God commits not
sin, for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne
of God. This assurance of our standing for ever in the covenant, is the root
of all courage and comfort in trials and tentations, it helps us to fight
manfully against sin, it preserves us from security, it nourishes us in
good works, it increases in us a care to please god, and lastly it confuteth
the popish fancy of the forged sacrament of penance, whereby (they say) a
Christian being clean fallen from grace is restored, finding no comfort in his
baptism: whereas the true believer never falls finally from faith, neither
needs an outward seal to assure his pertaining to Gods favor and love.
Indeed every christian that is fallen through infirmity, must rise up, repent
unfeignedly, and show forth the fruits thereof: yet the force and strength of
his baptism is not lost, the fruit and comfort thereof remains for ever, and
is extended as well to the time to come as to the time that is past. So many
therefore as asfirme, that the faithful in thoir falls, have remedy in
penance, but no comfort by their baptism, do set up themselves, magnifieng
their own dreams and devises above the holy ordinances of God.

The fourth part of the former description of Baptism, is the form of
baptizing into the name of the father, of the son, and of the Holi-ghost. The
use of the fourth part of the description of baptism.
This teaches that whosoever is baptized, has made a solemn promise to
confess and profess the Christian religion, to be the servant of Christ, to
fight his battelles under his banner, against all the enemies of his faith and
salvation, against sin, against Satan, against the world: he has vowed to
renounce the works of the flesh, and to serve the true God. So often then as
we are present at the administration thereof, we must consider the covenant
into which we are entered, which we made in the presence of men and Angels,
which we are bound to keep for ever. Wherefore, let us learn daily to die
unto sin, and follow a new life by the grace of sanctification. Secondly, this
form of administration teaches us, to assure our own hearts of God protection
and defense, (...). 20. 16
as a wife does of her husbands tuition and preservation of her from al
dangers. Let us look for life, salvation, government, and nourishment from
him alone in Christ For as he calls us from the fellowship of Satan, of sin,
and of the worldto have fellowship with himself: so he promises to be our aid
and defense in time of need, on whom we are in every estate and condition to
depend. The last part of the description, The use of the last part of the
description of baptism.
shows, The inward clensing of the soul by the blood of Christ. This
teaches that they abuse baptism, that in the outward work seek remission of
sins, as though the force of washing away sins were found in the element of
water. Baptism therefore is not the washing away of sins: only the blood of
Christ cleanses us from al sin, 1. John 1, 7. Again this declares the
perpetual use of it in the church, seeing it has this effect to assure
remission and forgiveness of sins: unto this let us bring our children: of this
let us make them partakers: from this let us by no means keep them: and in
this let us continually renew our covenant with God.

Chap 2. That the parts of Baptism are partly outward and partly inward,
Hitherto we have showed how baptism is taken and what it is. In baptism we
are to consider 2 things, In batism 2 things are to be considered, his parts
and his uses.
his parts and his uses. For as in the former book, when we spoke of the
Sacraments in general, having showed what a Sacrament is, we descended to his
parts and uses, wherein the perfect knowledge thereof consists: so we wiil
observe the same in handling the doctrine of the sacraments in particular. The
parts of baptism are first to be opened: the uses are to be reserved to their
proper place. The parts are 2. 1 Pet. 3, 21 Mar, 1, 1 Act. 2, 38
the outward and the inward parts. This appears, 1 Pet 3 Where of the
baptism that now is, answers that figure, which is not a putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but a confident demanding which a good conscience makes to
God, and saves us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Where the A postle
teaches, that sin cannot be washed away by that outward water, but by
Christ's inward working which the outward baptism does shadow. In like manner
Mar. 1. Truth it is, I have baptized you' with Water, but he will baptize you
with the Holyghost, where the baptize shows that he baptized outwardly, but
the force of it proceeds from Christ who baptizeth inwardly. So Act, 2, Peter
said unto them, Amend your lives and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost: Where the A postle declares, that in such as repent and
believe, the virtue of the Holy Ghost is joined with outward baptism. The
outward parts therefore are one thing, and the inward parts are another:
that which is seen is one thing, and that which is understood is another thing.

This division of the parts of Baptism, affoordeth Use. 1.
diverse good uses, and puts us in mind of sundry holy duties. And first of
all, are there outward and inward parts of baptism? then we learn hereby,
that the outward parts are no vain ceremonies, no fruitless rites, no
unprofitable actions that may be neglected or contemned, but available signs,
and effectual seals of the sprinkling of Christ's blood for the forgiveness of
all our sins.

Again, seeing there is such an union of the parts between themselves, we
must not contemue, or despise, or defer baptism. Wherefore the faithful,
all delays, reasons, and pretenses set aparte, have speedily prepared
themselves to do that which God commands. We have a worthy example in
Abraham, Genesis 17, 23 (...)
when god required him to circumcise himself, his son, and all the males of
his house, and thereby to uncover all their shames: he does not inquire why
God required this at his hands, he does not complain or consult with flesh
and blood: over all doubts faith got the victory, and subdued reason under her,
and caused him with diligence, readiness, and expedition to submit himself to
fulfill the Lords will, and perform it the same day that he commanded it. Of
this duty likewise we see Paul was act. 22. 16 and 18. 8
admonished by Ananias immediately after his conversion Act. 22. saying, Why
tariest thou? Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling on the
name of the Lord. Whereby he shows, that this tarying and delay in the
matters of God makes us culpable in his sight. True it is, it is not Bernard.
epist. 77
the want of Baptism simply that is demnable (as is showed afterward) but the
contempt of the Sacraments is dangerous, and without repentance damnable, Luke
7, 30
as it appears. The Pharisees and expounders of the law despised the counsel
of God against themselves, and were not baptized of him. We know all neglect
and contempt in heavenly duties (...) 48. 10,
is evil, and brings with it a certain curse as the prophet says, Cursed is
he that does the work of the Lord negligently. We see in human and wordly
things, wisemen will not defer the sealing of their writings and calling of
witnesses, when they have given a promise to other or made a bargain with
other (knowing that unnecessary delay may breed unrecoverable danger) as we
see by the example of Jeremy, when he had (...). 32. 9. 10 Genesis 23. 16. 17. 18
bought a field of his uncles son, presently he weighed him the silver, and
enrolled it in a book of remembrance, he signed it, he took witnesses, and
left it written in roles or records, having an instrument or evidence fairly
drawn and sealed with the common seal, if any thing should be called in
question in time to come. (...) he like we see in Abraham long before, when he
had bought a possession of the Hittites for the burial of his dead, he weighed
out and paid (...) money among Merchants: so the field and the cave that was
(...) withal the trees and appurteuances that were therein, was made sure to him
for a possession. As these men, when they had made the purchase, would not
delay the taking of assurance and security: the like delaying and unnecessary
putting off the time from Sabboath to Saboath, from meeting to meeting, ought
to be fhunned of us: otherwise, though we should be free from contempt, we
cannot excuse ourselves of the neglect of au high and holy duty to God and our
children. Indeed, Baptism not pricisely tied to a certain day.
we are not pricisely tied to a certain day in Baptism, as the Jews were to
the 8. day in their circumcision: but that which the 8. day was to them, a
convenient and orderly time is to us. Now, what time can be more convenient,
more comely, more fit, then the Sabboath day following, when the Church is
assembled? That so it may be administered rightly, reverently, religiously, and
conveniently in the public meetings of the faithful? Again, the needelesse
and careless deferring of this work has a grievous threatening Genesis (...).
(...)
annexed of assured punishment and judgment, as it is set down, The
uncircumcised male, in whose flesh the foreskin is not circumcised, even that
person snalbe cut off from his people, because he has broken my covenant.
Whereby we see, that whosoever shall neglect circumcision, and not fuffer
himself be circumcised, or shall approve the negligence committed by his
parents, shall be none of the peop'e of God, but shall be shut out from the
society and barred from the fellowship of the faithful, both in this world and
in the world to come, unless he repent of this sin. And that the Exodus 4. (...)
neglect of Gods ordinance draws his wrath, appears in the example of
Moses, The Lord met him and would have killed him, because his son was not
circumcised. He had dwelt inth: land of Midian an Idolatrous country 40. years,
he began to savor of the manners thereof: but having called him to be a
governor of people, would not be appeased toward him, until he had reformed
his own house. For if any cannot 1 Timothy 3, 5
rule (...) own house, how shall he care for the church of God? Now whereas
he had two sons borne unto him in Midian, the elder no doubt was circumcised
the eight day, according to the order and ordinance of God: why then did he
defer the circumcising of the younger? No doubt he was scorned and derided
among them for circumcising his first borne, and his enemies were those of his
own house, even the wife that lay in his bosom: yea he being then weak in
faith, loved the praise of men more then the praise of God, and therefore the
Lord would have slain him. Albeit the sign of circumcision seemed base and
contemptible in outward show, and to savor of great cruelty toward little
children: yet God would not suffer the deferring and neglecting thereof to go
without punishment. Although grace be not tied to the sacraments, and that we
may be saved without them: yet it is not left to the disposition of men,
whether they will come to them or not, God will not have the outward signs
contemned of us: for if we will be in the covenant, we must not despise the
seal of the covenant.

Furthermore, are the outward parts united to the inward? then this serves as
a special means to comfort the very Use. 3.
lowest estate of men and the poorest degree in the church, that they doubt not
of the fatherly favor of God toward them, but be assured of their acceptance
with God, who will make them partakers of his eternal blessings in his
kingdom, as well as other whose condition is greater and higher in the world.
When god gave circumcision to Abraham, he commanded him circumcise Genesis 17, 12
13, 27
all his servants bond or free, as well borne in his house as bought with his
money: thereby signifying that he adopted them for his children, and that
albert they were Abraham's bondmen, 1 Cor. 7, 22
yet they were the Lords free men. So unto baptism we admit and receive the
poor as well as the rich, the servant as well as the master, the low as well
as the high, without respect of persons. When the lord instituted the
passover, Exodus 12, 3
the lamb was eaten of all the congregation.

So touching the Lords supper, it is an holy banquet for all degrees and
conditions whatsoever, and therefore (...). 11. 21. 23.
the Apostle checketh the Corinthians for this abuse, that whereas the poorest
soul eating of the bread and drinking of the cup, is as welcome to christ the
governor of the seast as the richest, they did despise the poor and shamed
them that had not. All these things duly considered, serve to assure the very
meanest, lowest, and simplest in the church, that they are made heirs of
eternal life as well as other, as they are partakers of the sign with other,
if they believe with faithful Abraham. This the Apostle Gal. 3. (...) Col. 3.
11
teaches, There is netther Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free
there is neither male nor female: for ye are al one in Christ. And Col. 3.
There is neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
Scithian, bond, free: but Christ is all and in all things.

Fourthly, are there outward rites, signs, and persons as Use. 4.
external parts of baptism? And are their likewise inward parts whereby we
are consecrated to God, teaching that we have vowed to renounce the lusts of
the world, and to forsake the works of the devil? Then this They are to be
reproved that depart out of the church before baptism be solemnized.
condemns those that depart out of the church before this holy and public
action be taken in hand. Baptism belongs not only to the witnesses and
parties that bring the child, but to all the members of the church, that we may
learn by our presence thereat, to renew our faith and repentance unto God.
These men do too much disgrace and deface the dignity of this sacrament, not
vouchsafing to remain at the administration thereof, as if it were not worthy to
be solemnized before the^: whereas they should quicken their faith in the
covenant of god, by beholding the works of the minister, and ratifieng them in
their hearts, Luke 1. 58. 59.
as we read. Luke 1. where they are said to circumcise, because they were al
present at the work, consenting to prayers and thanks giuings, of the Church: 1
Cor. 11. (...)
as also the Apostle says, Women pray and prophecy in the church, when they
sit still and are partakers of the prayers and preaching used in the public
assemblies. And as no member is cut off by excommunication, 1 cor. 5. 4.
but in presence of al, to be witnesses thereof and to ratify their grief for
the loss of a member of their body: so in Reasons rendered why the (...) should
remain altogether, (...) Baptism be (...).
Baptism it is required, to witness and approve the public work by their
presence, and to (...) themselves thereby (...) (...) and comfort, hata
fellow-heire is made partaker with them in the communion of Saints. Moreover,
the excellency of this Sacrament is as great as of the other: they are of like
worthynes in themselves, and to be had equal and indifferently in like price
and estimation: they are both commanded and instituted by the (...) authority
of Christ: there is the same matter and substance of both, to wit, Christ with
all his benifits: there is (...) one and the same end of both, the increase and
strengthening of our faith: therefore why should one Sacrament be so much
extolled above the other, and preferred before the other? So that whereas many
come to the Lords Supper, few remain and abide in the Church at the
administration of baptism. The whole assembly hears the word preached and
delivered by the minister: the Sacraments are instruments of our justification
by faith christ is after a sort preached in (...).
as well as the word preached, saving that the word works by hearing only,
the Sacraments serve by the senses of seeing, handling, and tasting as well as
hearing, to strengthen and increase faith in our hearts: and therefore it is
requisite that we join in the one as well as in the other. Furthermore, the
excellency, and worthynesse of baptism appears herein, in that it was
instituted of God sealing up his gracious covenant, in that it was sanctified
by Christ being baptized of John, and in that it was beautified by the heavenly
revelation of the blessed Trinity appearing thereat: so great honor, so great
dignity and pre-eminence was never given to any Ceremony? Did God institute it,
and shall we contemn it? Did Jesus Christ come to John's baptism, and shall we
disdain to be at the baptism of Christ? Was the holy Trinity present, and
will we be absent? True it is, some of the sacrifices and burnt offerings were
Genesis 4, 5 compared with Heb. (...). 4
miraculously consumed by fire from heaven: but what is this to the glorious
presence of the majesty of God, the blessed Trinity: declaring to us thereby,
that God the father, God the son, and Judge. 13, 20. 1 King. 18. (...) 2 chr. 7,
(...)
God the Holy Ghost are always present at the administration of baptism, and
truly perform that which is out-wardly figured and represented. Here heaven
was open, which for our sins was shut against us: here the spirit descended
in the visible form of a dove upon Christ, to signify unto us that being
delivered from the terrors of sin and judgment, we are at peace with God:
math. 3. 16. 17.
the voice of the father is heard from heaven, saying, This is my son, in
whom I am well pleased. All these things note out the special force and
dignity of this Sacrament. It is not therefore to be administered in a corner
of the Church with three or four persons present to witness the baptism, the
rest of the body of the congregation being departed, but in the face and open
view thereof: forasmuch as God, to deliver it from contempt, has given it
visible marks of greater honor. The Apostle 1 cor. 12. 23
says 1 Cor. 12, Our uncomely parts have more comeliness on: for our comely
parts need it not, but God has tempered the body together, and has given
more honor to that part which lacked. As God has dealt with our bodies, so has
he done in this sacrament. That which is most subject to contempt, dishonor,
and disgrace, God has lifted up with sundry excelent preheminences and
prerogatives as we have seen in Christ's baptism. And albeit there be a
difference in the person baptized, yet there is none in the substance of the
baptism. Seeing then god so highly esteems of this ordinance: it serves to
convince, to accuse, and to condemn their carelessness and negligence, that
refuse to be present at baptism, or if they vouchsafe to be present for a
while, depart before the end of the whole action, and rushe out of the church
before the name of God be praised, and the whole work finished Luke 3. (...).
Act. 22. 16
and concluded with prayer, as it was Luke 3. It came to pass as all the
people were baptized, and that Jesus was baptized, and did pray, the heaven was
opened. And Act. 22, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling
on the name of the Lord. Wherefore we are not to depart, before god has be
ene prayed unto, and praised for his benefits. The Apostle charge, that 1
COI. 1426 40.
all things in the church be done in order and comeliness. Now, what can be
more comely and convenient, Ezekiel. 46. 10
then that the Churches begin the exercises of their holy religion together,
and end them together? Forasmuch as nothing is done in the assembly, which
tends not to the edification of the whole body.

Lastly, if in every true baptism, there be outward and inward parts united
each to other: then the baptism of lohn and of Christ are in nature and
substance all one. Contrary to the doctrine of the Council. Trid. sess. 7. can.
1.
Trent-councel that teaches, If any shall say, that the baptism of John has
the same force with Christ's baptism, let him be accursed. Although it be no
matter of faith, nor greatly necessary in the^e days to despute of John's
baptism; seeing no man or woman is now baptized the rewith: yet we will show
the truth of this point out of the Scriptures The baptism of John and of
Christ are in substance one and the same.
that they are al one in substance and effect, not of any other kind and
nature. For first, John preached the baptism of repentance to remission of
sins, they have therefore the same doctrine, the same word, the same promise,
Mar. 1, 4
the same repentance, the same forgiuenesle of sins, as they had the same
outward element of water. And the Apostle Ephesians, 4. 5. 6
teaches, that there is One body, one spirit, one hopeof the calling, one
Lord, one father, one faith, and one baptism. 2. The baptism of John was
consecrated and sanctified in the person of christ, for christ was baptized
with the baptism of John. 3. It may appear (as we will prove Chapter 4, that John
(...) in the name of the blessed trinity. Fourthly, neither Christ nor his Ap.
rebaptized any that were baptized by the ministry of John. Apollos did know
only the baptism of John, Act, 18. 25, 16
he is taken and instructed farther in the faith and ways of the Lord, but we
read not that he was baptized again. 5 if John's. baptism were not the same
with our baptism, it would follow that CHRIST was baptized with another
baptism then we are, and that our baptism was not sanctified in the person of
CHRIST: which takes away our comfort and consolation, that we which are the
members of CHRIST have one and the same baptism with our head. Sixthly, if the
baptism of John were not one with the baptism of Christ, here by the error
of the Anabaptists should be confirmed, for such as were baptized of John,
should be rebaptized. Seventhly, the Apostles themselves should not be truly
baptized: for they (no doubt) were baptized of John, some of them being first
his Disciples, otherwise they should be unbaptized. For Christ with his own
hands baptized none, Ioh. 4. 1, 1
as ap peareth Ioh. 4, 1, 2, and it is not likely that one of them baptized
another: yea they should baptize other into another baptism then themselus had
received. Last of all, Christ himself testi fieth, Math. 3, 15 Luke 7, 29
that the baptism ministered by John, pertained to the fulfilling of
righteousness Math. 3, 15, and Luke testifies, that the publicans and people
being baptized of him, justified god; but the Pharisees despised the counsel of
god against themselves and were not baptized. Wherefore seeing John bpatised
with water in the name of the Trinity to remission of sins and that the blessed
Trinity was present thereat, we conclude his baptism was the same with ours:
Difference between John's baptism and christ's wherein?
only heerin lies the difference, in the circumstance of time, John baptized
in christ that should suffer death and rise again, we baptize in the name of
Christ already dead and risen again to life. Against this evident Objections
answered.
truth directly confirmed, Bellarmine the Jesuit takes diverse, exceptions,
and makes many objections: all which stumbling blocks lying in the way (whereat
many stumble) are to be removed, before we conclude this chapter. For he
reasons thus, Bellar. lib. 1 de Bapt. cap. 20
The baptism of John was instituted by John himself not by Christ, he was,
not the minister only, but the author thereof: therefore it was no Sacrament
at all, especially of the new Testament, and consequently not the same with the
baptism of christ. I answer, we must consider in this reason, the base and
vile account that the Jesuits make of John's baptism, they make it an idle and
vain Ceremony without fruit or force, and no Sacrament or seal of heavenly
grace. Again, if John's baptism were no Sacrament, then CHRIST which received
no other outward Baptism, received no Sacrament: and we should be baptized
with an other (...) then Christ was. Furthermore, shall we hear with patience
and hold our peace, when these Jesuits or (...) Iebusites (...) enemies of the
people of God, belch out their (...), and blot John's baptism out of the (...)
of sacraments: and admit (...) (...) false and (...) Sacraments of (...),
Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and (...) (...)? Lastly, what intolerable boldness
or blindness is there in these bayards, that make John and not God, to be the
appointer, author, and ordainer of his baptism: contrary to express evidence
of holy (...)? For seeing no man Heb, 5, 4
takes this honor upon him but he that is called of God as Aaron was: shall we
think he would vsurp this office without gods word and warrant? And does not
christ himfelfe propound the question to the (...) priests and elders of the
people touching John's Baptism, Math. 21, 25
and teach that he baptized and preached by the authority and commandment of
God? Besides, do not the Evangelists say, Ioh. 1, 6
he was sent of god, Ioh. 1, 6, and that the word of God came to John in the
wilderness, and he came into all the coasts about Jordan preaching and
baptizing? Luk: 3, 2, 3. yea, John himself testifies that he was sent to
baptize, Ioh. 1. 33, I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water,
said unto me, upon whom thou shall see that spirit come (...), and tarry still
upon him, that is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, Where by appears,
that John's baptism was (...) of God no: of John: and John was not the author,
but only the minister thereof.

Again, Math. 3, 11
he obiecteth and allegeth Math. 3, 11, where John himself says, I baptize
with water, but Christ shall baptize with the Holy Ghost. whence he bellar.
lib. 1 (...) bapt. cap. 21
gathers that Christ's baptism gave the Holy Ghost, John's baptism gave not
the holy ghost: therefore their baptismes are not all one. I answer, these
words were spoken to inform Luk, 3, 15. 16
the people that he was not that christ, Luke 3, 15, 16. so that they make a
difference, not between the Baptism of CHRIST and of John, but between the
persons of Christ and of John, between the minister of the Sacrament, and the
(...) thereof. For this is true of all the Ministers of Baptism to the end of
the world, that baptize in the name of the holy Trinity: they pour on the
water, they can do no more, they can go no further, Christ must give the grace
of regeneration and sanctification.

Moreover, Bellar. lib. 1. de bapt. c. 22.
another objection he takes out of Act. 19, 4, 5. where Luke speaks of
certain disciples at Ephesus, to whom Paul said, Have ye received the
Holy Ghost, since ye believed? And they said unto him, we have not so much as
heard whether there be an holy ghost. Act. 19, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
And he said unto them, unto what were ye then baptized? And they said, unto
John's Baptism. Then Paul said, John verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people, that they should beleeu in him, which shall
come after him, that is, in Christ Jesus. And when they heard it, they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. So Paul laid his hands on them, and
the Holy Ghost came on him, and they spoke the tongues and prophesied, and all
the men were about twelve. In these words it should seem at the first sight,
that Paul baptized the Disciples of Ephesus with the baptism of Christ, which
had before received the baptism of John. If then he baptized them again in
the name of Christ whom John baptized, it follows necessarily that the
baptism of John was one, and the baptism of christ another, otherwise it
should be a needelesse and fruitelesse repetition. Besides this, the place
seems to favor rebaptization, and is alleged by dangerous heretics to that
purpose. Wherefore, the place being difficult, the doubts diverse, and the
errors many that are gathered and sucked from hence: let us assay by the
assistance of God to open the true and natural meaning thereof. If we shall
weigh and consider the words aright according to the true interpretation
thereof, august. de doct. christ.
agreeable to the drift of the place, to the circumstances of the text, to the
propriety of the words, to other testimonies of Scriptures and to the
proportion of faith: we shall see they favor and further neither rebaptization
maintained by the Anabaptists, neither real difference betweenee John's
baptism and Christ's, defended by the Papists. True it is, there is in this
scripture a double History and narration inserted, intermingled, and (...) the
one within the other, which causes some doubt and (...), but may easily be
clcered and (...). For first of all. the words verse 5, And they which heard
it were baptized: are not the words of Luke the writer, but of Paul the
speaker, continuing his speech of John's Disciples and hearers, and are not to
be understood of the 12, (...), as appears by the two Men, de
Greek conjunctions, which are used by the maiders of that tongue to join and
to disioyne, having relation one to the other, and knitting together the parts
of the sentence answering fitly each to other, Math. 3, 11 Mar. 1 8. 9 Act. 1.
5. 6
as may be seen in many places, wherefore, Luke speaks not here of Paul's
baptism, but Paul speaks of John's baptism. He sets down the office of
John verse 3, then he prose cuteth both the parts of it, mentioning his
preaching verse 4. and his baptizing verse 5. Again, these 12. abiding at
Ephesus dwelling far from the land of Judea where John preached and baptized
(...) living about 30. or 40, years after the death of John, could not hear his
doctrine from his own mouth, or receive baptism at his hands. Now, whereas they
are said to be baptized to John's baptism, the meaning is, act 18, 25 Math. 21,
25 Mar. 1, 4
they embraced and professed the same doctrine which John preached by word, and
sealed with his baptism. Thirdly, we have a like example, touching the
Samaritans baptized by Phillip, act. 8, 14, 15 16, 17
The holyghost was yet come down upon none of them, but they were only
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus: then laid they their hands on them, and
they received the holy hgost. Here we are to obseiue this order, Phillip
preached, the people believed, and were baptized: afterward the Apostles hands
were imposed and so the holy ghost is received. They gave the gifts of the holy
ghost by laying on of hands without baptism, Act. 8 17, neither do we read,
that laying on of hands was used in baptism, neither were these baptized
again, but only confirmed and strengthened by imposition of the Apostles
hands. So in this place, the twelve Ephesian Disciples had embraced and
received the doctrine that John preached, and were baptized in the name of
christ: then the apostle lays his hands upon them, and they receive the
Holy Ghost, they are no more rebaptized then were the disciples at Samaria.
Fourthly, if the 4 and 5, verses were to be sundred and dismembered contrary to
the use of the Greek particles, which serve to comoyne the whole, and to (...)
the parts of the sentence (as though the one were spoken of Paul, the other
of Luke) why does Luke afterward verse 6, repeat and assume the name of Paul?
What need was there to make mention of him again? Does not this show, that in
the (...) speech before, he had spoken of John and his hearers that heard him
preaching in the wilderness? Furthermore, the Apostle neither accuses nor
condemns the baptism of these Ephesians, neither enquireth whether they were
baptized or no, seeing they were in the number of the professors of the faith and
believers of the gospel (for they are called disciples) but whether they had
received the gifts of the holy ghost? Sixily, if such as have been once
baptized were to be repaptized, because they are sometimes grossly ignorant, and
know not some necessary fundamental point of religion concerning the Trinity,
concerning the offices or person of Christ, and such like holy principles: he
Apostles themselves should have been baptized again, who conuersing with
christ, hearing his doctrine, seeing his miracles, knowing his behauior, had
yet tafled little of his spiritual and heavenly kingdom, act. 1. 6 Math. 20,
28 Luke 22, 24
but dreamed that the Messiah should have a temporal and earthly kingdom. The
Samaritans also should be baptized anew, because being baptized they did not
immediately receive the holy ghost. Likewise, Apollos should be baptized again,
who was weak in knowledge, understanding only the baptism of John, yet he was
not rebaptized, but Aquillia and Priscilla took him, and instructed him
farther in the faith of Christ and in the ways of God. And if Baptism were so
often to be repeated, as GOD of his mercy shows us the errors of our mind
and laultes of our life: how often should we be baptized? Should not the
faithful many times, not only in a year but sometimes in a day require
Baptism? Besides, we must consider, that these 12. Disciples were not ignorant
of the Holy Ghost the third person in Trinity, but of the extraordinary and
miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, which appeared in cloven tongues on the
Apostles, act 8, 17, 18 19, and 10, 44 45, 47, and 19 6.
as the words are taken, Act. 8, 17, 18, 19, and Chap. 10 44, 45, 47, and chap.
19, 6. For it were unreasonable and absurd to imagine, that such as are said to
be disciples, scholars of Christ, professors of the faith, and members of the
church, could be ignorant wholly of the Holyghost, which John saw come down
Ioh 1. 32. 33.
upon Christ in a visible shape, without the knowledge of which spirit, none
can be said to be a believer and to be faithful: such are so far from being
admitted into the church, that they deserve not to sit in the porch. Neither
may we think without intolerable injury done unto John, who was filled with
the Holy Ghost from his mothers womb, that he would ever have received to his
baptism such rude and gross disciples as had never heard whether there were an
Holyghost. Last of al, if Paul had baptized these 12. Disciples of Ephesus, why
are they passed over in silence and not rehearsed, where, of set purpose he 1
cor. 1, 13. 14. 15
reckons up such as were baptized by him? he declares how he baptized (...),
(...), and the household of Stephanas, he makes no mention at al of this
History. Nay, if he baptized these, might not the Corinthians have taken
exception against him, and accused him of falsehood and forgetfulness? And albeit
the speak properly and particularly of the corinthians, yet after ward he
extends his doctrine farther, and concludes generally that he knew not
whether he had baptized any other; which he would never have spoken, if he had
baptized the xii. together: especially seeing he adds, Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel. And seeing the former (...) was written
after this History, and as some suppose from Ephesus where these disciples
dwelled, 1 cor. 16. 8.
as it may in part be gatheredout of chap 16. when Paulesaith, I (...) tarry at
Ephesus until Pentecost: how can it be that the apostle baptising, these
Ephesians and writing his Epistle from Ephesus should not remember them among
the rest, being many and also present with him before his face? Thus we have
opened the meaning of this place, which the unlearned and unstable have wrested
(as they do also 2 Pet. 3, 16
other scriptures) to their own destruction: and we have proved the Baptism of
John to be one and the same in substance with the baptism of Christ, and
therefore to be neither imperfect nor unprofitable.

Thus we see, that the union of the outward and inward parts together
teaches, The sum of this chapt. 18 set down.
that in baptism the outward rites are no needles ceremonies: that it must be
ministered with all convenient speed, against those that defer the same many
weeks and months: that it requires our presence to the end of the
administration thereof, that prayers may be offered up by the church for infants
to be baptized and our selves learn what we have vowed to God. We have also
learned that God testifies his love even to the lowest in the church. Nothing
is done in the church but to the benefit of the whole: and if we desire our
children should be the children of god, why do we not stay to ask it of God?
Or, how shall we better know, what our selves have vowed and promised in our
baptism to God, and how we have been answerable (...): then by our continual
ptesence when it is administered. Lastly, this division of the parts teaches,
that the baptism of John and of Christ differ not in the truth and substance
thereof. Thus far we have showed that the parts of baptism are partly
outward and partly inward Now let us see what these outward parts are: and
afterward proceed in order to the inward.

Chap. 2. Of the first outward part of baptism.
AS we declared before in the former book chap. 3. the number of outward parts
of a sacrament: Four outward parts of baptism.
so the out ward parts of baptism are 4, namely, the minister, the word of
institution, the element, and the receiver. All these though outward parts,
yet are substantial and necessary parts The first is the minister, as the
Ambassador of God sent out by him with (...) to meddle in the matter of the
sacraments, as appears by the ministry of John. by the commandment of
Christ, and by the examples of the Apostles. The baptist, Lu. 3, 15. 16.
when all men (...) in their hearts, if he were not that Christ, said to them,
Indeed I baptize you with water, but one stronger then I comes, whose shoos
Latchet, I am not worthy to unloose. And John. 1. he says, I am come
baptising with water, I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with
water, said to me, upon whom thou shall see the spirit come down and tarry
still on him, that is he which (...) with the Holy Ghost. And Math. 28. Teach
all nations baptising them Now according to this commandment and commission,
the Apostles went forth teaching and preaching to the people, and ministering
the Sacraments to such as were converted to the faith, act. 2, 38. and 8, 12,
38, and 10 47. 48. and 16 32 33, and 22, 16
as we see Act, 2. 38. Notwithstanding, whereas Paul says, Christ sent me not
to baptize, 1 Cor. 1, 17
but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor, 1, 17. it is not to be understood
hystorically but comparatively. For his meaning is not simply to relate and
set down his office whereunto he was called, but by conferring it with his
preaching: as if he should say, This is not the chief and principal end of
my calling and function to baptize, the high work of my ministry is to preach
the Gospel. Indeed they are both of them parts of the ministers Office, but
this is the chiefest to labor in the word and doctrine, in regard of the
greater gifts required, and of the fruit that flows and follows from
thence to their hearers, it being the high ordinance of god to save such as
believe.

That this is the Apostles mind and meaning, appears by the words immediately
ensuing, where he reckons up some whom he had baptized, which he would never
have done or attempted without a calling. True it is, the dignity and force of
baptism depends not upon the worthiness or excellency of the Ministers
thereof, but on the authority and institution of god, who only remitteth
sins, and baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

This appears by the example of such as cast out devils Math. 7. 22 and 23
in Christ's name, of whom Christ says, he knew them not. So Iudu was sent out
with the rest of the Apostles to teach Math 10. 1. 2. 3
and to preach the Gospel of the kingdom, and to heal Math, 23, 1, 2, 3
every sickness and every disease among the people, yet he was the son of
perdition that the scripture might be Ioh, 4, i, ii
fulfilled. The scribes and pharisees sit in Moses his chair. For this cause
Christ himself would baptize no man Ioh. 4, least any should esteem of
baptism by the worthiness or unworthiness of the Ministers. Nevertheless,
Reasons rendered why the Minister only may baptize
it is required that baptism be done and delivered by a minister of the
church, and one reputed so to be of the church, as may be confirmed by sundry
reasons.

First, baptism is a part of the ministry, which none may undertake but such
as are thereunto lawfully called. God has joined the Mat, 28, xix Heb, 5, 4
Math, xix, 6,
ministry of the word and sacraments together: and what God has coupled
together, let no man separate, Math 19. 6. But women or private persons may not
be admitted to teach in the public assemblies, i, cor, xiiii 34, 35.
in a true and well ordered chutch, 1, Cor, 14. Let your women keep silence in
the churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they ought to
be subtect, tim. 2, xi, xii.
as also the Law says: and if they will learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home, for it is a shame for Women to speak in the churcb. And 1 Timothy, 2, Let your women learn in silence with all subjection, I permit not a
woman to teach, neither to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence.

Likewise, Revel. (...)
the Apostle reproves the church of Thyatira, that it suffered a Woman to
teach among them, and to exercise the public ministry of the word, contrary
to gods commandment and the practice of gods people. I confess, Judge. 4 4,
1. Sam. 2. 2 2 King, 2 2, xiiii.
there have been prophettesses in the church, as Deborab, Huldah, Hannah, the
four daughters of Phillip, with some others: but the examples are
extraordinary, and therefore cannot make an ordinary act xxi. 9.
(...) for imitation.

The causes hereof are direct and evident. For to teach publicly, is a token
of authority and rule over others, in-asmuch as the teacher is higher in place
and authority then he that is taught, as Paul was brought up at the feet of
act. 22, 3
Gamaliell, and as the less is blessed of Heb, 7, 7
the greater. Therefore, the woman should not be admitted to be a master in
Israel, a teacher and instructor of men, as 1 Timothy 2, where the Apostle
forbids them to teach publicly, and to usurp authority over the man, but
requires of them to be in subjection, not to challenge dominion. Again, such is
the 1 Pet. 3, 7 Eccle. 7. 29. 30
frailenes and weakness of that sex, that they are easier to be seduced and
deceived, and so fitter to be authors of much mischief being the weaker
vessels: therefore Paul having set down the doctrine that women should not
take upon them to teach in the church, and so preach in the assembly of men,
presently alleges this reason, 1 Timothy, 2. 13 14 Genesis 3. 6
that The woman was first deceived of the devil and was in the transgression:
he made choice of her, and made her an instrument to be guile her busband.

Furthermore, the minister represents Gods person in this holy work, and
theresore he only can offer and deliver with power and authority the outward
sign, which answeareth fitly to the inward matter. Shall private persons vsurp
to be the Lords messengers, to bring his letters and seals, not called, not
allowed, not authorized? It cannot be without intruding of themselves and
dishonor to God.

As none can wash us from our sins but Christ only: so none can bear his
person in the outward Sacrament of the inward washing, but he whom Christ
himself has appointed, if we will receive the benifit of the holy seal of
baptism, for the assurance of our conscience The people cannot with comfort
assure themselves to (...) Sacrament at the hands of private persons.
that we are washed from our sins. And if the will and pleasure of a Prince,
do make that only to be his seal, which he has set aparte to seal his
grauntes withal, so that albeit another be made right of the same matter,
just of the same form and fashion, and in all points like unto it, no
difference being to be seen between them, yet the same is none of the
Princes seal, but a counterfcit stamp: then now much more ought the known
will of the eternal God (which is, that they only should minister the
sacraments, that have a public calling and allowance thereunto) to have that
authority, that no sacraments can be warranted to be his (...), but such as are
signed by his officers. Again, Beza. lib, de Quest. in sacre. (...), 140 141.
suppose the princes seals should be stolen away, which he has appointed to
seal his grantes withal, and should be set too, by him that has no
authority, not being the keeper thereof, there can by no means grow any
assurance of comfort to the party that has it applied to his writings: so if
it were possible to be the seal of GOD which a woman should set to, yet for
that she has stolen her patent, and used it contrary to Gods commandment, I
see not how any man can persuade his own heart by it to be partaker of a
sacrament: but his comfort is weakened and impaired, and his conscience left in
doubt and perplexity.

Moreover, this may yet farther appear by a comparison (a form of reasoning
often used in the scripture) comparing different actions of things done by a
calling, with such as are done without a calling, whereby we shall see that to
have a lawful calling to do a thing, gives life, likinge, and allowance unto
the doing For we must, not only consider what is done; but also who is the
doer. What is the reason that Ioab captain of the host, 2 Samuel 3, 27, and,
20, 10 1 King, 2, 5,
killing Abner and Amasa two more righteous then himself, was reserved to
judgment: Numb, 625 7. 8
whereas Phinchas killing Zimri and Cosbi, it was imputed unto him for right
cousnes? What is the reason that Peter is reproved for drawing his sword, and
smiting the high priests servant, being commanded to put up the sword, because
so many as (...) with the sword shall perish with Math 26. 51. 52
the sword: whereas the higher power which is God is said to be the minister of
god, to take vengeance on him Romans 13, 4
that does evil, and not to bear the sword in vain? Was it not, that
Phinehas was stirred up and called of God to do execution: but Ioah was stirred
up by the Devil, to see and to seek his own revenge? Was it not, that Peter
was a private man to whom God had said, Exodus 20. 13
Thou shall not kill: but the Magistrate is ordained of god, to whom he has
said, Deuteronomy. 13, 8
Thine eye shall not pity him, whom I have appointed to die? Wherefore there is
more to be marked of us then the deed that is done seeing the same deed
performed by a person that has a calling is liked and lawful, the which done
without a calling is ungodly and unlawful. This truth is so plain and
apparent, that the Heathen Terent. in Adesp. ast. 5. sce. 3
poet does acknowledge it.

Duo cumidem faciunt saepe vt possis dicere
Hoc licet impune facere huic, illi non licet:
Non quod dissimilis res sit, sed is qui facit.
That is.

Though two an act attempt in substance one, as does befall,
Yet one we often as lawful like, the other unlawful call:
Not that the deed is differing, the doer is all in all.
So then, to say that a woman may minister baptism in cases of necessity, is
all one, as if a man should say, that if there be no judge or magistrate at
hand that will do his duty in executing justice against murderers and
malefactors: that then a private man may take upon him to draw the sword out of
the sheath to strike osfendors. But as a private man, flaying a murderer, has
himself committed murder, and not executed judgment, because he had no
calling or commission thereunto, so such as without any warrant have taken in
hand to baptize, have made a profane washing; and not administered any
Sacrament of the Lord.

Lastly, if it be not material who baptize; then if the friends or neighbors
meeting together after the birth of a child, should carry the child to the
church to be baptized and solemnly dedicated to Christ that died on the
cross, if a private person preventing their purpose cast water on the infant
and with all use the words of institution; the child should by this
imagination be baptized and be carried no further to the minister. Or, if no
man of purpose pour on water, but it dash at unawares upon the face of the
child, or if a shower of rain fall from Heaven, and a private person speak
the words of institution, it should likewise be baptism. Nay, which is more
unreasonable and absurd, calu. lib, Epistot, Page 85
if it were ministered by a boy playing and in sport, if it were ministered by a
fool or a mad man, if it were ministered by one that were not himself
baptized, if it were by a Turk or infidel that is a sworn Enemy by
profession to baptism and to them that are baptized, yea if it were ministered
by an Athiest that holds there is no God; yet it should be by this opinion a
good, lawful, and perfect baptism. But seeing this cannot be so, we are not
only to observe what is the deed done, but to consider who is the doer, and to
provide it be done by the minister warranted by the church and called of God
thereunto.

Before we come to the uses hereof, we will answer an objection from the
example of Zipporah the Wife of Moses, who in case of necessity circumcised her
son, and God departed from pursuinge her husband to the death for omitting
thereof. To this we may answer, that we must live by laws, not by examples
which have no warrant. The question is not of the fact, but of the lawfulnes of
the fact.

Again, there is a difference between circumcision and baptism. For this
falling out before the law, was more lawful, when circumcision was left more
at liberty: yea under the law there was no special commandment given to the
priests to circumcise, which should tie it to the priesthood. But Christ in
the gospel has appointed the same persons to be preachers of the gospel and
Ministers of the sacraments. Moreover, inasmuch as she did it, Exodus 4. 24.
25, 26.
not in the absence but in the presence of her husband, and inasmuch as her
heart was not upright, but filled with Anger against GOD, with indignation
against her husband, with murmaringe and frettinge against the institution of
circumcision, castinge the foreskin with great disdain upon the earth,
regarding nothing less then to perform a good duty to God, railing upon and
reuiling Moses, the act cannot be lawful or aproued. Furthermore it does not
appear out of the scripture that Moses was sick (as some pretend) but it is
most probaple and likely, that Zipporah wanting discretion but not presumption,
through her boldness and hastines prevented Moses, and adventured on the work,
before the prophet could prepare himself unto it. Neither may we by the
sequel and success conclude the lawfulnes of her deed, Bellar. de sacra. bap,
cap 7.
as Bellarmine does, because the Angel ceased from vexing him, that therefore
god was pacified, pleased, and appealed toward him. For the Heathen man
condemns such as measure actions Ovid. Etist. 2, careat successibus opto,
quisquis ab euentu fact a notanda putat.
by the event, as by a false rule and deceitful measure. We see oftentimes
evil works prosper, and evil works speed well in this world; The Assyrians
that halted in the worship of God, and mingled his honor with Idols, were
delivered frow the 2 King. 17. 25.
lions that devoured them: yet their corrupt and consused religion pleased not
God. Wherefore, we conclude, that whereas this Woman administered circumcision,
her example must not be drawn into imitation.

Now, as the truth is plain and evident: so the use is profitable and
comfortable. First, if the minister be one outward Use. 1.
part of Baptism, then he must be ready and careful to perform his duty,
which is, to wash the unclean body with water in the name of the father, of
the son, and of the Holy Ghost, to call upon God, and to follow the
institution of Christ, as it is left in the scripture for his direction. For if
there be the outward sign of baptism as the matter of the Sacrament, if there
be a party to be baptized which is the receiver, and if there he a minister to
administer it: yet unless he perform his duty, there can be no baptism. So
then we must know that the actions of the minister What are the actions of the
Minister.
are dubble: first, there is required of him a sanctifying of the water:
Sccondly, a washing of the party. The sanctifying of the water, is the
separation and appointing of it by the word and prayer to this use to signify
the blood of Christ. The outward washing is a certain pledge unto us of our
inward washing by the blood and spirit of christ.

Secondly, if it be the ossice of the minister to baptize: Use. 2.
then this gives direction and instruction to the people to whom to repair
and resort when they have any children to be baptized. It is required of them
to have recourse to the ministers as to the officers of god. We see in the
asfiairs of the commonwealth, and in passing conueyances of houses, of lands,
and of inhritances, how careful and circumspect men are to pass them where
they ought to be passed, and in such courts, and under such officers as are
authorized for such purpose, that there may be no error committed in the
conueiance. For whatsoever is done and passed before him that has not his
patent to warrant his practice, is held to be void and frustrate by masters of
that profession. In like manner it stands us all upon, when a matter of an
higher nature and of greater importance is in hand, then the sealing and
assuring of temporal possessions, to look carefully to the diligent
performance of this special duty, that the signing of our infants and sealing
them in the covenant, be made by the hands of such officers as are appointed by
God for that purpose, and by no other.

Thirdly, this condemns the abuse and profanation of the Sactament of
baptism in the church of Rome, where use. 3.
women, midwiues, and private persons without any commandment of God, nay
contrary to his word, take upon them this part of the ministers office to
baptize children, which they have received from the (...) Marcion Epiph here, 42
who gave women power to baptize, which Epiphanius Epiph. cont. her. (...).
teaches, the holy mother of Christ was not permitted to do. Such then as
vsurp this calling and approve thereof, never knew the force of our adoption in
Christ, nor the strength of the covenant, nor that the elect are saved by the
good pleasure and will of God. Therefore, there is not that absolute necessity
of baptism to salvation which many suppose, that for this supposed necessity,
the ordinance of God should be broken and profaned. And a man may marvel, why
at such times, they did not rather commit the matter to private men to baptize
then to woman (whose sex is surther removed from execution of this office) not
only because they be uncalled and private men, 1 Timothy 2, xi, 12 1 cor. xiiii,
34,
but even because they'are women, and thereby are wholly incapable (though
otherwise qualified) of any public charge or function in the church, they are
commanded to sit still, and to be quiet. Besides, if in time of this extreamety
and necessity which is imagened, it be permitted them to minister baptism: why
should it not be suffered in like necessity and danger of death, that they
minister the Lords Supper, and preach the Gospel, (in case they be able and
men unable or unwilling) the dignity of the one Sacrament being no less then
the other, and the excellency of the word being as great as of them both? If
then women may justly be condemned, when they shall presume to sit down in the
chair of Moses, or to minister the Supper of the Lord: they cannot be
justified if they vsurp to minister baptism. For, shall we make a shameful
and double diuorcement of those things that God has coupled, between the word
and sacraments, and likewise between the one Sacrament and the other? This is
to great contumely and contempt offered to baptism, to allow it in those, that
may neither publicly preach, nor lawfully minister the Lords Supper: seeing
their warrant to practice the one, is no greater then to do the other.
Wherefore, let all private persous and midwiues consider with the mselues the
fearful examples recorded in the Scipture, of such as have rashly presumed to
profane the holy offices of the church, and how God has often visited this
great sin with grievous judgments, sometimes with fire from heaven, sometimes
the earth opening her mouth, sometimes with sudden death, and sometimes with
the most filthy disease of the Leprosy, whereby as by his voice from heaven,
he thundered down upon men's disobedience, and so ratifieth this law of the
necessity of a vocation (...) calling for ever. Number. 16, 9, (...), 106 17, 18.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram taking upon them the priesthood without a calling,
fire from heaven came down consuming Corah and his company: the earth also
opened and covered Dathan and Abiram, that they were swallowed up alive: none
of them died the common visitation of other men, but God wroght a strange work
upon them, and altered the course of nature: which ought to be a parpetuall
instruction and direction unto us, to teach us not to pervert or euert that
order, which God has established to continue in his church. Hitherto belongs
that which is written of Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6. 7
who was smitten with sudden and unexpected death, only for that beyond the
bounds of his calling he put forth his hand to hold up the Arc which did shake
and was ready to fall, which was lawful for the Levites only to meddle withal,
although his intent and purpose were never so good: so that if the unlawful
intruders upon baptism pretend cases of necessity, here seemed as great a
necessity, yea his mind and meaning was as good as theirs, yet it displeased
god, because it was done without his word and warrant. So Azariah was stricken
with Leprosy, that he was a Leaper to the day of his death, for that not being
content with his kingly office, he would take upon him the priests office 2
king 15. 5
to burn incense unto the Lord. These worthy examples of gods most feuere
judgments executed upon the breakers of this ordinance, ought to strike such a
fear into our hearts, that we suffer not the sacred functions and offices of the
church to be profaned, and to teach us that every one meddle only with the
approved duties of his own calling. And although God do not now thus execute
judgment from heaven, and work strange things in the earth in extraordinary
manner, when his ordinances are broken: yet the sin is not thereby lessened, nor
the punishment mitagated, nor the hand of God shortened, but stretched out
still, though judgment according to desert be deferred: my rather the Nah. 1,
2 Eccl. 8, 11, 12 13.
greater wrath is reserved for his adversaries, to the great day of account,
when al flesh shall appear before the throne of his glorious presence. For if
the prophaners of the sign (...) sacraments of the old testament did not
escape, but were thus sharply and severely punished: our sacraments
established by the lord Jesus are not of less value (...) worthiness, so that
the contempt of the^ shall be visited with sorer judgments. And if god did
strike with his revenging hand priuatemen when they sinned in a abusing the
sacraments, and spared not kings in the pride of their hearts: how should
women standing a degree (...) off, and barred from the office by a stronger
bolt, enter into the house Ioh. 10, 10
at a window, and not be accounted as thieves and robbers? So that we conclude,
that the necessity of a calling is as great as the necessity of baptism. And
thus much of the first outward part of baptism, namely the minister.

Chap. 4. Of the second outward part of baptism.
THe second outward part of baptism is the word of institution, Word of
institution is the form of baptism
which is as the form of the Sacrament, as Ephesians. 2, 26. Christ loved the church
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it by the
washing of water Ephesians. 2, 26 Math. 28, 19
through the word. This also is expressly set down Math. 28. Go, teach all
nations, baptizing them into the name of the father, and of the son, and of
the Holy Ghost. This both declares the use of the Sacrament, and promises
Christ with all his benefits. For to be baptized into the name of the blessed
Trinity, is to be made one of Gods family which is his church, and to be
partaker of the privileges thereof. I his promise is contained under the
commandment, Genesis 48, 19
as we may see by sundry testimonies of the Scripture as Genesis 48. Jacob says,
The Angel that has delivered me from all evil, bless the children, and let
my name be named upon them, and the names of my fathers Abraham and Isaac:
whereby he means, they should be joined to his family and accounted in the
number of them. Now the uses remain to be considered. First, hereby it is
manifest, what a solemn covenant and contract, and what Use. 1.
a near conjunction is made by the washing in baptism between God and the
persons baptized: for god the father vouchsafes to receive them as his
children into favor, the son to redeem (...), the Holy Ghost to purify and
preserve them, to comfort and regenerate them, to protect and defend them from
all evil. This is the staff and stay of our hope and comfort.

Secondly, consider on the other side, that the parties thus Use. 2.
baptized, do promise and vow, to acknowledge, believe, serve, worship and call
upon the name of no other Gods but of the true God, which is the father, the
son, and the Holy Ghost, and consequently to renounce the works of the devil,
the fashions of the world and the lusts of the flesh. Baptism is as it were a
solemn oath taken in the sight of God and in the face of the congregation,
whereby the person baptized binds himself wholly to God, three in persons,
but one in substance. Indeed we deserve to be cast out of the favor and
family of God, yet he vouchsafes to entertain us, to receive us, and to
acknowledge us for his children: therefore we must in every estate depend upon
him, honor him as our God, serve him as our master, obey him as our Lord, and
look for salvation from him as from our redeemer. Again, as we have been
baptized, not in the name of one person alone, not in the name of the father
alone, or of the son alone, or of the holy ghost alone, but in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the Holy Ghost: so we must all believe (...)
confess as an article of our faith, that the Trinity in unity, and unity in
trinity is to be worshipped. For albeit here are three reckoned up as speaking
of many: yet here is also mentioned their name, as speaking only of one, not
of their names, baptize them in the name of the three persons. So many as deny
the doctrine of the trinity, are justly to be condemned of falsehood and
heresy. Such is the religion of the Jews, Greeks, Turks, Persians, and in
some sort the Papists, albeit in words these last acknowledge one God in three
persons. The Greek church at this day denies the Godhead of the holy ghost:
the Turks and Jews deny the deity both of the son and of the Holy Ghost: the
present church of Rome more glorious in show, but not much more sound in says,
has defiled the whole trinity with their Imagerie, and set up a false CHRIST,
partly denying him to be GOD of himself, and partly repealing all his offices:
so that howsoever they profess him in words, and leave him the name of a
savior: yet they make a mock of his sacrifice and have turned Christian
religion into Antichristian (...). Wherefore, as we are baptized into the most
worthy name of the blessed Trinity, let us hold fast the true profession
thereof, and renounce al errors and heresies oppugning our holy (...), and
(...) us of the sweet comfort we have therein.

Thirdly, are these words of institution baptizing them into the name of the
father, and of the son and of the Holyghost, Use. 3.
the outward form of baptism? Then we hold that manner of baptizing must be
retained, this ought not to be changed, no other ought to be used then this,
prescribed by Christ our savior. We must not therefore let pass or leave out,
any of the three persons in trinity (as some heretics have done) though we
shall understand the other by naming and speaking of one. If any say, that the
Apostles baptized in the name of Christ, as Act. 2, 38, and Chapter 10, 48, and 19,
5. To this (...) I answer, the Apostles do not set down in those places the
form of baptism, Objection Answer.
or the words of institution: but the substance and end, which is, to assure
remission of sins in the name of Christ. They show not the form, but the
fruit: not how it should be ministered, but what spiritual grace is signified
thereby. For why should the Disciples change the ordinance of their master,
who delivered nothing to the churches, but what 1 cor. 11, 23
they received of the Lord? Again, it cannot be denied, but that the Apostles
act. 10, 47 and 19. 2
baptized in this form, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of
the holy ghost, as Act. 10, 47. Can any forbid water that these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well as we? As if he should
say, these have received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, therefore they may be
baptized in the name of the Holy Ghost. And more plainly Act. 19, when the
Diseiples had answered Paul that they knew not whether there were an holy
ghost, he says, Unto what were ye then baptized? Whereby he shows, it was
the manner and custom to baptize in the name of the Holy Ghost, and
consequently of the whole Trinity. The Evangelists also teach, that at the
baptism of John, the father, son and Holy Ghost were present. And as he
baptized with the same matter, why should we imagine he observed not the same
form, that Christ eommaunded expressly to his Apostles? Nay seeing in the
baptism of John we have proved, there was the same promise, the same grace,
the same virtue, the same sign, the same signification, which was in the
baptism of the apostles (as we have proved before) why should we only doubt
of the words of institution? Wherefore, we conclude, that the Apostles would
not alter any thing of the direct-and express words of their lord and
master, Math. 28, 19
prescribed Math. 28, where he charge them both what to preach and how to
baptize. For as he enioyneth them to teach the nations, to observe whatsoever
he commanded them: so he wills them to baptize in the name of the father, of
the son, and of the Holyghost. And as they altered nothing in the matter of
teaching: no more did they in the manner of baptizing, considering that as the
doctrine they preached was the doctrine of God, so the Sacraments they
delivered were the Sacraments of God, and they had no more leave in the one,
then liberty in the other. If then, any should baptize otherwise then in the
name of the Trinity, or should name the son to be unequal to the father, or
should deny the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, or should baptize in the name of
the Virgin Mary and the Saints, this cannot be the Sacrament of baptism
instituted by Christ, but a Ceremony made void and frustrate by our own
inventions.

Chap. 5. Of the third outward part of baptism.
THe third outward part of baptism Water another outward part of bapt.
is the element of water, which is the matter whereof baptism consists. This
truth is taught in diverse places of the new Math. 3, xi,
testament. Indeeds I baptize with water. And Ioh. 1, because he should be
declared to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water: Knew him not,
but he that sent me to baptize with water, he said unto me, upon whom thou
shall see the spirit come (...) and tarry still on him, that is he which
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. So Act. 8, 36. As they went on their way, they
came unto a (...) ater, and the Enuruch said, See here is water, what does let
me to be baptized? then he commanded the chariot to stand still, and they went
down both unto the water, both Phillip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.
And chap. 10. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized,
which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Nothing is so apt to set
sorth the blood of christ and his merits, as water which is sit to cleanse and
wash, and leaves no filth behind upon the body: by which outward work,
Christ would have us feel the inward purging and purifying of the soul.

The use of this outward part, is threefold. First, it teaches, Use. 1.
that the minister may not baptize with any other liquor and element, then with
natural, common, and ordinary water: whereunto answer the flood, the red
sea, and the Jewish purifyings, under the law. The curious questions, whether
wanting water we may baptize with sand, or water distilled and compounded,
came at the first from the dangerous and bloody opinion that they are damned
which die unbaptized. If any demand whether sweet waters and distilled may be
taken and used, or mingled with common Objection
water, especially when children of such as are in high place are to be
baptized and sealed into the covenant, thereby to note a difference between
person and person, forasmuch as god has listed up the head of one above
another: I answer, Rom, 13, 1, 7
Answer
all power is indeed of god, and we with heart and tongue do give honor to
whom honor pertains, and fear to whom fear belongs.

Notwithstanding, all mixture of the water is man's invention and an human
tradition which in GODS woorshippe is not to be admitted. Whatsoever is mingled
with common Water, is a corruption, whatsoever the party be that is baptized.
The Apostle teaches, Ephesians, 4. 5
that the church has all one baptism: not one manner of baptizinge the poor,
and another of baptizing the rich. Besides, why might we not allow mixture of
water with Wine in the Lords supper, as well as the mixture of compound water
with common water in the sacrament of baptism? Furthermore, if there might
lawfully be admitted a different manner of baptising the children of rich-men
and the children of poor men: then in the other Sacrament the like distinction
might be received, and so a finer kind of bread be provided for the richer
sort by themselves, and a courser sort for the poor by themselves, 1 Cor 11.
21 22
which separation the Apostle reproves in the church of (...), and calls it
a despising of the Church and a shaming of the poor. For in the exercises of
religion there ought to be no difference of persons, Gal. 3, 28
for all are one in Christ Jesus, and therefore the Noble Eunuch mentioned Act,
8. was baptized by Phillip with ordinary water.

Now if no composition may be mingled: No other sign ought to be used in
baptism then water.
then much less may any other sign be used, and so the element clean
changed, and the ordinance of God altered: for the church of God has no
liberty to bring any other sign in place of water. If a man were baptized with
sand, with blood, with wine, with milk, with snow, with oil, and such
lickor, it is no baptism at all, but a mere void and idle action: such a
person must afterward be sprinkled or washed with water, not that any should
be rebaptized, but because all persons should be once baptized, the former
action being merely frustrate. Although the form of words be retained in the
administration which our savior commands, and the body be washed in the name
of the three persons, the father, the son, and the Holy Ghost: yet if such an
error be committed in the matter that the sign be changed, and another
foysted in, contrary to the precept of Christ and practice of the Apostles,
there is a nullitie of the whole work, the party be-sanded, or be-bloodied, or
oyled, is erroneously and unlawfully, not truly and effectuallye baptized.
Nadab and Abihu are smitten with lightning from heaven Lent. x. i. 2
for bringing strange fire into the tabernacle, whereas they should have taken
of that fire which GOD had appointed, though other fire would as well have
consumed the offering. And are not all other elements as strange fire that are
brought into this sacrament, beside water? Or, have we greater liberty to
change Gods ordinances in the gospel, then the Jews had under the Law?

When GOD appointed the Leuit, i. 3, x xiiii
burnt offering to be offered, and commanded the people to bring either
bullocks out of the heard, either Sheep or Goats out of the fold, either
Turtle-doues or young Pigeons from among the birds: being thus limited and
restrained, might they bring an Ass, or an Elephant, or a Camel unto him?
might they cut osf a dogs neck, or offer swines flesh before the Lord? So,
whereas God has ordained the sacrament of baptism to be administered, and has
willed it to be done with water, most common, most usual, most plentiful,
most fit, most significant: shall we take sand, or saw-dust, oil, or other
element then god has allowed? The Lord likewise threatening a general dearth
of Corn, Wine, and Oil (of which things many of their offeringes and
oblations consisted) shows that the priests should Weep and wail, because
the Iocl. i. 9
Meat Offerings and Drinke-offeringes should cease. But what need was there,
either that the priests should have lamented, or the offeringes have ceased,
if they might have used other elements, other signs, or other matter then GOD
approved? If they might have taken water in steed of wine, or Milk in stead
of oil? Or if they might have taken unclean beasts in stead of clean, Or
the Fishes of the Sea in stead of the Beasts of the field? Or creeping
things for their Offerings in steed of such as chewe the cudde and divide the
hoof? Now how can it be better Warraunted to us to take oil for Water,
then it was for them to take Water for oil.

Again, hereby all Popish corruptions and mixtures use. 2
brought into this Sacrament are confuted and condemned, as their cream, their
tapers, their crosses, their censors, their salt, their spittle, their
holy water, their exorcisinges and conjurations, having also an opinion of
salvation and worship annexed unto them. These men (as if it were a base and
contemptible thing to baptize with Water only, according to Christ's
commandment) have brought in a new word and new elements, (...) that is, new
dross and new filth into the church, and into the sacraments of the church: as
salt, that we may be seasoned with wisdom, and be kept from purrifying in
sin: oil, that we may be safe from evil suggestions: spittle, that our
ears may be opeto hear the word, and our Nostrils to discern the smell of
good and evil: crosses, that all our senses may be defended against the evil
spirit.

True it is, if all the other parts and actions be observed, these inventions
and additions, which are so many abuses make not baptism void, neither bring a
nullity thereof: notwithstanding these beggarly ceremonies, as they are
destitute of the testimony and aprobation of the first and ancient Churches,
so they corrupt the pure, simple, and sincere institution of Christ None were
used when Christ was baptized, neither gave he any such thing in charge to
his Apostles, neither were they in use in the Apostles times, neither did they
deliver them to the pastors and teachers which they ordained in every city.
For Peter says, Act, 10, 47
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized? He calls
not for oil, salt, spittle, cream or any such thing, but only for plain,
common, and ordinary water. Thus in one sacra. they find many sacraments, and
invent tipes, shadows, similitudes, and significations in the immediate service
of God, whereas we have the body itself, that is, christ already. They make
these outward things able to give grace, power, and strength against the
devil. But the Apostle teaches, that the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, 2 cor, 10, 4, Ephesians, 6, 12.
they are spiritual that must defend us from evil. If they refer all this trash
and trumpery, not to the substance of the sacram. but Hosii confess. de ritib.
bapt. cap. 37
to order and comeliness: do they not thereby blasphemously accuse the
baptism of John and of the Apostles of Christ of uncomeliness and disorder?
Whereas the comeliness and dignity of the sacraments is to be esteemed by the
word of God, by the institution of christ, by the simplicity of the gospel, and
by the (...) of the Apostles. Nothing is more comely, decent, and orderly then
that which christ commands and aloweth: nothing is more uncomely or
unseemly, then that which man inuenteth in the service of God, and in the
celebration of the Sacraments, thereby inuerting and perverting the holy
ordinances of God.

Thirdly, if washing with water be an outward part of baptism which pertains
to the flesh; but teaches not to the conscience, which touches the body, but
cleanses not the soul: then the bare want of external purification, cannot
bring the danger of eternal condemnation. Wherefore children dying without
baptism are not rejected because they want baptism: for children that are
elected are saved, though they die before baptism: and they that are not
elected are condemned, though they be baptized. For it is not the want, but the
continual contempt thereof that is damnable. Circumcision was as necessary to
the Jews, as baptism is unto us. But all did not perish Al perished not under
the law that died before circumcision.
that died uncircumcised: therefore all perish not that die unbaptized. And if
the salvation of the child did depend upon the outward sacrament, it had been
an hard thing in the Lord (who will Ezekiel. 18, 23,
not the death of a sinner) to have required the deferring of it one week, one
day, one hour, one minute? We see in Ioshuae, Josh. 5, 5
it was omitted 40. years, while they were in the wilderness, through their
continual iournies and uncertain abode in every place: yet it were an hard,
cruel, and bloody conclusion to determine thereupon, that whosoever among them
during that time dying before he was circumcised, was damned, When David's child
died the seventh day, which was before he could be circumcised, (circumcision
being limited Leuit. 12, 2, 3
to the 8. day) he did not cry out pitifully, it is damned, it is damned: but
arose from the earth, washed himself, anointed his body, changed his Genesis
17. 12. and 21. 4
apparel, refreshed himself, cheared his wife, came into the house of the
Lord, worshipped God, praised him for all his doings, 2 Samuel 12. 18, 19, 20.
(...). 23
made his servants that attended on him wonder at his comfortable behavior,
and said, he should go to his child, but not his child return to him again.
But if he had thought all condemned that die uncircumcised, his lamentation
would have exceeded, for he had cause to have sorrowed more after his death,
then he did in the childs sickness: and if circumcision had been of such
absolute necessity, he might have said, The child being now dead, why should I
not fast? why should I not weep? why should I not afflict my soul? seeing I
cannot bring him again, or restore him to life to be circumcised? But because
he sorrowed not as one without hope and he (...) not on this or any like
manner: it appears that his faith apprehended the salvation of the child,
and feared not his damnation through untimely want of the outward sacrament.

Now, God is not streighter and harder to us under the gospel, then he was to
the Israelites under the law: he is no less able and willing to save now
without baptism, then in those days he was without circumcision. Again, how
foolish, vain, and unreasonable a thing is it, to put life and death,
salvation and damnation into the hands and liberty of mortal men, as of the
parents that should bring them, or of the minister that should baptize them,
or of others that perform other duties unto them: whereas eternal life and
salvation stands sure and settled upon the brazen pillar of Gods election (who
knows 2 Timothy 2. 15
who are his) and upon his merciful promise in his covenant, and not upon the
lust and pleasure of any man, as we see in the example of Jacob, of whom God
said, I have loved him, before he was circumcised, nay before he was Romans 9.
11. 13 Mal 1. 2
born, or had done either good or evil.

Furthermore, we have showed before, act, 10, (...)
that many believed, repented, and had the Holy Ghost before they were
baptized. Yea the thief upon the cross repented of his sins and believed in
Christ, yet was never baptized: notwithstanding he was received to mercy and
certainly saved, as Christ says, Luke 23, 43
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Besides, there is no greater
necessity of baptism then of the Lords supper: but we may be saved without
the Lords supper: therefore also without baptism. Lastly, if al persons dying
without baptism be condemned: then infinite multitudes of children should or
may perish and be damnd without their own fault, through the carelesnes of
others: but none perish without their own fault: therefore all dying without
baptism are not condemnd. To these we might (...) the testimony and confession
of the adversaries, which is strong against themselves, to whom we may say as
Christ sometimes did to that sloathfull person, Luke 19, 22
Thou evil servant out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. These make three
sorts of baptism, of water, of blood, of the spirit: whereby they consesle
that the want of baptising with water is not damnable in all, seeing that want
may be supplied, either with shedding of their blood for the testimony of the
truth, or by spiritual regeneration and ingrafting into the body of christ To
conclude, do we desire the custom and practice of the church? It is well
known, that in Thessalia Socra. lib. 5 cap. 22 Bellar. de sacra bap,. c. 26
the sacrament of baptism was celebrated but once in the year, namely, at
Easter. In other places thrice in the year, and sometimes not until the hour
of their death, when they were going the way of al slesh. Constantine the great
was the first christian Emperor, yet was he not baptized till Tripart, hist
lib, 3, cap. 12
the time of his death. And Valentinianus a christian Emperor died without
baptism: yet does Ambrose give him his due commendation, Orat. de obit. (...).
and doubted nothing of his salvation. Shall we do these good men, these worthy
Emperors, these godly christians this wrong, as to think they were damned,
who were the chief pillars and protectors of the Catholic religion? Or if the
churches above mentioned had holden this hard opinion, that the want of
baptism was a sign of reprobation: would they have deferred it in the hour
of death (whereby sometimes they were (...)) or administered it at certain
times only of the year? True it is, that custom is not to be followed,
neither the negligence of those bishops to be allowed: but it teaches thus
much that in de ferring baptism they differed in judgment from the new church
of Rome, and concurred in opinion with the reformed churches, for which causes
their practice is aledged. The reasons used to maintain the absolute necessity
of this sacrament to salvation, are weak and not worth the answering. First
they object Cen. 17, 14 Objection Answer
the threatening annexed to circumcision. The uncircumcised male shall be cut
off from his people. To this I answer, first God commands infants to be
circumcised the eight day, before which time they were forbidden to circumcise.
Wherefore, infants that die before the 8. day, were not bound and obliged by this
law. And seeing there Rom, 5, 13
can be no transgression where there is no law, they are not damnd because they
are vncircumcifed, seeing god calls many out of this life before they were
capable of this sacrament. Again the commination and threatening is not to be
understood generally of all, but of such as are grown up: not of children,
but of men, as appears by the reason, For he has broke my covenant. This
cannot be applied to infantes, caletan. (...) cap. 7, genes.
who albeit they have not actual faith, yet cannot be said to contemn grace,
to refuse the covenant, to reject the promises, or to lie in infidelity and
hardness of heart. Wherefore, it belongs unto those only that being grown up
and come to years shall approve the negligence of their parents, and will not
suffer themselves to be circumcised. Now as to Peter, saying, Thou shall John,
xiii, (...)
never wash my feet, Christ answered, If I wash thee not, thou have no part in
me: so to the Israelite that should have said, I will never be circumcised,
this threatening might fitly be applied, If thou will not be circumcised, thou
have no part in God, no portion in his blessing, no assurance of his promises
in this life, or of his kingdom in the life to come. Lastly, to be cut off
from the people, does not signify to be condemned, for even the negligence and
contempt of the Sacrament is pardonable where repentance follows: as we see of
such as came vnuerently and unworthily to the Lords supper among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor, 11. 30 31.
who were punished with diseases and death it self, yet the soul no doubt was
saved in the day of the Lord. Sometime therefore, that phrase of speaking
signifies temporal judgments of God on men and their families Psa, 55, 24
for their wickedness. Sometimes it signifies the magistrates justice inflicted
on malefactors, Deuteronomy. 13. 5 9
who bears not the sword in vain, which is expounded afterward, Thou shall
surely kill him. Sometimes, it signifies to be cut off from the bosom of the
church, Exodus 12, 15 19
which is done by the high and dreadful censure or excommunication. Whosoever
eats leauened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that person
shall be out off from Israel: the interpretation of which words is added
verse, 19. That person shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel. So
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5. He which has done this thing should be 1 cor,
5, 2 (...)
put from among you, that is, from your company and fellowship as verse 13. Put
away from among your selves that wicked man. Thus we are to understand the
threatening in this place, that such as contemn circumcision, either
themselves, or allow the same contempt and negligence of others, shall no
longer be reckoned and reputed among the people of God, but be separated from
them.

Again, Ioh, 3, 5
they object John, 3. Unless a man be borne of water and the spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God: therefore Object 2.
say they, it is necessary to salvation to be baptized. This is the reason of
Bellar. lib, 1 de bapt. c. 4,
Bellarmine, and Hosij Confess. cap. 35 Answer.
of others. I answer first, it is not necessary in this place by water to
understand material water, but the grace of Christ purging and cleansing as
water does; which interpretation may be gathred by conference of a like place
Math 3, 11. He shall baptize Ioh. 3, 11
with the holy ghost and with fire, that is, by the spirit of God which is as
it were fire, lightning our hearts with the knowledge of God, inflaming them
with his love, and purging them from evil affections. So when we are said to
be borne again by water and the spirit, he means, by the spirit showing
forth in us the force power, and property of Water, as if he should say, we
are borne of water which is the spirit, Ioh. 7, 38, 36 and 4, 11
as Ioh. 7, 38, 39. Again, if it were meant of water in baptism, it must be
understood according to alike Ioh. 6. 53
sentence Ioh. 6. Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, ye shall not have life in you: which must be understood of such as
are of years and grown in age. And thus Innocentius the 3. in the Decret.
Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 42. c. 3
decrees expounds it: so does Peter Lumbard Lumb. sent. lib. 4. did 4
master of the (...). So then, if they will be tried, either by their own
Pope, which is their holy father: or by Peter Lumbard, which is their
grand-maister: this place cannot be enforced against infants, that die before
they be baptized, but must be referred to men of greater years.

We reason not thus far, to justify and allow the sluggishnesse and neglect
of careless parents, under color and pretense of this, that the salvation of
the child depends not upon the participation of the Sacrament: but to show,
that if it cannot be obtained as it ought to be desired, or if by godless
parents it be deferred and neglected: yet salvation is not tied and glued to
the outward water. Away then with he doctrine of the church of Rome touching
the absolute necessity of baptism, and touching children that dye without it:
a beastly and bloody Let none object the opinion of Augustine, for he thought
it necessary to salvation, that children should receive the Lords Supper, as
well as baptism, De peccator. mer't. lib. cap. 24.
doctrine joined with rigor and cruelty, full of error and fear, uncharitable
in it self, presumptuous by entering into Gods secret judgments, impious by
binding him to second causes and ordinary means, injurious to thousands of
poor infants, discomfortable to al good parents, and blasphemous against the
bottomless mercy of a gracious God, who has said Genesis 17, 7
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed: where he makes a coueuant of
salvation with us and our children, not adding any condition of baptism, if it
cannot be had, as it ought to be. If it cannot be had by the infant, the spirit
of God does work the effectual knitting of them to the body of Christ by a
secret working (as pleases him) instead of ordinary means. For when our
savior had said Mar. 16 He that shall believe, and be baptized shall be
saved: (...) does not add contrariwise, he that is not baptized shall be
damned, Mar, 16, 16.
but annexeth only, He that believes not, shall be condemned. Thus we have
showed the malice and madness of Satan against poor insants, and how he has
used proud and pestilent instruments to effect his purpose: partly the
Anabaptists, who deny Baptism to their bodies: and partly the Papists, who
deny salvation to their souls for want of baptism.

Chap. 6. Of the forth outward part of baptism.
THe last outvvard part of baptism is The last outvvard part of bapt. is the
body washed.
the body that is washed. For we have showed before, that the sacraments
without their use are no sacraments. And albeit the word joined to the sign
make a sacrament, yet this presupposes a minister to administer it, and
receiver to take it: and then the rule is most certainly to be admitted. Now
whether the whole body should be washed, or a part of the body: whether it
should be washed once, or oftener: whether it should be dipped, or sprinkled: we
are neither curiously to enquire, nor seriously to contend, nor rashly to
determine: but rest in practice of the church, and in the custom os the
country, as in a thing in it own nature indifferent. The dipping and plunging
into the water used by John Baptist and the Apostles in Judea and such hot
regions, are not a necessary rule to be drawn into imitation, especially in
these cold quarters and countries.

But let us see who they are that have right and interest in baptism, and who
are capable of this Sacrament. For not every one without respect, without
difference, without distinction, is to be admitted to this privilege, because
they are not fit receivers thereof. If a minister should take the outward
element, and use the word of institution, baptizing in the name of the father,
of the son, and of the Holy Ghost: yet it can be no Sacrament, unless the
receiver have warrant and authority to receive it. If he should baptize a
stone, or an image, or a bruit beast without reason and understanding, these
are no fit receivers, here is an apparent and flat nullity: where by appears
farther, the truth of the former rule, that besides the joining of the word to
the outward sign, their is necessarily required a fitted person to be partaker
of the sacrament, as is more at large expressed, book. 3. Chap. 3.

To proceed, Who are in the covenant
we must know that the receivers are such as are within the covenant and such
as profess the truth, whether in truth or not, we leave to GOD, that
searches the hearts and raines: Rom, 14. 4
let us not judge another man's servant, he stands or falls to his own
master. Again, such as are borne in the covenant are of two sorts. First,
men and women of years: secondly, infants that are the seed of the faithful.
For the faithful do believe for themselves and for others: as in bargains
they (...) and contract for themselves and their heirs after them for ever.
Although children cannot be said to be saved by their fathers faith, no more
then to live by the fathers soul, inasmuch as the prophet Heb. 2. 4 Romans i,
xvii Gal. 3 xi Heb. x, 38
teaches That the just shall live by his own faith: yet the faith of the
parents makes their children to be counted in the covenant, who by reason of
their age cannot yet actually believe, as they that want all knowledge and
understanding, Jonah, 4. xi.
not discerning the right hand from the left. Every man lives this temporal
life by his own soul: so every man lives the eternal life by his own faith.
True it is, baptis me is a common seal. But as all have not interest to the
pasture, herbage, and privileges of a Commons, but only such as are tenantes
according to the custom of the manor: so all have not title to baptize a
Sacrament of the church, but only such as are the Lords people according to
the tenor of the covenant.

Touching the first sort of such as are to be baptized, they are men and women
of riper years, who adioyne themselves to the church, testify their
repentance, hold the foundation of religion, act. 8, 36
and confess their faith, as Act. 8, If thou beleeuest, thou (...) be
baptized. The second sort, are infants within the covenant, 1 cor. 7. 14,
which have both theit parents, or one at the least faithful, as 1 Cor. 7, 14.
The unbelieving husband is sanctified to the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified to the husband, else were your children (...), but now they are
holy. Where the Apostle she weth, that albe it a believer be unequally yoaked
and matched with an unbeliever: yet he is not to be forsaken, nor the marriage
bed to be accounted polluted, inasmuch as their children are sanctified to
God and the Church, as well as if they were borne of both parents faithful.
For so the children of the Isralites being of the posterity of Abraham, are
included in the covenant of God. We are not curiously to enquire into the
secret counsel and election of god: we must We must hope well of the seed osthe
faithful, and therefore we batize them.
hold all the seed of the faithful holy, until they cut off themselves, and
in process of time openly declare themselus to be strangers from the promises
of salvation. Again, the same Apostle Romans xi 16 Gen 17. 7
says Romans 11. If the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump: if the root
be holy, so are the branches. So likewise God testifies Genesis 17. I will
establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their
generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God to thee, and to thy seed
after thee. Such only were circumcised as were within the covenant.

Notwithstanding, they which were borne of unbelieving parents and were
strangers of the commonwealth of Israel, and aliants from the promises of
salvation: if they acknowledged the errors in which they lived, and sought
forgiveness of their former sins, were accounted the children of faithful
Abraham, were admitted into the Church, and received circumcision, as the
Apostles said to the Iailer, act 16, 30, 31
humb'ed under the mighty hand of GOD, and desiring to be instructed in the way
of salvation, Believe in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and thou shall be saved, and
thy whole household. So the (...) testifies the like of Zacheus, when he had
once received CHRIST into his house, nay which is more, into his heart: Luke
19. 9
then Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come unto this bouse,
for-asmuch as he is also become the son of Abraham. Thus when the Sun of
rightcousnesse shines upon the head and master of the family, the beams
thereof by a gracious influence begin to comforr and concerue act. 16, 14, 3
15 1 Cor. 1, 16 Ioh. 4, 53 2 Ioh verse, 1
all the rest in the house: like the precious ointment upon the head of Aaron,
that ran down upon the beard, and descended upon the borders of his
garments: or like the dew that falls from heaven upon Hermon and the
Mountains of Sion, Psalm. 133, 2.
which goes down into the valleys, and makes all the plain country fertile.

The knowledge of this point offers diverse profitable Use. 1.
uses to our consideration and consolation. First, it is the duty of all those
that are within the covenant to give their bodies to be washed, and to receive
that washing in the face and presence of the Congregation. Let such as are of
years desire and crave this Sacrament: let them claim this privilege: act. 8
36 and 22. 16
let them demand to be baptized, according to the example of the Eunuch Act.
8, so soon as he was instructed in the faith of Christ by the preaching of
Phillip, as he came to a certain water, he said of his own accord, See here
is water, what does let me to be baptized? And to the same purpose Act. 22,
Ananias stirs up Paul to this duty, saying, Why (...) thou? Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins.

Secondly, this condemns the blind, ignorant, and Use. 2.
superstitious practice of baptizing belles church of Rome propha neth bapt, by
baptizing bellcs.
practiced in the church of Rome, whereof now they begin to be ashamed, and
seeking fig-leaues to cover their shame, they say they were not baptized, but
only hallowed and consecrated to holy uses, as Bellarmine betaketh himself to
this shift, as to a place of refuge, Lib. 4, de pon. Romans cap. 12. Where the
Cardinal confesses, that the people call their solemn blessing and
sprinkling with holy water, the baptism of belles. And indeed what can it
else be called and accounted. They give names unto them as to their children:
they have Godfathers appointed unto them as children have when they are
baptized and confirmed: Bellar. de sacra. bapt. lib. 1, cap. 27
they have new garments put upon them, as the persons baptized among them like
wise have: it is also permitted only to the By shops suffragan, who exacteth
great sums of money for the baptizing of belles: they ascribe to them a
spiritual power against storms and tempests, against thunder and lightning,
against winds and evil spirits: Lastly, they sprinkle them with holy water,
bless them, cross them, and so horribly corrupt this Sacrament of baptism.
Yea Durand a principal schooleman, not in the schools of the prophets but of
the papists (a fit teacher of such scholars) sets out solemnly Durand. lib.
1 Enchirid cap. 4
the praises of belles, making them public preachers and driuers away of
devils. But the devils are not feared and fraied away by fight of crosses, by
sprinkling of water, by sound of belles and babies: Math. 17, 2 Ephesians. 6, 13, 14
xv, xvi
This kind goes not out but by fasting and prayer, as our savior teaches.
And the Apostle wills every Christian to take unto him the whole armor of
God, that he may be able to resist in the evil day. Stand therefore having
your loins grided about with verity, and having on the breast plate of
righteousness, the shield of faith, the sword of the spirit, the preparation
of the Gospel of peace, and the grace of prayer in the spirit. Here is the
universal armor of God: here is the complete furnishing of a Christian
Soldier: here is perfect direction given to understand, and to withstand the
assaults of the devil: but among these, we have neither the sign of the
cross, nor the hallowing of belles, nor the sound of such preachers, and
therefore they are no part nor parcel of spitituall armor, to surnish us to
go into the field against the enemies of our salvation. For evil spirits
which fightagainst the soul are not driven away by hallowing of belles. If
then, there were ever profanation of Baptism, this may justly be judged to
be one of the most vile and miserable corruptions thereof, to be detested of
all true hearted Christians / that groan under the burden of them.

Thirdly, we may see the great love of God to all believers, Use. 3.
seeing he vouchsafes not only to be their God, but the God of their seed
after them, as God himself Gcn. 17, 1, 2, 7,
promises to Abraham, Genesis 17. I will make my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations, I will be their God: walk
before me, and be thou upright. And ought we not to walk in the uprightness
of our heart before this merciful and all sufficient God, Who thus aboundesh
in kindness toward us, and the fruit of our body? Let us return unto him
love for his love, who loved us first.

Lastly, this teaches that infants are to be baptized, and Use. 4.
have as great right and interest in this Sacrament, as they which be in
years, able to make confession of their faith, Of which we will entreat in
the chapter following, where we will prove this truth by testimonies of the
scriptures, and maintain it against the Anabaptists and other heretics that
condemn the same.

Chap. 7. That Infants are to be baptized.
ALthough it cannot appear unto us, that infantes and newborn babes brought
to be baptized, have actual faith, but rather is like they want the habit of
faith which have Deuteronomy. 1, 39 Luke 1. 15. 44 John. 4, 11
not the use of understanding, unless God extraordinarily work it, which lies
not in us to judge of: yet we baptize them and admit them to this sacrament,
which we do upon very good grounds and susficient reasons.

First therefore, we will prove by evident demonstration out of the scriptures,
the doctrine of childre^s baptism to be conformable to the Jews circumcision,
agreeable to the practice the Apostles, allowable by the words of Christ,
answerable to the custom of the primitive church, reasonable in it self,
profitable to the infants, available by the ordinance of God, and very
comfortable to all christian parents. Secondly, we will maintain this
assertion against the objections and arguments of the Anabaptists and other
adversaries that have crossed and contradicted this truth. Lastly, we will show
what evident and necessary uses may be gathred from hence, for the strength of
faith, and the increase of our obedience.

Touching the first, that the baptising of infants is waranted by the word
Reasons waranting the baptizing of children.
of God, I will make it appear by sundry reasons. We see in the old testament,
that all males by express commandment were willed to be circumcised the Gen,
17, 12 Leuit, 12 3 Phil. 3, 5
eight day. If God made infants partakers of cirumcision: why should we not
hold the same of baptism, being instituted for us in steed of circumcision,
col. 2. 11
there being the same promises in both, and there being the same ends of both?
If then the covenant made with Abraham remain stable and steadfast, it does no
less belong to the children of Christians at this day, then it did appertain
to the children of the Jews under the old Testament: unless peradventure we
will say, that our savior Christ by his coming has restraind or diminished
the grace and love of his father, which were detestable blasphemy against the
father, and an horrible reproach against the son of God. From hence then, we
reason thus, if the infantes of the Jews were circumcised, then the children
of christians are to be baptized: but the infantes of the Jews were
circumcised: therefore also the children of christians are to be baptized.

Against this reason, sundry exceptions are taken by the adversaries of this
doctrine, which are not unworthy the consideration. Object.
They say, circumcision was a sign of mortification, it was tied to be
administered the eight day, and that women ought not to be baptized, if baptism
were like to circumcision, in as much as they were not circumcised. I answer,
these objections will easily appear to be very cauils and mere dreams of
idle and addle brains, if we diligently (...).
observe, both wherein circumcision and baptism agree, and in what points they
differ. They Wherein circumcision and baptism agree.
agree, first, in one author of them both, that is, God himself, who first
appointed the Minister of circumcision, which was Abraham, and John the
Minister of baptism, whereof he was called the baptist. Secondly, in the
chief and principal ends for which they were instituted, namely, to seal up
the promises of grace by Christ. Thirdly, by both of them is wrought our
visible receiving into the church: the Jews were received by circumcision, the
christians are entered by baptism. Lastly, by both of them our mortification,
regeneration, newnes of life, and justification are signified. So then they
fully agree in the ends which they respect, and in the things which they
signify, to wit, in the substance and nature of the things themselves.

Again circumcision and baptism differ Wherein circumcision and baptism
differ.
only in certain circumstances: first, in the form and manner of doing, as
circumcision was administered by cutting away of the foreskinne and effusiou of
blood, but baptism by washing and sprinkling with water. Secondly, in the
outward sign, which is different in both. Thirdly, in the circumstaunce of
time: for circumcision promised from God grace and mercy in the Messiah to
come, baptism in the Messiah already exhibited. Fourthly, in the subjects or
persons that are partakers of them: circumcision belongs only to the male
children, but baptism is common to male and female. Notwithstanding, How women
were after a sort
howsoever the bodies of the men children alone were imprinted, yet through
them the women were after a sort made partakers and companions of circumcision,
so that albeit God commanded only the males to have this sign in their flesh,
yet the females were not excluded from being members of the church, nor
accounted strangers from the Covenants of promise. For as the man is the 1
cor. xi, 8
head of the Woman, so they were accounted as circumcised in the man, yea they
were reckoned and numbered with the men, namely, the unmarried with their
father, and the married with their husbands. Now, their circumcision was thus
comprehended in the men, so that it was unto them in stead of circumcision to
be borne of the circumcised, may be gathered by many places, as Luke, 13, Where
the woman which Christ healed of a spirit of infirmity bound together, is
called Luk, 13, 11
the daughter of Abraham, to signify that the privilege of his posterity
belonged no less to her and all women that were faithful, then to the males;
and that she was as well his daughter, as they his sons. Likewise Genesis 34,
the sons of Jacob, communing with Hamor after their sister was humbled and
abused, said unto them, Genesis 34, 14 15. 16
We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to an uncircumcised man, for that
were a reproof unto us: but in this we will consent unto you, if ye will be as
we are, that every man-child among you be circumcised, then we will give our
daughters to you, etc. where these two are set as contrary one to another, our
sister, and the vncircumsed, which teaches that they were accounted as
circumcised in the males, so that it was enough to them to be borne of parents
that were circumcised.

Fifthly, they differ in the settled time which is limited for circumcision,
being precisely and necessarily tied to the 8. day: but in baptism it is not
so, there is greater liberty left to the church: yet the Sabbath following
would not without urgent cause be omitted. Sixthly, circumcision was instituted
for the Israelites that were the seed of Abraham: but Baptism was instituted
for all Nations that are willinge to join themselves to the fellowshippe of
the churches of Christ that profess his name, of whatsoever Land and language
they be. Lastly, circumcision was to endure only till the coming of the
Messiah, but the body being come, the figure must cease, whereas baptism is to
continue unto the end of the world Math. (...), 20
as our savior teaches Math, 28 Teach and baptize, and lo I am with you
until the end of the world. Wherefore, the circumcision of the Turks which
live in infidelity, and of the Moors which profess Christianitye used at this
day is nothing worth, albeit they retain the outward sign and ceremony:
because the institution of it was only to endure the blessed times of the
Gospel. Thus we see, that notwithstanding the differences between
circumcision and baptism in circumstances of time and manner of doing: yet being
in substance and effect the same, the Argument stands strong and inuinsible,
proving the baptizing of infants in the time of the Gospel, from the
commandment of circumcising infantes in the time of the Law.

Again, The practice of the apostles.
let us consider the practice of the Apostles and ages succeeding in this
point. For albeit it be not expressed, that any infant was baptized by the
hands of the Apostles: yet we find in diverse places, that whole families and
households have bin baptized, in which no doubt were many infants and sucklings
act. 16, 13 33 1 cor. 1. 14, 16 act, 18, 8 and 2. 37, 38, 39
as Act. 16. 15. Lidia being converted to the faith was baptized, and all her
household. And again Verse. 33, of the same chapter, the Iaylor was baptized
and all that were with him. So was Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue
and his household baptized, and the household of Stephanas.

Furthermore, when Peter commanded the Jews, newly converted to the faith of
Christ, and hungring after salvation in him whom before they had crucified, to
be baptized: he adds this as a reason, For the promise is made to you, and to
your children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the LORD our
GOD shall call.

Nevertheless will some say, we read not directly that any infants were here
baptized in these pIaces? But do we Object. answ.
read that any were excluded? And seeing the scripture expresses all the
household, who shall dare to debar infants? Are not they a principal part of the
house? Besides, if the baptism of children be not to be believed, because it
is not named and expressed: we might with as good reason shut out women from
the Lords Supper (if any were as great an enemy to the communicating of Women
as to the baptisinge of Children) seeinge we do not expressly read, that they
were not admitted to the Lords table in the apostles times. Wherefore, childrens
baptism is no human tradition, no apishimitation, no ancient corruption of
this Sacrament: but is grounded on the unblameable practice of the Apostles,
which has the force and strength of a commandment.

Thirdly, Christ by his own example aloweth and approves their baptism as we
see, Mar. 10, when the Disciples rebuked those that brought little chilren to
Christ that he might touch them, he said, Mar. 10. 13 14, 15
Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is
the kingdom of God: verily I say unto you, who soever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. Where we are to
observe, that he says not, of these only is the kingdom of heaven, but of
such like infants, which shall be in all ages and times of the church. In this
act of Christ embracing the infants brought unto him and sharply rebuking his
Disciples thatforbad them: we are to consider that he commands children to
be brought unto him, and adds a reason, To such belongs the kingdom of
heaven. If any object, It is said, he embraced them, it is not said, he
baptized them: or if Object.
any reply and say that there is no agreement and resemblance between
baptizing and embracing: I answer, he Answer.
lays his hands upon them, he prays for them, he commends them to his
father, and says The kingdom of heaven is theirs. All this is a great deal
more then to give them the outward sign. For if reason require, they should be
brought to Christ: why should they not be received to baptism, which is a
sign of our union with Christ? If the kingdom of heaven belong to them: why
should the sign be denied unto them, whereby the door of entrance into the
church is opened? Why should we drive them away from Christ: whom christ
calls unto himself? Neither let any say, these children were of years and
grown up in age, able of themselves to come and repair to christ: For the
Euangeliste uses such words as signify such young infants as are babes and
hang upon their mothers breasts, Luke 2, 12, 16 and chapter 1, 44
therefore, by coming in this place he means to draw near or to have
excess. Again they were such as were brought to Christ by Luke 18. (...)
others, Luke 18, 15, they were carried in their Arms, they walked not on their
feet, and Christ also took them in his own arms.

Besides, heerto agrees the practice and custom of the primitive church: for
no teacher so profound, no docter so learned, no writer so ancient, which does
not refer the beginning hereof to the Orig. lib, 5 comment. ad Romans Hieron in
fine lib. 3, contra Pelag. August. de bap (...) and. cap 20 libri. de origin
animae.
precise times of the Apostles. Let the Anabaptists and adversaries of this
truth tell us, who was the first author and inuenter of childrens baptism, if
they refer it not to Christ? who first administered it? What was his name, if
they cancel, let them not hide it? Let them declare the time when it began? Let
them show the place where it was devised? Let them name the child first
baptized, and in what assembly or church it was? If they cannot do these or
any of them, let them acknowledge the baptism of children to be the
ordinance of God, and not of man: warranted both by doctrine of the scripture
and practice of the church.

Moreover if there were no writer to avouch this ancient truth, yet is it in it
self very right and reasonable. For do we not see and behold daily very
babes and (...), children admitted to coppi-holdes by custom of the Manor
amoug men.
oftentimes among men admitted to their inheritance, have they not livery and
season of land, and have they not the wand or turfe taken in their hands,
according to the use of the (...), or custom of the Manor of which they
hold? They know not what is done: they perceive nothing what the Lord of the
Manor or steward speaks unto them: yet we see among the wisest men in this
world, this is not thought foolish, neither is such an admission called into
question, but they are afterward instructed what they have done, what they
have undertake n and taken upon them, what services and duties they owe, what
their Lord requires of them.

Thus they are admitted in their infancy to a temporal inheritance and
possession this they hold to the end of their life: and of the validity of
such entrance no tenant makes doubt. Why then should it seem unreasonable to
give them baptism, the sign of the covenant, being born heirs of the promise,
that after they come to discretion they may make use of it as the rest of the
members of the church? They shall understand afterward that which they
understand not for the present: and yet if it please GOD to take them in mercy
to himself from the miseries of the world, before they know the mystery of
their baptism, he works extraordinatily by ways best known to himself the
force of their baptism in their hearts, and seals up their engrafting into
Christ I esus. If then children have the white wande delivered unto them to
assure them of the inheritance which they hold: let none deny unto them the
partakinge of this sacrament, whereby they are assured of an eternal inheritance
howsoever for the present time they are not capable of the knowledge thereof.

Lastly, the privileges and prerogatives of children are no less then those
of elder years. For infantes are a part of the Church of GOD, children are
christ's sheep and members of his body
they are the sheep of CHRIST, they are the children of the heavenly father,
they are inheritors of the kingdom of heaven, they are redeemed with the blood
of CHRIST, and engrafted into his body: why then should they not bear the
mark of CHRIST, seeing they are a principal part of his possession? If they
be a part of the household, they ought to have entrance into the house: if they
belong to the City of GOD, who shall dare to shut the gates against them? Or
if they be in the number of the sheep of Christ, who shall presume to keep
them from the sheepe-folde? Or if they be sound members of the body of christ,
who shall cut them off as rotten members? Wherefore then, Genesis 17. 7 act, 2 39
1 cor, 7. 14.
should they not receive the seal whereby the promise is confirmed unto them,
seeing they have the promise it self of salvation? Why should they not be
pattakers of the outward sign, math xix14
seeing they are partakers of the thing signified? Why should they be put back
from the figure, seeing they have the truth itself? Why should they not be
partakers of the sacrament with the faithful, seeing they are enrolled in the
fellowship of the faithful? And who shall deprive them of the seal of the
covenant, seeing they are partakers of regeneration and remission of sins.

Hereupon thus we reason, whosoever are in the covenant and Church of GOD, to
them belongs baptism, which is the seal of the covenant: but infants are in
the covenant and of the Church: therefore to them belongs baptism which is
the seal of the covenant. Again, to whom the promise appertains, they may
and ought to be baptized: but the promise was made even to infants: therefore
they may and ought to be baptized.

Furthermore, to whom forgiveness of sins and the Holy Ghost are promised and
given, they ought by no means to be denied the outward sign: but
forgiveness of sins and the Holy Ghost are promised to infantes and given
unto them: therefore infantes ought not to be kept from the element of Water,
no more then such as are of years of discretion. Thus much of the first point,
putting children into the right and possession of Baptism, as if it were the
right heirs into their inheritance, from which they have been wrongfully and
vniuftly dispossessed.

Having now sufficiently proved by the scripture, that children are to be
baptized: it remains that we should maintain this assertion against
Objections of Anabaptists, impugning childrens baptism, answered.
the cauils of the Anabaptists. For as the former reasons, grounded upon the
evident demonstration of the word, as upon a pillar that cannot be shaken,
may persuade us to embrace the truth: so the weakness and sophistry which
appears in the Objections of the adversaries, ferueth to confirm us in this
persuasion. But let us examine what is the strength of them.

First they object it was never commanded that infants should be baptized. I
answer, unblameable examples and practices Objection Answer
not contradicted, are in the nature of precepts. Again, the will of God
approving and appointing childrens baptism appears, col 2. 11, 12
in that it came in place of uncircumcision, Baptism is our circumcision.
Besides we have Math. 28, xix i. cor x, 1, 2
a general commandment, Go teach all nations and baptize them. And the
Apostle says, all were baptized in the cloud and in the sea. Christ says, al
nations, the Apostles says all the Israelites: let them show, where infants
are excepted and exempted: for we hold this as a certain principle, that a
general commandment includes the particular, and comprehends the same
under it, as well as if it were by name expresled.

Secondly, they object, if infants may be baptized, then they may be admitted
to the Lords supper: for why should Objection
not the supper be given to the whole church as well as baptisine? I answer
there is not the like reason and respect of both. There is great difference
between these two sacraments. For baptism is a sign of our entrance and
receiving Answer
into the church, so that the Supper is to be granted to none but to such as
are baptized, and are fit to bear strong meat, being instituted for our
confirmation and sealing unto us, that God having once received us into the
church, will also evermore preserve us in it, that we never fall from it, nor
forsake it, and will nourish and cherish us by the body and blood of Christ.
Wherefore, the Lord Jesus, to show that his Supper was not for children but for
men, would not administer it in the element of milk, which is for infants and
for newborn Babes: but in bread and wine which are for strong men that are
of age.

Again, sundry conditions and considerations are required in the supper which
debar young infants, that although they are to be baptized, yet they ought not
to be admitted to the Lords supper, seeing by their young years they are
excluded. For it is required of all those that come to this supper, 1. (...),
xi, 26 28, 29
to show forth the Lords death, to discern the body and blood of Christ, and
try themselves whether they have faith and repentance. But infants cannot do
these things, they cannot show forth the Lords death they are not apt to
discern his body and blood, they are not able to examine themselves, and
therefore infants for good causes are excluded from this Supper.

Thirdly they object, Mar. 16, 16. Math. 28, 19
that it is said Teach and baptize: and Object. 3.
again, He that shall believe and be baptized shall be saved: where upon they
conclude, that such as believe not, are not to be baptized; inasmuch as Christ
before baptism commands teaching, and afterward joins baptizing with
believing. But infants are not capable of doctrine, neither do they actually
believe: therefore they are not to be baptized. Again, act, 2. 38
if repentance be necessarily joined as Act. 2 Amend your lives and be
baptized: then infants must be separated and secluded, who cannot repent. But
repentance is necessarily required: therefore infants are to be barred from the
sacrament of baptism. I answer, first, those Answer
sentences are not general to all, but belong only to men of sufficient
years and discretion to discern between good and evil. By this fraud of
extending, stretching, and falsely applying general sentences of Scripture, a
man might rear and raise many monstrous conclusions. If a man would go about
to prove that children are not to be nourished and sed with coporall food,
because the Aposte would have none to eat 1 Thessalonians 3. x.
but such as labor, were he not worthy to be spitted at or hissed out of the
schools, because he carries that indifferently to all ages, which is limited
and restrained to a certain age? So must we not rack and rent asunder the Luke
xiii. 3. 5 Rom x. xvii. Mar, xvi, xvi Heb. xi, 6
general sentences of scripture, Except ye repent, ye shall al perish: faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. These belong only to men of discretion, and are not
to be applied to infants, whom they do not concern. Again, Christ in those
words instructs his Apostles, what order they should observe in the
conversion of the Gentiles: first, they must instruct them in faith, then
baptize them being instrued, and lastly guide them in true obedience being
instructed, when he adds. Math 28, 20
Teaching them to observe what soever I have commanded you. Besides, if they
strictly urge and stiffly stand upon the words, as they literally lie in order:
why may we not first baptize them before we teach them, because it is said,
baptizing them in the name of the Trinity, and teaching them to observe what I
commannd. But he entreats in this place of such as are grown up, which
must first have knowledge in the gospel, faith in Christ, and repentance from
dead works before they be baptized: but infants are baptized by reason of the
promise made to their parents. Moreover, we might oppose unto these, the
example of circumcision, which we know and they are not ignorant was given to
infantes, who could not yet believe: so that such as bar them from baptism,
because they are not capable of faith and repentance, might in like manner
exclude the infants of the Isralites from circumcision. Baptism is the sacra.
of repentance and faith, though neither of these be in infancy, yet they are
baptized to the repentance and faith to come, which albeit they be not actually
formed in them, yet by the fruits afterward they shall appear to be in them.
Lastly, if baptism should be given only to those that truly believe, it
should likewise be denied to such as are of understanding: for we are able to
pronounce of these that they do truly believe, and certainly apprehend the
promises of the gospel. Wherefore, if infants are not to be baptized, because
they have not faith and want repentance: neither are they of sufficient age to
be baptized, of whom it cannot be directly and undoubtedly said, they do
believe. Simon the sorcerer mentioned act, 8. 13. 20
in the Acts of the apostles was baptized, and yet remained an hypocrite. If
they say, profession of faith is sufficient to make members of the visible
church: I answer, our savior speaks not of a bare profession of faith, when
he says He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, for then all that
profess faith should receive 1 Pet. 1. 9
The reward of their faith, which is the saluationof their souls. Again,
profession of faith is for such as are capable of it, which agrees not to the
age of infants: as they cannot deny the faith before men, which they have not
acknowledged: no more can they confess the truth of doctrine, which they never
learned. Now, to be borne in the church and in the covenant, is infants in
place and stead of an actual confession and real profession. Such as are
grown up must believe with the heart, Rom, 10. (...)
and confess with the mouth the gospel of salvation: it is sufficient for
others to be the children of such as have confessed the faith.

Fourthly they object in this manner, baptism is given for Object. 4.
remission of sins: but infants have not sinned: they therefore cannot be
baptized: I answer, infants commit not actual answer.
sin, yet are guilty of original sin, they want inherent righteousness,
they have a pronenesse to all evil, their whole nature is corrupted being in
the seed of Adam. Albeit therefore infants have not finned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, in their own persons, yet they have sinned
in him, and in his loins, in whom al are dead. This the holy man Job. 14 4
teaches, Job. 14. Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? There is
not one. Likewise, the prophet Psalm, 51, 5 Romans 5, 14 19
David confesses this truth, Psalm. 51.

Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me. So the
Apostle Paul, Romans 5. Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also
that sinned not after the manner of the transgression of Adam, which was the
figure of him that was to oome: for as by one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Wherefore,
such as hold infants without all guilt of sin, never knew the greatenesse
of Adams fall, of Gods justice, of man's misery, and of Christ's endless mercy.

Lastly, they object, that Christ himself was not baptized Object. 5.
until 30, years of age. I answer, no more did he preach Answer,
before he was thirty: yet hence it follows not, that none ought to enter
that calling before that age. True it is, he that desires that worthy office
must be no new plant, no younger Scholar, none lately come to the profession
and gathered immediately from heathenish religion to the fellowship of the
gospel: yet the office of teaching is not tied to 30, years, the age may be
less if the gifts be great, and fit for that calling. Again, Christ stood not
in need to be baptized in respect of himself, being without original or
actual sin to he washed away, and therefore John at the first put him back:
Math, 3, 15
yet he would be baptized for our sakes, to fulfill all righteousness, to
sanctify our baptism in himself, and that thereby we might know he was
installed into his osfice. But we stand in need to be baptized, to seal up
the washing away of our sins, and therefore there is a great difference in
this respect between Chrift and us. Besides, the Evangelist does testify,
that albeit our savior were baptized at thirty years of age, yet he was
circumcised at 8. days old. Now we have proved before, that the same which
circumcision was to the Jews, baptism is to al christians. If then he in his
infancy were circumcised, then children in their in fancy may be baptized, and
are not commanded to wait thirty years: for baptism is our circumcision as
the Apostle teaches: but Christ in his infancy was circumcised, Luke 2, 21
when the eight days were accomplished: therefore children in their infancy may
be baptized. Furthermore, baptism was not hitherto as yet in use, it was not
commanded to be used when he was a child, and therefore he could not possibly
be baptized, unless we will imagine he might be baptized, before baptism was.
So that we see, as he would not have his circumcision deferred one day beyond
the time appointed: so he was presently baptized, so soon as baptism was
instituted of God, and administered by John. Fifthly, we are no more tied to this
circumstance of time in christ's baptism, then we are to other circumstances of
time, place, and persons in the Supper: he ministered it in an upper Chamber,
and before his passion: we in churches, before dinner, and after his
resurrection. Lastly, when the time appointed came, that the promised savior
and redeemer of mankind should manifest himself to the world, then he showed
himself openly, then he came to the preaching and baptism of John, and began
to publish the glad tidings of salvation, Mar. 1, 15
and to exhort men to repent and believe the gospel. These are the chiefest
objections against childrens baptism, that carry any show and probability of
reason, which hitherto we have dissolved and discussed. And this is the second
point before propounded.

Now as we have seen the truth proved by the scripture, and maintained it
against all the ignorant cauils of the Anabaptists and other Arrians of
Transiluania, that have Ministri. Transiluan. contra Trinit and in carnationem
domini.
oppugned this truth: so let us come to see the benifit of this doctrine, and
what profit comes by baptism of children that are without knowledge, without
understanding, without faith, and without repentance. What use can there be of
this? Much every way, as well as by circumcising an infant of eight days old.
First, consider from Use. 1.
hence, a plain and palpable error of the Church of Rome, Lindan. lib. 4.
panopl. Bellar. de verbo dei. lib. 4 cap. 9
that teach that the baptism of children is by tradition, not by divine
institution, from their word unwritten, not in the word of God written. But we
have confuted the Anabaptists by the Scriptures, and convinced them by the
institution of circumcision, by the tenor of the covenant, by the holiness of
their birth, by their redemption through the blood of Christ, and by the
practice of the Apostles. This is better armor, these are stronger weapons,
this is a sharper sword to cut in sunder the corrupt heresy of the
Anabaptists, then the wooden dagger of human tradition which the church of
Rome draws out against them. The Scripture is all sufficient 2 Timothy 3. 16
to prove all truth, and to beat down all false doctrine that lifts up it
self against God. Wherefore, we hold their traditions, to be superstitions:
and their unwritten (...) are written lies. As we retain the baptism of
children, so we have always been ready to maintain it by the old and new
testament, as by the sword of the spirit against all the adversaries thereof.

Secondly, let us learn from hence (...) acknowledge a difference Use. 2.
between (...) and the Lords supper. For in baptizing of children, (...)
faith, not (...), not regeneration is required, but only to be borne in the
covenant: but the supper of the Lord requires knowledge, discerning, trying,
and examining of our selves: which are not required, neither can be performed
of young children, who know not light from darkness, nor good from evil.

Thirdly, if infants have interest in baptism, then hence it Use, 3.
flows that all are conceived and borne in original sin, Ioh, 3, 6 1 Cor.
15. 22, Rom 3, 23, 24, Ephesians 2, 1, 2
and whatsoever is of the flesh is flesh. So the apostle says, As in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. There is no difference, all have
sinned, and are deprived of the glorious kingdom of God: we must be justified
freely by his grace through the redemption that is in christ Jesus: by nature
all are the children of wrath, and borne dead in sins and trespasses, infants
not excepted. We learn therefore that whatsoever is begotten of man is sinful
and corrupt, it must be cut and pared away, we must be renewed and borne again
by the spirit of God, clensing us from our sins: yea the children of the
faithful parents, whose corruptions are mortified, whose lusts are subdued,
whose flesh is tamed and brought under the obedience of the will of God, are
notwithstanding brought forth in sin, because they are born by carnal
generation, and not by spiritual regeneration: as corn winnowed from the
chafe August. de poenit. merit and ^emiss. l. 3. c. 18.
yet grows up again with it, and as the foreskin cut off from the parents
recurneth in the child. Again, have infants of the faithful right to be
baptized? Then acknowledge hereby the difference between them and the
children of infidels, Jews, Pagans, and Turks. As the children of the Jews,
being heirs of the covenant, were separated and distinguished from other
children of the wicked Idolatrous nations, and were therefore accounted the
holy seed: so for the same cause and reason the children of christians 1 Cor,
7, 14
are called holy, borne of either party and parent being faithful and a
believer, and do differ from the profane seed of idolatrous people. Indeed
whosoever makes a true profession of the faith which he holds, and is ready
to lead his life according to that confession, though he be not the seed (...)
child of the faithful, yet is to be baptized, though he came of the race of
Turks, or pagan^s, as act. 8, 37
appears by the speech of Phillip to the Eunuch, If thou beleeuest, thou
may. Thus we see, that the children of those that profess the faith, belong
to the church of God: the children of Pagans belong not to the church of God:
lo how great a difference there is between them. Heerby then, the children of
the faithful are discerned and distinguished from the profane multitude of
Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, Arrians, Anabaptists, Turks, Sarazens,
Persians, and other barbarous nations, Ephesians. 2, 12
which are without christ, without hope, without God in the world: whereas the
holy seed of all the faithful belong to the church of God, and are reckoned
in the company of the church. For this Romans 11, 16,
cause, the Apostle calls the whole posterity of Abraham, holy, that is,
consecrated and hallowed to God, If the root be holy, the branches are also
holy. Not that the children of the faithful do want original sin, or that
they gather any actual holiness or inherent righteousness by carnal
generation and propagation from their parents, but because by benefit of the
covenant of God, and by force of his gracious promise, they are separated from
profane infidels, and brought into the bosom of the church, as Noah was into
the Arc.?

Fifthly, this doctrine sets forth the honor and glory of God. For is not God
greatly glorified, when he shows Use. 5.
himself true in his promises and has mercy upon the faithful Deuteronomy, 7, 9
Esa. 59, 21 Exodus 20, 6
for a thousand generations? And is not occasion offered to us continually to
glorify him? Can we deserve that God should be our God? Nay do we not deserve,
that he should not be our god? And yet behold he will be the God of our
children also? Let us therefore never forget his mercies: let us fill our mouths
or rather our hearts with his praises: let us confess before the Lord his
loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men.

Sixthly, all parents are hereby wonderfully comforted, Use. 6.
they have their faith strengthened, and are confirmed in the love of GOD, when
they see themselves so beloved of GOD, that it descends and flows even to
their Children, as they are assured by this visible sign. This is that worthy
and wonderful promise which we must receive by faith, Genesis 17. 7,
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, I will establish my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee. A sentence to be
written, not only in Gold, but in the tables of our hearts to dwell with us
for ever. When we must leave the world and our families in poor estate behind
us, and go unto the father: let us not be dismayed, discoraged, or discomfited:
this is the stay of our hope, this is the staff of our comfort, this is our
Anker-hold, that he will not shut up his mercy toward our children, but be a
gracious God to them as he has been to ourselves: so that we may assuredly
say unto them with faithful Abraham, Genesis 22. 8.
My son God will provide. Let us be content with those things that we have,
for he has said, Heb. 13, 5, 6, 7, Josh, 1, 5 Hag, 2, 9
I will not (...) thee neither for sake thee, so that we may boldly say, The
Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me. Godliness is
great gain, and he that is truly godly, is truly rich. He that has Christ,,
has all things: he that wants him, wants all things. Heaven and earth are
the Lords: all the gold and silver are his, who has promised to be an husband
to the Widow, eyes to the blind, a covering to the naked, a father to the
fatherless, and he will not forget his kindness toward us for ever.

Wherefore, let us lift up Heb, 12, 12 13
our hands and our hearts which hang down, let us strengthen our weak knees,
and make straight steps unto our feet, God is able to work contentednes in all
his servants, whose power is best seen in our weakness (...) whose glory
shines brightest in our greatest wants, Remember Psalm 37, 25 34. 8, 9, 10
what the prophet says Psalm 37, 25 I am young and now am old, yet I saw never
the righteous for saken, nor his feed begging bread. And again, Taste ye and
see, how (...) the Lord is, blessed is the (...) that trusts in him Fear the
Lord ye his saints: for nothing wants to them that fear him. The Lions do
lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall want nothing
that is good. Lo, how the man shall be blessed that fears God, not only in
his own person, but in his children: Psalm, 115, 13 (...). (...), 32 38, 39
inasmuch as our seed is no less dear to him then we are, as Psalm, 115. He
will bless them that fear the lord, both small and great: the Lord will
increase his graces toward you and toward your children. And to the same
purpose the prophet (...), Chap, 32. says. They shall be my people, and I will
be their God, and I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear
me for ever for the wealth of them and of their children after them. Let us all
rest in his words, and rely upon his merciful promises. He is not as man that
he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should deceive. He has said, he
will be our God, and the God of our seed that we leave behind us. Behold, O
Lord, the words of thine own lips, consider the promises that are gone out of
thine own mouth. We know thou art true and faithful in all thy sayings, thou will not alter the things which thou have written with thine own finger: on
thee we wait and in thee we put our trust, let it be unto thy servants
according to thy free promise, and according to thy gracious covenant, that we
may feel the accomplishment thereof in our souls.

Seventhly, all parents are hereby to be warned and admonished, Use. 7
that seeing the promise of forgiveness of sins and the kingdom of heaven
belongs to their seed, and consequently the sign and seal thereof: they
must be careful to bring them up Ephesians. 6, 4
in the true knowledge and fear of God, as Ephesians, 6. Fathers provoke not your
chrildren to wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of the
Lord So Moses teaches Exodus, 12, 26, 27. When their children should ask them
touching the paschall lamb, that then it is their duty to declare and deliver
to them the true cause and occasion thereof.

Likewise so often as we consider how our children are by grace accepted, by
baptism consecrated unto God, and (...) made heirs of life and salvation: it
stands us upon, to plant and water the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus in
them. For what should it profit us to leave them great riches and large
possessions, and make them for want of instruction and information in the ways
of God the children of hell? If we do no more but feed them, and give them meat
and drink: what do we for them, which we do not (...) the Ox and Ass? Or if
our chiefest care be to cloth them well, and to apparel them warm: what do
we 1 Timothy 5. 8
which the Turks and infidels do not, as well as we? Have not they as great a
portion in this, as we? but our obedience to the will of God, and duty to our
children must exceed theirs, if we will enter Math 5. 20
into the kingdom of heaven. Whereby we see, that they are greatly deceived,
who when, they have made honest provision for the sustenance and sustentation
of their children in this world, will say they have done their part, although
they have not taught them to know God, these have the greatest and chiefest
account to make for their souls. Now if this be a grievous sin, to neglect
the teaching of our children the fear of God: then they increase and double
their iniquity, who by their corrupt example do lead them into evil, and so
murder their souls. For children in stead of godly and religious
instruction, do oftentimes hear their fathers swear, swagger, lie, rail, and
slander: see them deal deceitfully and unjustly, and mark their walking in
every evil way, making their houses as it were any mage and representation of
Hell it self, by practice of all manner of abominations leading thereunto.

Lastly, this doctrine is very comfortable to children themselus. For howsoever
they cannot know or remember use. 8
their own baptism: yet they are to consider that they live in a church and
among a people, where infants are ordinarily baptized, and sealed with the
sign of the covenant of God. Besides, it is and ever has bin A laudable
custom of the Church to have godfathers and Godmothers.
of ancient time a laudable custom in the church to have special witnesses
(men of credit and estimation) of every childs and infants baptism, whom
commonly we call Godfathers and Godmothers. The steps of this truth may be
traced out, if we consider Esa. 8. 1, 2, 3
what the Pprophet Esaias says, Chap 8, where he declares that so soon as his
wife had borne him a son, he gave him his name (which was done at circumcision)
and took two Parents no. fit witnesles of their own childrens bap tisme.
faithful witnesses Uriah and Zechariah to testify the circumcision of his
son, and the solemn giving to him of that name in the presence of the
congregation. And howsoever Uriah walked not with a right foot, but turned
aside from the pure worship of God to set up the idolatrous Alter after the
fashion of Damascus to seed the fancy of Ahaz: yet he was a man of reputation,
whose testimony was sufficient to assure the naming of the prophets son:
because the times to come would be troublesome and full of many calamities.
For their children were named, when they were Genesis 21, 3, Luke 1. 59 and 2 21
circumcised: as now our children are named, when they are baptized.

So likewise the Church oftentimes lies under the cross, and is subject to
persecution, as Revel. 12. 6
the Woman driven into the Wilderness, Revelations 12, 6, and so the baptism
of many members might many times be doubted of and called into question,
(forasmuch as no impressionabideth in the flesh, as there did in circumcision)
the Churches have thought it convenient to require certain men to be as
special witnesses of infantes their bringing to Christ and to the church by
baptism, and of their names given them in their baptism.

Seeing therefore children are baptized, and have by this means no assurance
given them of their baptism: they have a marvelous benefit bestowed upon
them, that they so soon obtain the partaking of CHRIST and all his benefits.
God works in the children of the faithful belonging to his covenant by ways
unknown to us, as Luke 1, xv, 41
John Baptist is said to be filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers (...):
and they are called 1 cor, 7. xiiii
holy by the Apostle, insomuch that they cannot perish: whom God calls, some
sooner and some later, all in his own appointed time, as seems good to his
heavenly pleasure. The remembrance whereof, when children come to age, greatly
comfort them in the love and fear of God, when they call to mind that they
are so greatly esteemed and highly regarded of GOD, from the first coming into
the world, before they had the use of speech, of reason, and of understanding.
Christ Jesus shed his blood for them, he dyed for all the children of God, Ioh
11, 52 Revel. 20, 12
he redeemed them whether they be old or young, small or great, as Ioh. 11. He
must die, not for that nation only, but should gather together in one the
children of God which are scattered. And the same Apostle Revel. 12. says, I
saw the dead both great and small stand before God, and the books were opened,
and another book was opened which is the book of life, and the dead were
judged of those things written in those books according to their works.
Wherefore, when children shall come to years of discretion and understanding,
they must hereby be pricked forward to an earnest care and endeavor to walk
in the fear of God, and to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of their life, by whom they were received for sons and adopted for his
children by a solemn pledge of their adoption, before they were able through
their age, to know and acknowledge him for their father.

Let them give the Pro. 3, 9, Lam. 3, 27 Psalm. 119, 9 Eccl. 12, 1
first fruits of their life to God: let them learn to bear the yoke of
obedyence from their youth let them redress and reform their ways by taking
heed to the word of truth: and seeing God has remembered them in their
baptism, let them also remember their creator in the days of their youth and
begin to be wise betimes, least death come suddenly and cut them off, as the
sluggard that for-sloweth the seasons of plowing and reaping, wishes for them
in vain at another time of the year. Thus we have showed the baptism of
children: the certain truth thereof has been evidently proved: the
objections against this truth aledged, have been susficiently answered: and the
uses of it to the great comfort of all faithful parents and Children have
been particularly remembered.

Chap. 8. Of the first inward part of baptism.
HItherto we have handled all the outward parts of baptism now we are orderly
to proceed to the inward parts. The inward parts of baptism are such as are
represented by the outward. Those are Math. 28. 19 20.
four in number: first, God the father: secondly, the spirit: thirdly, Christ:
fourthly, the soul cleansed, as we see Math. 28, 19. Teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost:
he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Here we see these four
inward parts Four inward parts of baptism
are named and expressed. This is also evidently proved Math, 3, in the
baptism of Christ, where the Trinity Math, 3, xi
of persons was manifested.

These inward parts do directly and fitly answer to the outward. The father
is represented by the Minister: the spirit works by the word: Christ is
sealed by the water: and the soul cleansed is signified by the body that is
washed. Now, The agreement between the outward and inward parts.
there is a notable agreement, a singular union, and fit proportion between
these parts, where the minister has relation and reference to the father, the
word to the spirit, the water to Christ, and the body dipped to the faithful
cleansed. For even as the minister by the word of institution, takes and
applies the water to the washing of the body: so God the father, through the
working of the spirit offers and applies the blood of Christ, to the
clensing of the faithful.

Having seen the proportion of the parts between themselves, let us consider
of them particularly and in order. The The first in ward part of baptism is
God the Father.
first inward part is God the father, represented by the minister. The minister
calling upon the name of God, uses the water to wash, and washes the party
baptized with the element of water, which seals up gods incorporating and
ingrafting Gal. 3. 27.
of the baptized into Christ, and our spiritual regeneration. Hence it is,
that when John baptized, the father was present, as president of the work,
when lo, his voice came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son in whom
I am well pleased. Now let us come to the uses.

This (...) first of all, to strengthen our faith in the remission Use. 1.
of our fins, in imputation of Christ's righteousness, in mortification of sin
by the force of Christ's death, and in sanctification through Christ's
resurrection. Wherefore, although the Minister does nothing, touching or
toward the clensing of the soul: yet in regard of Gods ordinance and our
benefit, the ministry of man is somewhat, which whosoever despises, does
despise God the author of it. For whenever the eye of the body sees the
minister pouring on the water, and washing the body: we must behold by says
god the father, offering the blood of his own son, to be water of life to our
souls. And let us all make this use of the Churches baptism to the comfort of
our own hearts, so often as we see it administered: let us not rest in it, as in
a work done to another, and nothing concerning our selves, but evermore help
our inward affection by the outward action: and always as the eye of the body
beholds the Minister, let the eye of the faith, be fastened firmly upon the
Father, who makes the Sacramental rites available, which are openly done
before us for our edification.

Again, it teaches, that we must not rest in the outward Use. 2.
washing, nor in the external actions of the Minister: but ever consider what
is offered to our considerations therein, and when the father offers to us his
son, let us not refuse him. For, he that satisfies himself with the
outward work, is as he that catches after the shadow, and regards not the
substance; or as one that makes much of the garments, but respects little
the body it self, which ought to be had in greatest price and estimation.

Lastly, is God the father an inward part of baptism? then Use. 3.
we must take heed, we give not that to the Minister which is proper to god the
father, whereby he is robbed of the honor and glory due to his great name. The
Minister may wash the body and cleanse the flesh, but can go no further: he
medleth not with sanctification of the conscience from dead works, which is
not in the power of mortal man to do: so that god gives the thing, and men
give the sign, yea while the Minister offers the one, God the father gives
the other.

Chap. 9 Of the second inward part of Baptism.
THe second inward part of baptism The second inward part of baptism is the
holy spirit.
is the spirit of God, having relation to the word and promise of God. This
Math, 3, 11 16
appears Math, 3 11, He baptizeth with the holy ghost and with fire: And
verse 16, When Christ was baptized, the heavens were opened unto him, and he
saw the spirit discending like a dove, and lighting upon him. So the apostle, 1
Cor, 6 says, ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. And chap. 12, of the same
Epistle, By oak spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Graecians, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink
into one spirit. And Tit, 3. According to his mercy he saved us, by washing of
the new birth, and the renewing of the holy ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our savior. All these testimonies teach us,
that the Holy spirit of God is a necessary inward part of this sacrament, and
that the baptism of the spirit joined to the word, gives force unto it, who
works in our souls that which water does in our bodies, so that without the
spirit it is nothing.

From hence we learn, that it is not the dipping of us into, Use. 1
or the sprinkling of us with water, by the Minister that makes us partakers
of Christ, but it comes from the virtue of the spirit, who in time performs
what is represented by outward signs, and promised by the word.

Again we learn hereby, that the spirit is true God, use. 2
equal with the father and the son. For who is able to make the word and
Sacraments available, but only God?

Seeing then this is the proper work of the Holyghost, to open the heart, to
teach the conscience, to seal up to the day of redemption, and to help our
infirmities in heating, in praying, and receiving the Sacraments: he must needs
be acknowledged to be true God the Icot. 12. 4 5, 8. 9, x, xi Revel. 1, 4
giver of these graces. So we see, that in the form of the administration of
this sacrament, the blessed spirit is named and rehearsed, Mat 28, xix
and has his order together with the father and the son. This therefore is a
principle of our faith, to be learned, confessed, and believed.

Thirdly, we are heerby to take heed and beware, that we use. 3.
give not to the word that which is proper to the spirit, he ingrafteth us into
Christ, he keeps us that we fall not from Christ, he makes the word and
promise of the institution profitable unto us, without whom it should be unto
us as sounding brass or a tinckeling Cymball. Wherefore, as GOD the father in
mercy makes the promise, so his spirit must assure it to the Consciences of
all the faithful.

Lastly, let us learn whenever we come to the Word or sacraments, to crave
the gracious assistance of the blessed use. 4.
spirit, to guide direct, and regenerate us to eternal life, to sanctify us, 1
John. v, 7
and to assure us of gods endless favor in Christ's Jesus, as 1 Ioh 5. There
be three which bear witness in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy
spirit: and these three are one. The Holy Ghost by his grace and virtue works
in us steadfastly to believe the truth of Gods word, and the gracious promises
of salvation: as he is the author, beginner, and begetter of faith in us, so he
increases it, and makes us fit to receive Christ, and to apply him with all
his gifts unto our selves, and sends us into the full fruition and possession
of Christ. He is our comforter to certify us of our reconciliation to god, and
to make us rejoice under the cross, knowing that Rom, 5, 3, 4
tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of god is shed abroad in
our hearts by the holy ghost which is given unto us. He is the earnest and seal
of our inheritance, by whom we are sealed up to everlasting life.

Thus we see, that howsoever the increase and (...) of faith is assigned to the
sacraments: yet this grace proceeds from the holy ghost, who is unto our
faith as marow unto the bones, as moisture unto the tree, and as a comfortable
rain unto the fruits of the earth. If this inward master and teacher be
wanting, the sacraments The sacraments profit not without the spirit.
can work no more in our minds, then if the bright Sun should shine to the
blind eyes, or a loud voice sound in deaf ears, or fruitful corn fall into
the barren wilderness. Wherefore, least the word of salvation should sound in
our ears in vain, and Sacraments joined to the word should be present before
our eyes in vain; the spirit works in us whenever we come unto them
aright, he mollifieth the hardness of our hearts, he frames us to new
obedience, and assures us that God offers to us his own son for our
justification and salvation. For even as the seed that falls into a barren
soil dies and rotteth, yet if it be so wen in fruiteful grownd well tilled and
manured, it brings (...) good increase with gain and advantage: so likewise
the word and the sacraments, if they hit upon an heard neck, and fall into a
barren heart, bcome unprofitable and unfruitful: but if the effectual work of
the spirit accompanies the hearing of the one, and receiving of the other,
they are profitable, available, and comfortable. Thus much of the second part.

Chap 10. Of the third inward part of Baptism.
THe third inward part of baptism The third inward part of baptism is Christ
Jesus.
is Christ, represented and signified by the water. For as the A postle
teaches Heb. 10, 4
That the blood of bulls and calves cannot take away sin: so the water in
baptism cannot wash away sins. It touches the body, washes it, cleanses
and purges it, but it can proceed no further. For this Act, 2. 38 and 10, 48,
and 19, 5
cause the believers are said to be baptized in the name of Christ, as Act, 2,
38. He baptized every one of you in the name of christ. So chap. 19, 5, They
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Not meaning heerby the form and
manner of baptizing, but the fruit foundation, and end of baptism. Likewise,
1 Pet. 3. 21.
the Apostle shows the same, 1 Pet 3, 21. Baptism answering to the figure of
the Arc, saves us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. There is no more force
in outward baptism to save, the whole virtue and force flows from the
stream of Christ's blood, as the true material cause thereof, wherein the
power of in ward baptism does consist. The truth being evident, that the
pouring out of the blood of CHRIST is one of the inward parts of Baptism, let
us see the uses.

The use of this part teaches diverse points. First, that the outward washing
with water, is not the washing away Use. 1.
of sins: for then whosoever were dipped in it should receive forgiveness of
sins, repentance from dead works, and sanctification of the spirit, whether
he believed or not: act. 8. 22,
which is otherwise, as we see Act. 8, 22. Also, they should not, and could not
be Christians, and eternally saved, which are not outwardly washed, but
departing this life without baptism, they should perish in the next world
without redress or redemption, and so our condition were worse then the Jews
their condition in times past, and the grace of God more restrained under the
Gospel, then it was under the law, Moses offering more mercy then Christ
himself. So then, the washing with water serves to ratify the shedding of
Christ's blood for the remission of our sins, and the imputation of his
righteousness to our instification, 1 Ioh. 1, 7
as 1 Ioh. 1, 7. The blood of Jesus Christ his son does cleanse us from all
sin. So Revel. 1, 5. He has loved us and washed us from our sins in his
blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto GOD even his father. And Col. 1, 14
the A postle says, In him we have redemption by his blood, that is,
forgiveness of sins.

Again, when we see with our bodily eyes the Water poured upon the body of
the baptized: we must behold Use. 2
and consider with the eyes of faith the blotting out of all our sins, as
well original as actual, as well after baptism as before baptism, by the
precious blood of Christ, that we may assure our selves it is no idle action.
For we must not behold the Sacramental rites, as certain dombe gestures or
stage-like shows without substance and signification but we must make them
serve to further our faith and edification.

Lastly, it teaches us, not to be led by the outward senses to measure the
truth or to judge of the substance of baptilme use. 3.
by the outward sign and visible parts: but to have our faith fixed on
Christ, crucified on the Cross, and signified in baptism. The infidel seeing
children solemnly baptized in the name of the father, of the son, and of the
Holy Ghost, will rashly and ignorantly coniesture nothing to be there, but
naked rites, and bare Water: but the faithful and true Christian does behold
the washing of the soul and clensing of the heart by the dearest blood of
Christ.

So in the Lords Supper, to the unbeliever appears nothing but Bread and
Wine, because we see with our eyes, we receive (...) our hands, we taste with
our mouth no more: but the believer knows, that together with these signs,
GOD the father offers the body and blood of his Son to be spiritually
received and digested. Even as he that is unlettered and unlearned, if he
look Esa, 29, 11, 12.
upon the face of a book, beholds only black colors, and spots upon
the Paper, sees certain figures and charusters of Letters differing each from
other, but cannot read the writing or comprehend the meaning: but he that
has learned his Letters and is able to read them, reapeth great profit and
instruction thereby: So is it in the (...). He that rests in the outward
sign, deceives himself: but he that respects the thing signified
receives the profit and advantage.

The Cross of CHRIST, and preaching of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.
are a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gracians. For the
infidel hearing that christ was crucified and nailed upon the cross, is
offended at him, accounting it a foolish and weak means to save mankind, that
life should spring out of death, glory come out of shame, power proceed out of
weakness, and triumphant victory arise out of his contemptible sufferings:
but the faithful soul acknowledges in this mystery of Godlinesle, the high
hand and unsearchable wisdom of God. It may seem ridiculous unto some men,
Gen 17, 10
that God should require circumcision of Abraham and of his household, young and
old, bond and free, master and servants to uncover all their shames, and to
open the hidden parts of nature: yet Abraham submitttd himself to the
ordinance of God. Naamaen the Syrian thought it a toyish precept and prescript,
when he was bidden to wash himself 7. times in Iordin, having many rivers in
his own country as good as that: yet by 2 king. 5, 11 12, 14
obeying the prophet, he was cleansed of his Leprosy. The inhabitants of
Jericho scorned Joshua and the men of Israel, when they saw them compass
their City strong and walled, Josh. 6, 20
and to blow with their Rams horns: yet by this weak means the wall fell
down, the enemies were destroyed, the city was sacked, and the people of God
(...). Christ seeing a blind man and willing to heal him, he spat on the
ground, Ioh. 9, 6
and made clay of spittle, and anointed the eyes of the blind with the clay,
and said unto him, Go, wash in the poole of Siloam: he obeyed, he went, he
washed, he returned seeing.

Thus does God by simple, base, and weak things, oftentimes confound the
mighty, strong, and wise of the world, that no flesh should rejoice in his
presence, and crosses all the high conceits and proud imaginations of man's
will and wit. Wherefore we must not follow our own understanding, nor measure
the matters of God by the crooked rule of our carnal reason. Whosoever will
yeald obedience to God must deny himself, and renounce his own wisdom, 1
Cor. 3. 18 19
and become a fool that he may be wise in God, as 1 cor. 3, Let no man deceive
himself, if any man among you seem to bec wise in this world, let him be a
fool that he may be wise, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God.

Thus we see, that in the Sacraments we must understand more then we see, and
believe more then we can behold. Such (...) are without knowledge and faith,
(...) no more of baptism then the bodily eye directs them unto: but the
faithful conceive the blood of Christ to be offered, to (...) the soul and
conscience from all sin, Genesis 2, x
as the river watered the garden of Eden.

Chap. 11. Of the foruth inward part of baptism.
THe last inward part of baptism is the soul The soul cleansed is the last
inward part of baptism.
cleansed; most lively represented by the body that is washed. For as the
outward receiver gives his body to be washed: so the saithfull receiver does
consecrate himself to God with joy, and forsake the flesh, the world, and the
diuill, and feels the inward washing of the spirit, as Tit. 3, 5, According
to his Tie, 3, 5 Ephesians. 2. 26, (...)
mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost. And the same Apostle, Ephesians. 5. Christ gave himself for the church,
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by washing of water through the word,
that he might make it unto himself a glorious church, not having spot or
wrinkle. Wherefore, this outward washing of the body commanded by Christ,
fignifieth unto me, that I am no less assuredly cleansed in his blood by the
working of his spirit from the spots of my soul, that is, from all my
sins, then I am outwardly washed by water, whereby the stains of the body
use to be washed away: and it binds us that we ought ever afterward by our
works and deeds to declare newnes of life and fruits of repentance.

Let us now come to the uses of this last part of baptism. Use. 1.
Does the washing of the body represent the clensing of the soul? And does the
soking up of the filthiness of the flesh signify the removing of the remnants
of rebellion? Then we are all by nature unwise, unclean, (...), vnregerate,
unholy, disobedient, disordered, deceiving and being deceived: we are the
vessels of wrath, the children of death, the bond-slaues of Satan, the heirs
of damnation, we have our part and portion in the offense of Adam, Romans 5, 19
and 7, 23, 24
as Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the world: and chapter 7. I see another
law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me
captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Heereunto also comes
that which the Ioh. 3, 5, 6. 7
Evangelist sets down in the conference between Christ and Nicodemes, Ioh.
3 That which is borne of flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit
is spirit: marueil not that I said unto thee, ye must be borne again. For this
cause are infants baptized, because they are conceived in sin and borne in
iniquity, and cannot become spiritual, but by a new birth wrought by the
spirit, which is sealed up by the water in baptism.

Again, this serves to strengthen our faith when we behold Use. 2.
the outward washing, pouring out of the water, and baptizing of the body, it
assures the inward clensing of the soul by the blood of Christ offered to
all, and received of those that are elected to eternal salvation. This then is
the right and holy use of baptism. Do thou feel inwardly in thine heart,
that through the corruption of thy nature and strength of concupiscence thou
art moved, tempted, and provoked to commit sin? And do thou feel thy
self ready to yeald to Satan, and so to fall from God into evil? Begin to
have some holy meditation, of that solemn vow which thou made to God in
baptism, when thou did consecrate and give up thy self wholly to his
service, and did renounce obedience to the suggestions of Satan, to the
allurements of the world, and to the corruptions of the flesh. For baptism is
the Baptism is a christian man's ensign to fight under it the battles of the
lord.
Christian man's ensign given of God to us, that we should fight as it were
under it against all the enemies of our salvation and overcome. It is the badge
and bannerofour captain, that we shrouding our selves under his colors,
should not cowardly turn our back in the skirmish, but coragiously look the
enemy in the face, nay tread him under our feet for ever. Moreover, have thou
through weakness and infinnity, (...) once or twice into some sin to the
dishonor of thy god, to the wounding of thine own conscience, to the slander
of the gospel, or to the scandal offense of thy weak brother? have recourse to
thy baptism as unto a board after shipwreck, as unto a medicine after
sickness, as unto a plaster after wounding, or as unto a staff after
falling, that thou may receive strength, courage, and comfort to thy soul.
For albeit baptism be once only administered for the reasons before alleged,
chap, 1. of this present book; yet it being once delivered and received,
testifies that all our sins past, present, and to come are washed away and
shall be forgiven. The fruit or efficacy of the Sacraments is not to be
restrained and tied to the present time of receiving, but extends it self to
the whole course of our life afterward. And thus much of the fourth part of
baptism.

Chap. 12. Of the first use of baptism.
HItherto we have handled the parts of baptism both outward and inward: now
let us proceed to the uses, the last point to be observed in this Sacrament.
The uses of baptism are in number Three uses of baptism.
three: first to show our planting, ingrafting, and incorporating into the body
of christ: secondly, to seal up the remission and forgiveness of all our
sins: thirdly, to teach us to dye unto sin and live unto righteousness and
true sanctification. These ends Romans 6, 3 4, 5, 6
appear evidently by the words of the Apostle, Romans 6. Know ye not that al we
which have been baptized into JESUS CHRIST, have been baptized into his death?
We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as CHRIST was
raised up from the dead to the glory of the father, so we also should walk
in newness of life. For if we be planted with him to the similitude of his
death, even so shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection, knowing
this, that our old Man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. In this place the Apostle
sets before us the former ends of baptism expressly.

Touching the first use, The first use of bapt. i. to show our ingrafting in to
Christ.
he shows that by it is signified and sealed our uniting, setting, 1 cor. 12,
13 Call. 3, 27
and inserting into the body of Christ, to remain in him soreuer, as branches
in the vine, as 1 Cor, 12. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be bond or free: where he teaches that by baptism we become one
body with Christ. And Gal. 3, All ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. This conjunction with Christ is not bodily or natural, it is not by
ba^ds in the flesh, it is not by neernes of blood, sor such as we see may be
seprated, as the father from the son, the husband from the wife, the brother
from the sister: but this is wholly mystical and spiritual, above reason and
above sense, because it is wrought, not by natural ways as by joints, sinnews,
arteries, ligamentes, and such like, but by spiritual means, to wit, by the
power of the spirit, and by virtue of faith: he sends down his spirit, we
send up our faith. First, he must send down his spirit, because all goodness is
of him. Indeed, we love him, but it is because he loved us first, giving us
Romans 8, XV
the spirit of adoption to cry Abba father: Indeed, we come unto Christ to be
eased and refreshed as he commands, but it is because John, 6, 44
the father draws us. Indeed, we persevere in faith and love, but this is,
because he perseuereth in loving of us. Indeed, we repent and turn unto God,
but this is because he (...), 36, 26 27
takes away our stonye heart, and gives unto us an heart of flesh.

Secondly, as he puts his spirit within us, so the faith mounteth up to the
heavens, and apprehends Christ sitting at the right hand of the father. And
thus, his spirit discending, our faith ascending, and both of them ioyninge the
members to the head, the branches to the vine, us to Christ, being once
engrafted, Ioh. XV. 5. 6
we are never sepetated, as Ioh. 15. He that abides in me and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. If a man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withers, and men gather
them, and cast them into the fire and they burn. No man can be partaker of
Christ's benefits to salvation, which is We are joined to Christ in spititual
marriage
not made one with him. As a Woman cannot be partaker of the riches and honor
of some great man, and have interest in his person, except she be joined to him
in marriage, that they become one body and one flesh: and as the members cannot
draw life from the head, except they be joined with it: so there is no
partaking of Christ, except thete be an union and communion with him, Ioh. 6, 53
as himself teaches us, Ioh. 6. Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. If
Christ be present to us, life and all things accompanying salvation are present
to us. If christ be absent from us, death is present, wrathlyeth at the door,
life and salvation are absent: so that we are never partakers of his graces,
except webe as nearly coupled to his humanity, as meat and drink are coupled
with our body, which of al other is a most near union and inward conjunction.

Thus we see, we are severed from the world to have fellowshippe with CHRIST,
and are set once in him for ever, 1 Ioh. 2, 19 Rom 8, 33, 34. 35, 37, 38, 39
because he that comes to CHRIST once, he casts him not away, he shall
never hunger, he shall never thirst, he shall not be lost but hue for ever, as
the Apostle says, If they had been of us, doubtless they had continued with us,
And paul to this purpose says, Romans 8, Who shall lay any thing to the charg of
GODS chosen? it is GOD that instifieth, who shall condemn? Who shall separate
us from the love of CHRIST? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? in all the se we are more then
conquerours through him that loved us: for I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us, from the love of GOD which is in CHRIST JESUS our LORD. If once
we be joined to him in spiritual Marriage, notwithstanding the difference
and disparagement between him and us, nothing shall be able to work our
deuorcement from him.

True it is, God (...) us wallowing Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5. 6
in our own filthiness, polluted in our own blood, defiled by our own
uncleanness, he has made an eternal covenant with us, he has spoken peace
unto oursoules, saying, Thou shall live, even when we were sunk down in
sin to death, he said unto us Thou shall live: so that he will never turn
from us to do us good, but we shall be his people, and he will be our God, he
will give us one heart and one way, that we may fear him for ever, and that it
may be well with us and with our children.

This made the Apostle to write, Ephe. 5. 30. 32. We are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones: this is a great mystery, but I speak
concerning christ and concerning the church: Where he seems to allude to the
Gen, 2, 21
first creation of the Woman made of one of the ribs of the man, shadowing and
(...) our knitting and conjunction with Christ, which we have by faith, not by
nature: by virtue of the spirit, not of the flesh.

Now as we have showed that this conjunction made by Gods spirit and by our
faith which he has given: so the means and instruments to work it, are the
word and sacraments. This is a dignity peculiar and proper, to the elect, to
have perpetual fellowshippe with Christ, and to grow up into one body with
him, as he teaches John, 17 20. 21. I pray for all them which shall believe in
me through their word, that they all may be one as thou O father art in me and
I in thee, even that they may be one with us, that the world may believe that
thou have sent me. If then there be not an union between Christ and us, we
have no access to God the father, being quite cut off from all hope of life
and sa'uation. As then all the substance and nourishment of the tree comes
from the root, and all the vital powers of a true natural body, come from
the head: so it is between the son of God and us, we have not so much as one
drop of the heavenly life in us of our selves, John 14, (...)
CHRIST is the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the father
but by him.

To conclude this first use, seeing such as come to this sacrament Mark. 16. 16
must be christians before, it appears to be a very corrupt custom of the
people, when they require Baptism of the pastor for their children, to say,
God has given me a Pagan, I desire you to make him a Christian. For Baptism
cannot make a Christian, but signify: the Sacraments cannot make that which is
not, but assure that which is already made, as seals do not give the right,
but confirm it. Thus much of the first use of Baptism: the second follows.

Chap. 13. Of the second use of baptism.
BEing made one with Christ, we are partakers of the (...) of his death, to
wit, The 2, use of baptism (...) to assure forgiveness of sin.
of forgiveness of sins, and of regeneration or new birth. So then the second
use of Baptism is, to assure us of the remission and pardon of our sins,
that we may be unblameable and acceptable to god. This is signified by the
outward ceremony of washing and sprinkling, to wit, the sprinkling of our
souls with the blood of Christ for the forgiveness of all sins, Act. 2. 38,
(...) 22, 16
as appears, Act. 2, 38, Then Peter said unto them, Amend your lives and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins.
And Act. 22, Ananias said unto Paul immediately after his conversion, Arise and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling on the name of the Lord. So
the Evangelist witnesses Mark. 1, 4. that John did baptize in the wilderness,
and preach the Baptism of amendment of life for the remission of sins. And
the Apostle makes this use, col. 2, 12, 13. Ye are buried with him through
Baptism, in whom ye are also raised up together through the faith of the
operation of GOD, which raised him up from the dead: and you which are dead in
sins, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together
with him, forgiving you all your trespasses. The meaning of these places is not
that, baptism Baptism does not of it self confer grace
bestows or gives forgiveness, but only signeth, seals, and assures our
pardon: even as remistion of sins and the right ousnesse of faith were not in
the old Testament by circumcision conferred, but confirmed unto the faithful.
The grace of pardon and forgiveness of sins, is not attained but by faith in
Christ, so that the work of baptism will not effect it. Moreover we have
proved, that it is not lawful to baptize such as are in years, unless they
make open profession of their faith in Christ, and repentance from the works
of the old man: wherefore, they obtain them not by the outward washing with
water in baptism. So then we are no less assuredly washed by the blood of
Christ from the spots of our souls, then outwardly we are washed with water
from the filth of the body. For the force of his death has that effectual
working in clensing our souls from the corruption and filthiness of sin,
which natural water has in washing our bodies. By the merit of his death we
have full forgiueneste of all our sins, not only original but actual, not
only past but present and to come, whose blood is never drawn dry, but is
ever fresh and full of efficacy.

Therefore, the words delivered by the minister in baptism at the
commandment of christ, namely, Math, 28. 19,
I baptize thee in the name, of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, should always be in our ears, even until the last gasp, and by them
we ought to be assured of the full forgiuensse of our offenses against God. For
the blood of Christ, by which we are once washed, can never be drawn dry, but
is ever fresh, full of force and strength, to the continual clensing of our
filthiness and iniquities, so that they never come into the sight of God,
neither are imputed unto us. Wherefore, it is like unto a sealed charter,
whereby is confirmed that all our sins are blotted out. We are all taught by
our baptism, that none of the enemies of our salvation shall be able to lay
any sin to our charge Art thou tempted to think, that Christ's blood was not
shed for thee? That thy transgressions are not pardoned? That thou shall be
brought to judgment for them? Does Satan (...) thy tender conscience with
them? thou may as well doubt, that thou wast not baptized and washed with
Water, as doubt thy sins are not blotted out: thou may as well surnize thou
perishedst in the water, as suppose thou shall perish in thy wickedness, the
floods where of howsoever they go over thy head: yet shall not be able to
prevail against thee sully, and overcome thee sinally.

This over throws the false Council. Trid. sess. 5
doctrine of the false church of Rome, the Mother of abominations, which
teaches that by the grace of Christ received in baptism, all our sins going
before it, are rased and blotted out, and leaves nothing in the party baptized
Bellar, lib. 1. de bapt. cap. 13
that has the name and nature of sin. But albeit our sins be freely and
fully forgiven for Christ's sake, pardoned and not imputed, coucred and
remembered no more: yet the stain, blot, and remnants of sin remain (though
not reign) in our flesh, so long as we live in this world, which in the end of
our days together with the mortality and corruptions of our bodies shall be
taken away and abolished. Indeed the scripture teaches, that Christ's blood
cleanses, washes, Ioh. 1, 29 Psalm. 32. 1. 2
and takes away sin, Ioh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away
the sin of the world: but this is not by an actual purging of us from all
corruption, but in freely acquiting and truly discharing us from the guilt,
offense, and punishment before God, as Psalm. 32, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are lightened, blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes not sin. I herefore, though they be forgiven, yet they
remain, 1 Ioh. 1, 8
as appears, If we say (...) have no fin, we deceive our selves and there is
no truth in us. And Solomon in his worthy prayer says, If any sin against
thee, for there is no man that sins not. So the Apostle teaches and
touches this truth by his own experience, Romans 7, I see another law in my
members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the
Law of sin which is in my members. We are all as a filthy cloth, the fsesh
rebelleth against the spirit, and in nothing we can do the things we would, so
that if God enter into judgment with us, we (...) stand in his sight. And if
Original sin were extinguished and vtrerly abolished in baptism, then they
which are baptized, should sin no more: but we see they sin again after their
baptism. To conclude baptism is auailable not only for sins before, but it is
a seal for confirmation of faith touching the remission of those sins that
are committed after baptism, as well as done before, as our (...) savior
teaches, Mark, 16, 16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved,
but he that will not believe, shall be damnd. Faith then believes the forgiveness
of all sins past and to come, inasmuch as the bood of Christ cleanses from al
sins. And the Apostle accords heereunto, Titus 3, 5, 7. According to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of the new birth and the (...) of the holy
ghost: that we being justified by his grace should be made heirs according to
the hope of everlasting life. Where we see that the promise of justification
(...) general against all sins. Thus much of the second use.

Chap 14. Of the third use of Baptism.
THe third use of baptism is to kill and bury The third use of baptism is to
teach us our dying to sin, and rising to newness of life.
our natural corruption by the power of Christ's death and burial, and to
raise us again to sanctification of our nature and newnes of life by his
resurrection. Hence it is, that sin has his deaths wound and is stricken to
the hatt, so that it cannot live and reign in the children of God. Hence it
is, that baptism is often Luk, 3, 3
called the sacrament of repentance, (...) Luke, 3, John came into all the
parts and coasts about Jordan, preaching the Baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins. So likewise Mark 1, 4. John did baptize in the Wilderness
and preach the baptism of amendment of life, And the Apostle affirms as
much, col, 2, xii, xiii, declaring that the one end of baptism is the death and
burial of the old man by the almighty power of God.

This also was taught in those 1 pet. 3. 20, 21
lively types answering our baptism, to wit, the flood that drowned the old
world, while Noah and his family were preserved in the Arc. Also the red sea
in which Pharaoh and his host perished, but the people of God. were delivered.
For as God destroyed in the waters and as it were buried in the flood the
world, but saved a remnant of grace: so does God, through christ, mortify the
old man, raise again the new man, and seal them both in our baptism.

Likewise, as GOD delivered his people out of the hands of Pharaoh, and opened
them a way through the red sea, and drowned their enemies that they saw them no
more alive: so by baptism, he assures our deliverance from the thral dome and
bondage of sin (which brings greater slavery and captivity then any slave
is in, under his earthly master) and the destruction of the flesh, that it
shall not hurt or condemn us. We are al Psalm. 51. 7 Romans 5, 12
born in sins and trespasses: we have need of repentance and regeneration.

We see then what use we are to make of our baptism, even labor to attain to
the efficacy and fruit of it, that it may not be a bare and barren sign. Moses
and the Prophets earnestly exhort the people of Israel, to show forth the
force and effect of their circumcision, Deuteronomy. 10, 16 and 30. 6
to cut away the foreskin of their hearts, and harden their necks no more, as
we see, Deuteronomy, 10. 16. The Lord did set his delight in thy fathers, to love
them, and did choose their seed after them, even you above all people,
Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your hearts, and harden your necks no
more, And in another place, The Lord thy GOD will circumcise thine heart, and
the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the LORD thy God with all thine
heart and with all thy soul, that thou may live.

So the Prophet Ier, 4, 4
Jeremy says, Break up your fallowe ground, and sow not among thorns: be
circumcised to the Lord, and take away the fore-skinnes of yonr hearts, ye
men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, least my wrath come forth like
fire, and burn, but none can quench it, because of the wickedness of your
inventions.

Circumcision was the thing wherein they bosted above althings: it was their
glory wheros they bragged, to be a cirpeople, peculiar to God. Now the Prophets
recall and reclaim them from trusting in outward signs and lying words, Ier,
7. 8
that shall not profit: and stir them up to confider the power and effect
thereof, not to rest in cutting off a thin piece of skin, but to cut off quite
and clean their lusts and corruptions which rebel against the spirit. This
the Apostle teaches Romans 2, 28 29
evidently. He is not a Jew which is one outward neither is that circumcision
which is outvvard in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one within, and
the circumciston is of the heart in the spirit, not in the Letter, whose praise
is not of men, but of God.

The outward Letter is of no moment with God, it must be the circumcision of
the heart, otherwise the circumcising of the flesh is nothing. So, if we would
have God to take us for his people and heritage, We must all be baptized in heart
we must be all baptized in our hearts and our souls. What, will some say,
baptized in soul, and in heart? What is that? Or how can this be? Can the
water wash the soul? Surely, the Water cast upon our bodies is nothing, if we
have not the truth of it. As then the apostle Paul makes a difference between
inward circumcision of the spirit, and outward circumcision of the letter,
insomuch that if they would have the true circumcision indeed, they must have
that which is within: so is there a great difference between the baptism of the
spirit and of the letter, between that of the soul and the other of the body,
between that which is outward, and that which is inward. Whosoever would have
the true baptism indeed, he must be cleansed within, repent of his Wickedness,
mortify his imaginations, deny himself, renounce his affections, and offer up
his soul and body in sacrifice to God, that he may renew and regenerate us:
otherwise, it is a certain thing, we were never indeed and in truth
baptized. For as the Jews were charged to be uncircumcised, though the
foreskin of the flesh were cut off, and so they were circumcised in body: so,
we may in like manner be charged to be unbaptized, albeit we have bin outwardly
washed with water.

The Jews chosen above all Nations to be the people of God, were oftentimes
condemned of forgery and fasehood for breaking the covenant of God, and not
answering to the truth thereof, Esa, 2. 4 and 57, (...)
and were (...) with the vncircumcisednesse of their hearts, that they were
worse then the heathen themselves, a bastard brood, witches children, and
unworthy to be accounted Abraham's seed, to the end they should brag no more
of their circumcision, as Act. 7. Stephen, a faithful witness of God,
obiecteth against them, Ye stiff-necked and of uncircumcised hearts and
ears, ye have always resisted the Holy ghost, as your fathers did, so do you:
they show the prophets which showed before of the coming of that just, of whom
ye are now the betrayers and murderers: where we see, he discovers their
hypocrysie, and sets their sins before their faces, telling them, that as
their fathers rebelled against god so the children followed their fathers
footesteppes. Do not these things concern us? Though we have not circumcision
in action and practice, belong they not to us now a days? Yes even to us For
we shall be condemned for our vnclensed and unsanctified hearts, not
answering to the truth of our baptism. For so much we profit by baptism, as
we profit in mortification. If then we be once baptized and washed with water:
we shall pay dearly for our desiling that sacred water, which God has
appointed to so holy an use.

True it is, the water of it self is as nothing, no other in substance and
nature then that wherewith we wash our hands: but when once it is joined to
the word, and applied to an holy end, it is as it were an authentical seal
which God has engraven in it. Now, he that counterfaiteth the seal of a
Prince, shall he not be punished? Behold, baptism is the seal of GOD, which
serves, not to seal conueyances of earthly possessions as house and lands:
but to assure us, that we are called to the heavenly life: and brings good
assurance and warrant with it, that we be washed from our sins, by the blood
of our Lord I esus christ, and borne again by his holy spirit. Shall we break
al, and escape punished? Let us not then boast of our baptism, and
Christianity, to say, oh, we are baptized: we are christened: we wear the
badge of God: these things, these things I say, will cost us dear, if we make
not our baptism available to our selves and our own souls by killing our
corruptions: for thereby 1 Eccles. 5, 3
we show our selves like unto the fool that makes a vow, and immediately
after breaks it.

Now, although we profess the Gospel, yet you shall find a great number that
know not this use of baptism, neither whereto it avails, nor to what ends
it was ordained. They call it indeed their christend ome, but are altogether
ignorant of the nature thereof, and are unacquainted with the effect of it. This
will cost them decrely, for abusing such a pledge-token at Gods hands, seeing
it is a means whereby we are united to our Lord Jesus christ, and ingrafted
into his death and resurrection. Wherefore, whereas many have received baptism
in their infancy, and have lived 40. or 50. years in the world, without
knowing to what end they were baptized: it had been better for them that they
had been borne dead, or perished in their mothers womb as as untimely fruit,
then to have unhallowed so holy and precious a thing. Thus of the third and last
use of baptism, as also of the parts thereof, and generally touching this
whole Sacrament.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK of the lords Supper, being Christ's farwel-token to his
church, and a sweet pledge of his wonderful kindness toward mankind: where
in the truth of this Sacrament is manifested, the parts are delivered, the uses
are showed, the doctrine of the reformed Churches is cleared, the errors of the
church of Rome are evidently convinced, and the means set down, how every one
is to be prepared to the worthy receiving thereof with fruit and comfort.
CHAP. 1. of the names and titles of this Sacrament, together with the reasons
and uses thereof.
IN the former Book we have spoken of baptism, the first sacrament of the
church, together with the parts and uses thereof. Now we are to set down the
doctrine of the Lords supper, which is the second sacrament. For after that
God has brought us into his Church by baptism, and made us as it were of his
household servants: then, as a good father of the family, he feeds us
spiritually with the flesh of his son, applying unto us the merit of his
death and passion. This The Sacrament of the body and blood of christ called by
diverse names
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, is declared in the scripture by
diverse names, to deliver the nature thereof unto us. Sometimes it is called
the communion, as 1 Cor 10. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
1 cor. 10, 16
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? Sometimes, it is called the Lords supper, as 1
Cor. 11, 20. When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat 1 cor
xi. 20.
the Lords supper.

Thirdly, sometimes, it is called the breaking of bread, as Act. 2. 42. They
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, Act. 2. 42 and 20. 7
and breaking of bread and prayers: and Chap. 20, 7. The first day of the
week, the disciples being come together to break bread, Paul preached unto
them ready to depart on the morrow. Fourthly, sometimes it is called the table
of the Lord, as we see 1 Cor. 10, 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and
the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords 1 cor. 10, 21
table, and of the table of devils. Moreover, we shall nothing offend, if we
call. it the testament or will of Christ, This cup is the 1 cor, 11, 25 Math,
26, 26
new testament in my blood, this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of
me: and our savior thus speaks Math. 26, This is my blood of the new
testament, that is shed for many, for the remission of sins. These are the
chief and principal names given to this Sacrament in the Scriptures. I am not
ignorant that the ancient fathers and times succeeding, have given unto it
other names, and not unfitly: but my purpose being not so much to all age the
councels or doctors of the church, as to instruct the simple and unlearned, I
will content my self with expounding such terms and titles, as are penned in
the word of God, and pointed out by the spirit of God.

Now then, let us render Reasons rendered of the former names
the reasons of such names, as this Sacrament is entitled withal. It is
called the communion because we have a communion and fellowship with Christ,
and 1 cor 10, 17
he with us: both which are sealed up the in this Sacrament. It is called the
Lords supper, both because it was instituted by the Lord Jesus at is last
supper, (which circumstance of time the church has changed) and because therein
is offered to us a spiritual banquet in which the faithful are spiritually fed
and nourished. It is called the breaking of bread, both because this is a
necessary action used of Christ, not to be omitted, and because it represents
the crucifieng of christ and tormenting of his body: so that we should never be
present at this significant ceremony, but we must call to remembrance the
sorrows and sufferings of CHRIST: now if Christ were thus tormented for us,
surely we ought greatly to be griped and grieved for our own sins, which
was also showed by the Exodus 12, 8,
sower herbs of the Passover, Exodus 12, 8. It is called the table of the
Lord, because he does feed us at it, as this we know is the end and use of
Tables in our houses, to set our meats and drinks upon them prepared for our
nourishment, and this is the scope and end of the Lords table: only here
lies a plain and maine difference, our Tables serve for bodily nourishment,
but the Lords is prepared for the spiritual nourishment of our souls.
Lastly, it may be called the testament or will of Christ, because it sets
forth unto us asolemne covenant between God and us, touching forgiveness of
sins and eternal life: which covenant is racified and established by the
Heb. 9, 15
death of the son of god: so that heerin we find all things belonging to a full
and perfect testament, as we shall see after ward.

Out of these several names and titles thus interpreted, arise most aptly and
fitly sundry uses, which, in order, as they have been propounded we will
consider. The first title is the Communion: from whence we deduct The uses of
calling this sacrament the communion.
these necessary conclusions. First of all, is the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ called a communion? And so called of our communicating
together? Then hereby all the faithful openly testify, that they be all one
body coupled use. 1
together in Christ Jesus, we profess him and all his benefits, we receive
him, we enjoy him, we rejoice in him. God the father does give him, the
holy ghost does assure him, faith does receive him: by this hand we are joined
to him, and have spiritual fellowship with him. Wherefore, al believers are
made one by Christ: and this is not an union in imagination, but in truth and
in deed: neither by transsusion of the properties of the Godhead or manhood
into us, 1 cor, 6. 17 1 Ioh. 3, 24
but by one and the same spirit dwelling in christ and in all the members of
Christ, as 1 Cor. 6, He that (...), to the Lord, is one spirit. And the Apostle
John testifies, that Christ dwells in us and we in christ by the spirit, He
that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: and hereby we
know that he abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given us: so that
the spirits of just and perfect men in heaven, and all believers upon the earth
(how far socuer sundred in place) having one and the same spirit of christ
dwelling in them, are al one in Christ their head. God has given his own
son unto us freely and fully: our faith receives CHRIST Ioh. 1 12
by believing him and all his gracious benefits to be ours, as Ioh. 1, 12, As
many as received him, to them he gave prerogative to be the soxnes of God, even
to them that believe in his name. Thus we see we are one with Christ, and
christ with us.

Secondly, as this sacrament being a communion admonishes Use. 2
that we are all one in Christ: so it teaeheth that it is to be received of
many together in the church, not of one alone, and therefore it overthrows
the private Masses of the church of Rome, where one partaketh all and the rest
of the Church nothing at all. There is a flat opposition between these two: so
that the communion cannot be a private Mass, and private mass cannot be a
communion. That which is ordained and prepared for many, delivered unto many,
and received of many, cannot stand with the Mass, where the priest prepares
for himself, not for the people: he speaks to himself, not to the church:
he receives himself alone, not with his brethren: all which are directly
contrary to the Apostles 1 cor. xi 33 use. 3.
rule, Tarry one for another.

Lastly, if it be a communion, it teaches that this is a sacrament of unity
and concord, and we are there by put in mind to avoid discord and dislention.
For christ never communicates himself to the malicious man, 1 cor. xi, 18 20
as the Apostle teachech 1 Cor. 11, 18, 20. When ye come together in the
church, I hear that there are dissentions among you, this is not to eat the
Lords Supper.

Wherefore, in that the people communicate of one and the same bread, of one
and the same wine, it signifies the union and agreement between all the
faithful in one body, where of Christ Icsns is the head: who loved us decrely,
and spared not his life for us. Let us join our selves together in love,
according to the exhortation Rom, xv, 5, 6
of the Apostle, Rom, 15, 5, 6. The God of patience and consolation give you
that ye (...) like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, that
ye with one mind and with one mouth may praise God, even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. All believers must be of one heart and mind, the Wolf and
the lamb, the Lion and the calfe must dwell together in the kingdom of
Christ, for all are one in Christ Jesus. For the Apostle having taught that the
cup which we bless, and the bread which we break are the communion of the
body and blood of christ, he adds, We that are many, are one bread and one
body, because we are all partakers of one bread: and therefore he says, 1 cor.
11. When ye come together to eat, tarry one for another.

The second title given to this Sacrament is, The uses of calling this
Sacrament the (...)
the Lords Supper: by which name it is now most usually and commonly called,
both because it was so instituted by Christ after his last Supper, and is
celebrated in the remembrance of CHRIST. Hereby we learn, first who is the
author of this Sacrament, not Peter, not Paul, not any of the Apostles, use. 1
not any man, not any angel but Christ Jesus God and man: and therefore it is
not called the Supper of the Apostles or of any man, but of CHRIST himself, as
the Apostle speaks of baptism, 1 cor, 1. 13, 15
Was Paul crucified for you? Either were ye baptized into the name of Paul?
I baptized none into mine oxne name. Wherefore, this title serves to teach us
and to put us in mind of the author of this Sacrament.

Secondly, seeing this sacrament is not a common supper, use. 2.
but an holy and heavenly banquet, fully furnished, not to fill the body, but to
feed the soul: we must come with an earnest desire and longing after CHRIST,
hungring and thirsting after his righteousness and merits, as after our life,
to be made pattakers thereof. For never did the body more stand in need of
corporal food, then use. 3.
does the soul of this Ioh. 6. 27
Bread of life which came down from heaven, which the father has promited to
give unto us

Lastly, it condemns our Rhem. Test. annot. in 1 cor. xi
English Rhemistes, and other Bellar. dc (...) lib. 2 cap. 10
romish readers of Popish divinity, that wholly condemn this name and title as
improper and unfit for this sacrament, and understand the Apostle to speak of
the loue-feastes, when he speaks of the Lords Supper. Indeed, in the Apostles
times they used to meet to gither in one common place, not only for the
hearing of the word, for the receiving of the Sacraments, and for prayer to
God, but to keep certain feasts, which of their end or use were called Jude
Verse 21. (...). 2 Pet. 2. 13
feasts of charity, as Jude speaks. But of these the Apostle speaks not,
when he named the Lords Supper. For first, let them show us the place, where
ever these Loue-feasts are called the Lords Supper, and then they may warrant
their exposition by some color? otherwise we cannot receive their
interpretation, being of private motion. Secondly, if this title were meant of
Loue-feastes, to what purpose should the Apostle bring in the institution of
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and largely handle the doctrine
thereof? Where as their abuses in their loue-feasts might be reformed and (...)
without this mention and remembrance of the supper. Thirdly, to what end
should these solemn feasts and bankets be called the Lords supper, which were
not instituted in the honor of Christ, but to testify the mutual love of
those that were members of the same body, having God for their merciful
father, the church for their tender mother, and Christ for their elder brother.
These might rather be called the supper of men, then of the Lord, being feasts
of charity, not of piety. Fourthly, the Apostles drift and purpose in this
place is to teach, that such as norish discention and division partake the
Lords supper unworthily, and therefore wills them when they come to
communicate with the Lord, to shake out of their minds all uncharitable
affections, as chafe from good corn, that so they may assemble together with
profit and not with hurt. Last of al, to call this sacrament by the name of the
lords supper is usual among the ancient fathers Cypri. in sacram. de caen 4.
domin.
of the church, grounding themselves from the authority of the scripture, and
example of the Apostle: (...) some of their own Writers (...). Ioh: Gagn. in
1, cor 11
call this sacrament, and expound the words of saint Paul to the Corinthians.
If therefore they will rest themselves, either in the true interpretation of
the scripture, or in the exposition Hosij confess. cathol, tom. 2, cap. 30 and
(...). 1. cap, 40
of the ancient fathers, or in the confession of their own Writers: we cannot
doubt, but the Apostle meaning the Lords Supper, understands the sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ.

The next title given to this sacrament is the breaking of bread: which
offers to our considerations, these uses not The uses of calling this
sacrament the breaking of bread
to be passed over. First, it she weth that the substance of bred remains
after the words of consecration, and is not altered by any strange
transubstantiation. For when the Apostle says, This is my body 1 cor, xi. 24
which is broken for you, properly Use. 1
it cannot be understood of the body of Christ which was Ioh. xix, 36
not broken, but of his crucifying and death, by a figurative speech taken from
the substance of the bread, which christ brake to distribute it among his
Disciples, and to represent effectually his suffering for us. The accidents of
bread cannot be broken, as we shall see afterward, no more then they can feed
and nourish.

Besides, we learn heerby that tropes and figures are used use. 2.
in the Sacrament, contrary to the opinion and assertion of the church of Rome,
as we make plain by the institution, and as we constrain the adversaries
themselves to confess, as when it is said, his body was broken, where the
lyterall sense cannot be retained, seeing a bone of him could not be broken.
Likewise when it is said, the cup is the new testament: the rock was Christ:
the bread is the communion of the body of christ, these and such like cannot be
interpreted without a figure.

Lastly, seeing of this one action, the whole sacrament has his denomination,
act. 2. 42. and 207
as appears in many places, Act ii, 42. and xx, 7. and 1 Cor, xi, xxiiii, we
must hold, that as the Apostles and other Ministers of the church were wont in
the administration of the supper to break the bread: so must we follow their
example, as they also followed the example of Christ. Neither must this be
accounted and accepted an as indifferent ceremony, to be admitted or omitted at
our own choice and pleasure, seeing Christ Jesus the Lord of this sacrament
commanded, the scripture has commended, the Apostles have practiced, and the
Ministers afterward observed the same, Cor. 10. 16
as the Apostle witnesses. The bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ? speaking of himself and the rest of the Ministers of
the church. Besides, it is an essential expressing and tepresentation of the
passion and crucifieng of Christ, as also the pouring out of the wine into the
cup of the Lord. Wherefore, they are to be accused and convinced as heinous
breakers of the high ordinance of Christ, as we see in the church of Rome, who
omit this breaking of the bread as impertinent and unnecessary, and as not
significant. For Christ Jesus commanded his disciples to eat that bread which
he had broken, and this breaking pertains to the end of the sacrament: so
that it cannot be passed over, without neglect of the institution of Christ,
and of the essence of the supper. The next title given to this Sacrament, is,
the table of the Lord: and it is rightly so called, as by a very fit name. For
seeing it is a Supper, and a most heavenly banquet, it is requisite there should
be a table answereable unto it, that as it is the supper of the lord, so there
may be a table for the administration of it. From hence we conclude diverse good
uses The uses of calling this Sacrament the Table of the Lord
for our further instruction.

First of al, it she weth that Christ and his Apostles in the celebration of
the supper used a table, not an altar. For albeit the Apostle paul speaks
improperly of the table, and thereby understand the heavenly meat and drink
which was set upon the table for all the lords ghuests: yet withal he
insinuates and signifies the place where on they were put, to wit, upon a
table. In like manner our fauiour Christ at the sirst institution of this
sacra. sat down at the table with his Disciples, he stood not with them at
the altar. Now according to the example of Christ and his disciples, must be
the practice of al churches, inasmuch as christ shedding his blood on the
cross, had abolished al altars: and therefore the Infidels did oftentimes
reprove and reproach the Christians Clem. alex, lib. 7. (...) Origin. lib.
contra. celsum. arnob, lib. 2, and 4
because they had no Altars, who on the other side desended themselves, that
their Altars are the congregations of such as bow themselves in prayers, and
the spirits of just men, which smell as sweet incense in the nostrils of God,
other Altars then these, they acknowledge none.

Furthermore, inasmuch as the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ was
accustomably administered on a Table, Use. 2
not an Altar: of wood, not of stone: made mouable, not immouable: We learn
from hence, that it is a sacrament, not a sacrifice: An altar does infer and
presuppose a sacrifice: and a sacrifice is referred to the Altar whereon it is
offered. But we have not now properly and sacrifice, for that were to account
the all-sufficient sacrifice of christ as insufficient and imperfect: therefore
we are not to bring Altars again into the church. There is no use of altars
in the new testament, seeing the making of them together with other types and
ceremonies of the old testament through the death of Christ is abolished, 1
cor. 9, 13
as the Apostles teaches, 1 cor. 9. Do ye not know that they which Minister
about holy things, eat of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers of the altars? And to like purpose, Heb, xiii, x. We have
an altar, where of they have no right to eat, which serve in the tabernacle,
that is, such as retain the necessary use of the ceremonies Gal. 4. 9
begerly rudiments of the Jews, are fallen from Christ. Whereby we see plainly
and apparently, that sacrifices and Altars stood together, and sell together:
and therefore whereas they would conclude the sacrifice of Mass from the use
of the (...), we may inuert the reason, and make it serve to eueit and
overthrow the sacrifice of their Mass, seeing it is certain there were no
Altars.

Lastly, we must obsorue that it is not barely called use. 3.
a table, but the table of the LORD: to teach us to draw near unto it with all
reverence and regard. If we measure and mark our affection in earthly things,
we see what care and curiosity is ofttimes used, when men come to the table and
presence of Noble men: how much greater care and conscience should be used of
every one of us, when we come to this table, where the King of kings and the
Lord of heaven and earth is present. Wherefore, to stir us up to this duty
and devotion, let every one consider and meditate thus with himself, I am this
day to be the lords ghuest: I am invited to his table: I am to eat of his
bread and to drink of his cup: I have not in this business to do with man
whose breath is in his Nostrils, but to deal with God in whose presence I do
abide, who is both a beholder and judge of all my actions, to whom I shall
either stand or fall. If I come in hypocrisy, he will find me out, Heb 1. 4. 13
before whom all things are naked and open: if I come fitted by faith and
sanctified by repentance, I shall receive Christ and all his merits to my
endless comfort Thus much suffices to be considered touching this title of
the Lords table.

The last title of this Sacrament remains to be handled, being called the new
testament or will of Christ, The uses of calling this Sacrament the testament
or will of christ.
from whence we may gather diverse uses as good conclusions from this
doctrine. For first it teaches, that there is a double testament and covenant
of God made to his people, one of works, the other of grace: one of the law,
the other of the Gospel: as Ioh. 1, 17, The law was given by Moses, but Use.
I.
grace and truth by Jesus Christ. And Ier, 31, 31, 32, I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, not according to
the new covenant that I made with their fathers, when I took them by the hand
to bring them out of the land of Egypt, the which my covenant they brake,
although I was an husband unto them. But this shall be the covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel, after those dates says the Lord, I will put my
law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their
God, and they shall be my people.

The covenant of the law is a covenant, where in God has promised to his
people all blessings corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal, Leuit.
18, 5 Math, 19, 17 Gal. 3, 12 Deuteronomy. 27. 20
under the condition of perfect obedience, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. And has
threatened all curses and death it self, to all that continue not in all parts
and points of the law to do them. The covenant of grace ratisied by the death
and blood of christ, is a covenant, wherein god promises his love and (...)
for ever to come upon all that believe in his son, John 3, 16
assuring them of remission of sins and eternal life, requiring of them
only faith in him, as John, 3. God so loved the world, that be gave his only
begotten son, that such as believe in him should not perish but live for ever.

Again, if this sacrament sealing up the new covenant Use. 2
between God and man, have the name and nature of a will or testament: then it
serves to condemn the church of Rome, that add and alter, mingle and mangle
this sacrament at their own pleasure. For the Apostle teaches, Gal, 3, 15
Though it be but a man's Gal. 3, 15
covenant, yet when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it, or adds any
thing thereto. And Heb, 9. 14 He is the mediator of the new Testament, that
through his death they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance: for where a testament is, there must be the death of the
testator: for the testament is confirmed, when men are dead, for it is yet of
no force, as long as he that made it, is alive. If then the Testament of man
may not be abrogated or altered, much less the testament of God confirmed by
the death of the mediator.

Notwithstanding such is the sacrilege and presumption of that Antichristian
church, that the idolatrous (...) as a bottomless gulf, has ouerturned and
swallowed up the Lords Supper, turning the Sacrament into a Sacrifice,
administering it in a strange tongue, taking away the cup from the people of
God, making prayers for the dead, bringing in their carnal presence, (...) a
monstrous (...), setting up a new Priesthood, a new sacrifice, a new Altar,
and lastly feigning uses and ends thereof, which CHRIST never appointed, the
Apostles never acknowledged, the churches succeeding never confessed or
practiced.

Now Masses council. cabilon. can. 33
are mumbled in memory of the Saints: they are held available, not only for
the living, but for the dead: they are judged profitable against storms and
tempests: they are thought a sovereign remedy against every sore and sickness
of the body: heathfull and helpefull for such as are going to war to cover
their heads in the day of battle, as a shield of brass, and to preserve
them from the sword of the enemy: good against (...) and sorceries, and fit to
be applied to make trial and proof, whether a man be guilty of the crime and
accusation laid to his charge. But what are all these strange uses, but
strange abuses, yea strong fancies and delusions of the man of sin, burying in
perpetual forgetfulness the true ends for the which Christ Jesus ordained his
last supper. All these, being pestilent corruptions of the sacrament of the
supper, and fraudulent additions to the last will and testament of christ, do
lay open to the full, the (...) abominations of the Church of Rome, the mother
of (...).

Lastly, the name of Christ's last will and testament given Use. 3
to this sacrament, serves for the great comfort of Gods (...). For heerin we
shall find al things belonging to a full and perfect testament. For Christ Jesus
is the testator: all faithful christians Romans 8. 17 1 Pet 1. xii. and 5. 1
are appointed heirs: the angels are as the overseers: the Apostles are the
witnesses: the legacies bequeathed are, not lands and possessions, or great
sums Math. 8. 20 26
of money, for the son of man had not where to lay his head: nor the
kingdoms and gouernementes of this world, for his kindome is not of (...), 18.
36
this world: but the forgiveness of sins and everlasting life, obtained by the
body of Christ given, and his blood shed for us and our (...).

Wherefore, if God have so loved us, if christ have not spared his own life to
give us life and salvation; how bitter ought our sins to be unto us, and how
ought we to strive against them? If we will hate enemies, here are enemies for
us to hate: if we will (...) revenge against enemies, let us fight against them
that seek our overthrow and the destruction of our soul and body. There is
no reconciliation and attonment to be made with these enemies, if thou kill not
them, they will kill and condemn thee for ever. Hitherto of the names given to
this Sacrament.

Chap 2 What the Lords Supper (...)
AS we have in the former Chapt. considred the names and titles attributed to
this Sacrament: so now we will see what the Lords supper is. For we shall
never understand the nature thereof, except we be able to define or describe
it. Therefore, What the Lords supper is.
the Lords supper is the second sacrament, wherein, by visible receiving of
bread and wine, our spiritual communion with the body and blood of Christ is
represented. This description is plainly proved by the Mat. 26. 26 27
institution of Christ, by the first celebration of it, and by other apparent
testimonies of holy scripture. 1 Cot, 10, 16 17.


First I say, it is the second sacrament, because such as have interest in the
Lords supper, must be first partakers 1 cor 11, 24 25
of the other Sacrament: for Christ and his Apostles ministered it to those that
were before (...). And how should they be continually (...) and fed at his
table, who are not known to be of his house, nor admitted members of his
family? We must be received into his protection and lurisdiction, before we sit
down at his table for our refection. They then that are in the house must be
(...) and fostered in the house: the several parts of the family, have the
privileges of the family: it is not lawful to take the childrens bread, and
give it unto strangers.

Now, baptism is the true bath of our souls to cleanse our sores, and an
honorable badge whereby we are dedicated to the service of Christ, and have
interest in the privileges of the church sealed up: being partakers hereof,
we come with comfort to the Lords supper. Under the Law none (...) Exodus, 12,
48
were admitted to the passover, If astraunger will observe the (...), let him
circumcise all the males that belong unto him. If then the vncircumsed had been
admitted, the passover had bin profaned. Wherefore, it is not enough for us
once to be baptized and admitted into the number of the people of God: we must
also be partakers of Christ's supper. When as by baptism we are brought into
the church of God, we are afterward nourished by this heavenly banquet to
eternal life.

Again, I say in the former description, that by the bred and Wine the body
and blood of Christ are represented. Herein consists the substance of this
Sacrament: he was (...) given for us, and his blood was shed for the remission
of sins, least our faith should wander, least our hope should waver.
Therefore, he says to his Disciples, Luke. 22. 19 20
This is my body, which was given for you: this is the cup of the new
testament, which was shed for you and for many for the remission of sins.
Mark 14. 24


Now that the description of the lords supper is proved, Use. 1.
let the uses there of in the next place be declared. Hereby we learn, first,
that God does not lie nor dally with us, when we come to his heavenly table,
but does truly offer those benefits in Christ, which are represented, to all that are admitted thereunto: and therefore the Apostle said, 1 Cor. x, 3, 4
they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink.

Indeed, many of them did receive only the outward signs, and did refuse or
neglect the spiritual grace so lively represented and truly offered unto
them, but the greater was their sin, who labored for the meat that
perishes, John. 6, 27
but rejected the meat that endures to everlasting life. Likewise, christ in
the administration of his. Supper (...), Mat. 26, 26
take, eat, this is my body. When he bids us take, does he not give? When he
charge us to eat and drink, does he not offer? When he commau ndeth us to
do this, does he not apply the thing signified? If then we come to this
Supper, and depart away without christ and without comfort, the cause is in
our selves, he is come near unto us, he stands as it were at the door
knocking being reaready to enter: he mercifully offers himself unto us, but
we refuse him, we will none of him, we bid him depart from us, and shut the
entrance of our hearts against him.

Again, we see here the excellent price and prehemenence Use. 2
of the Lords Supper, howsoever to those, whose faith it does not nourish,
whose assurance it does not confirm, and whose salvation it does not further,
it is turned into most hurtefull and deadly poison: yet it is an holy banquet
for the Lords ghuestes, an instrument of grace, a medicine for the sick, a
pledge of salvation, a comfort for the sinner, an assurance of Gods promises, a
seal of our faith, an help for the weak, meat for the hungry, drink for
the thirsty, and a refuge for the distressed in time of tentation. Is not this
a worthy dignity? Is not this a great privilege? Is not this an high
prerogative? So that we must highly regard and reverently esteem this mystery
of our religion, and badge of our profession, to the glory of God and our own
comfort. He that is not moved heerby to a reverent regard thereof has no
spark of gods spirit in hun, but lies in darkness and discomfit.

Thirdly, heerby the adversaries mouths are stopped, and they are put to
silence and shame, who accuse us, to deny the use. 30
blessed presence of CHRIST in the (...). We confess and believe, that we
receive the body of CHRIST verily, truly and indeed, not a naked figure, not
a bare sign, not an empty shadow, but even that body which suffered death
upon the Cross, and that blood which was shed and poured out for the remission
of our sins. This Christ Ioh 6, 55, 56 53, 57
himself teacheh, Ioh. 6, Myflesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, du elleth in me and I
in him. And again ver. 33, Verily, verily, I sar unto you except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye (...) no life in you (...)
eats me, even he shall live by me. So then, we teach, we preach, we publish,
we profess, that there is no other substantial food of our souls, and that
whosoever is not partaker of his body and blood, is void of life, of
salvation, of grace and of christ himself. Wherefore, we shall show Chap, 10
afterward, that the difference between the church of Rome and us is, not
whether christ be present in his supper, but about the manner of his presence;
for we say, and will never fly from it, that as the outward signs, of bread
and Wine are delivered and received, so they represent and seal up to every
true believer, God the father offering and giving, the Church also taking,
receiving and applying christ crucified, with all the promises of his covenant
ratified in him unto eternal life.

Lastly, is this the matter and substance of the supper, to offer, and apply
Christ for our wholesome nourishment? Use. 4.
Then we should often desire (if we hunger after Christ) to sit down at his
Table, to come to his banquet: to feed of his delicates, and to be present at
his dainties. And why should any be absent that have faith and repentance? Why
should they not show that they are one body 1 cor. 10. 17
by eating all of one bread? Why should not such apply christ to their
justification? We know the Apostles oftentimes prepared, offered and delivered
the outward signs of the Lords supper, exhibiting christ to all the faithful,
even every Lords day, or first day of the week, and the people received
oftentimes the same, act, 2, 41, 42
as we see Act. 2. There he adds to the church about three thousand souls,
and they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of
bread and prayers: And Chap. 20. 7. The first day of the week the Disciples
came together to break bread. And this was the order and ordinance of the
Church many years after the Apostles times. In some places it was received
August. in Ioh tract 26
every day: in many places Chrysostom, in Ephesians. 1. hom. 26
every Sabbath day: august. ad (...). epist. 119
in all places often in the year: until, through the negligence of the
Pastors in administering, and the slacknesse of the people in communicating,
these uses were grown out of usage, and a frozen coldenesse in the practice of
religion stepped in. For, it cannot be denied, but it proceeds from the shop
and invention of the Deuell (whosoever were the instrument) to bring in this
corrupt custom of once communicating in the year, and that for the most part
for fashions sake.

Now, to the end we might return nearer to the ordinance of the Apostles, that
the often use of the communnion might be retained and maintained, and that the
backwardness of the people might in part be redressed: it was ordained by the
Canons of many churches, that every one should communicate at the least three
times in the year, not that men should do it no oftener, but least otherwise
they would not do it so often, or peradventure do it not at all. And if a
survey and examination were made, I fear it would be found to our great shame
and beastly slothfulness, that scarce the tenth person has satisfied the law
in this respect in many places, regarding no time of the year but Easter.

But seeing it is so necessary a sacrament, let every one consider of this holy
mystery, how fruitful, profitable, and comfortable it is to be partaker
thereof, and how dangerous to neglect and contemn the same. Is it not an
unkind and churlish part among men, when one has prepared with great coasts
and charges a rich banquet, killed his Oxen and his fatlings, furnished his
table with all provision, bidden his ghuests, and set all things in order and
readiness to entertain them: were it not, I say, an unkind and discourteous
part for those that are called and bidden, unthankfully and churlishly to
refuse to come? Which of us in such a case would not be moved, disquieted, and
discontented? Who would not think he had wrong and injury done unto him?
Wherefore, let us take heed, least by withholding and withdrawing our selves,
we provoke gods wrath and indignation. When he calls, are ye not ashamed to
say, ye will not come? When he says, Pro, 9, 4. 5
Eat of my meat and drink the wine that I have drawn, will thou desperately
and dispitefully answer, thou will not eat, thou will not drink, thou will
not do it? Or will thou say, thou (...) a grievous sinner, thou (...)
unworthy? I would ask thee, when thou will be worthy? Will thou lie still in
thy sin, as a man in a deep pit, and never strive to come forth? Why do
thou not return to God, and amend thy ways? Why do thou continue in thy
hordnesse, and heart that Romans 2, 5
cannot repent, and so heapest up as a treasure to thy self, wrath against
the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.
Moreover, if thou be unfit and unworthy to receive this supper, thou art
Cbrysost, in Ephesians. hom. 3
unworthy to pray, thou art unworthy to hear: unless thou pray as a parrat,
and hear as an hypocrite. Consider therefore seriously, and weigh earnestlye
with your selves, Numb. 9, 13
how little such fond, fained, and frivolous excuses shall prevail with God.
When Moses called Corah and his company to come up unto the Lord, they
answered presumpteously, Numb, 16, 12
We will not come. When the King in the Gospel had invited his ghuests, they
began all with one mind, to excuse themselves, and some refused, saying, Luk,
14, 20 24
I cannot come. So in these days of sin, albeit the supper be prepared, the
ghuests called and the table covered: many men make light account of it: and
what, with some that reply carelessly, we cannot come; and what with others that
answer desperately, we will not come, the feast is unfurnished, God is
dishonored, the people are unprepared, and all the exercises of religion are
lightly and slightly regarded. I say unto you, that none of these men which
were bidden shall taste of his Supper. Again, another sort are as profane as
these, which stand by as gazers and lookers on upon them that do communicate,
and yet communicate not themselves. What is this else, then a further contempt
of God? Truly, it is great unthankfulness to depart away: for these depart away
from the Lords table, they depart from their brethren, they depart from the
heavenly (...) of their souls: but their fault is much greater, when they
stand by in contempt, and will not be partakers of this Communion: What can this
be else but to have the minister of christ in derision? It is said to all
that are present, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, do this in remembrance of me:
With what face then, with what countenance, or rather conscience, can ye hear
these words sound in your ears, and not be touched? Let us therefore be
drawn and persuaded to this duty, by the benefit that redoundeth to the worthy
receivers, and fruitful partakers thereof: and on the other side fear to
offend, by staying and standing (...), while the faithful are partakers of
this sacrament of the Lords supper.

Chap 3. Of the first outward part of the Lords Supper
HItherto we have showed what the Lords supper is, and how to apply it to our
instruction: now we are to consider in this Sacrament two things, his (...) and
his uses: as we have showed in the former books. The parts are partly
outward, and partly inward. The outward part is one thing, the inward part
is another thing: the outward is taken in at the mouth, the inward by the
inward man: the outward is turned into the nourishment of the body, the inward
works in us to eternal life: the outward is taken by some to their
destruction, but the inward always to salvation. This appears evidently by
the words of the Apostle, delivering to the church what he had received of
the Lord, and declaring how the same night he was betrayed He took bread, and
1 cor. xi, 23 24, 25 Math. 26. (...), 28, 29
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take ye, eat ye, this is my
body, which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me. After the same
manner also, He took the cup, when he had (...), saying, This cup is the new
testament in my blood, this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. In
these words we see, both the outward parts propounded, and the number of
them defined and determined. For here are Four outward parts of the Lords
Supper.
four outward parts handled, to wit, the minister, the words of institution,
the (...) and Wine, and the Communicants. The first minister thereof was
Christ: the words of institution are, This is my body, given for you, this is
the cup of the new testament in my blood: the signs are bread and Wine: the
first communicants were the Apostles. So then the Ministers must do that which
CHRIST did, and the people that which the Disciples did: the actions of CHRIST
are directions to the Minister, the actions of the Apostles are directions to
the people.

Let us then see the actions of Christ. He took bread, he blessed, he brake
the bread, he poured out the Wine, he distributed and delivered them both.
Wherefore, the actions and works of the minister are Four actions of the
minister,
foure-fould. First, to take the bread and wine into his hands after the
example of christ, who did it to show that himself willingly gives himself
for his church, which serves to strengthen our faith and persuasion of his
love toward us: in whose imitation the minister dothit, to represent the action
of God the father giving his son unto us for our full redemption The second
action is blessing and giving of thanks, that is, by prayer, by thanks
giving, and by rehearsal of the promises of God, together with the institution
of christ, actually to separate the bread and wine so taken from their common
use to an holy use Whereby we are given to understand, that the outward
creatures are reverently to be used, calling upon the name of God, and craving
his assistance to use his ordinance as we ought to do: and that we should
joyfully praise God, for the gracious work of our redemption by Christ. The
third action, is breaking the bread and pouring out the wine, which are
necessary rites, to be observed, having respect and and relation to the
unspeakable torments of christ for us, who was pierced, crucified, and made a
curse for us upon the Cross, Psalm. 22, 16 (...). 53. 5
as the prophet teaches, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken
for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. Wherefore, these Sacramental rites of breaking and
pouring out are no: to be rejected and omitted, being used by Math 26, 26 act,
2 42, 1 cor, 10, 16
christ, practiced by his Apostles, and retained by the churches. Not as in the
church of Rome, where they break not to distribute to the people, neither
pour out the Wine to give unto them.

So then, we see that whole bread is not to be delivered, but that the bread is
to be broken, and the wine to be poured out, to be distributed among sundry
communicantes. The last action of the minister is, to distribute the bread and
wine, and give them into the hands of the people (...). CHRIST did not offer
them up to God, (...) delivered them to his Discipies. All these, being works
to be done and performed by the Minister in the administration of this
Sacrament, do note out the actions of GOD the Father, sealing up his son
unto us, as we shall see afterward when we come to the inward parts

Now, let us enter into the consideration of the uses of this part. Are these
the actions commanded in the use. 1
word, executed by CHRIST, and to be performed by the Minister? Then we see,
that such as are set apart to deliver this sacrament, are not consecrated and
appointed priests of the new testament, to offer up an unbloody sactifice for
the quick and dead, as the church of Rome teaches and practices. They are
commanded as ministers of God to deliver the outward signs to the people, not
as priests to offer them to God the father: they are appointed preachers of
the gospel, not priests of the law: which were to abolish the priesthood of
Christ. Wherefore, we must detest the blasphemy of these shameless shauelings,
stella Clericorum. serdisc sermon. 3
that teach the priest to be the maker of his maker, and that he which made
them, creatur a vobis mediantibus vobis.
gave them power and authority to make him, (...) so after a sort preser
themselves being the sacrificers, before christ who is the sacrifice:
themselves being the creators, before Christ the creature: themselves the
makers, before christ being made of them. Thus these sacrificing priests are
not ashamed to speak, and to bray aloud. Secondly, if the minister be an
outward part of this Use. 2.
sacrament, then it belongs not Numb, 3, (...), Heb. 5, 4
to private persons to deliver it to others, nor to take it to themselves, and
deliver it to themselves, when or where there is no Minister. They may indeed
apply to themselves the outward signs, they may eat the bread and drink the
wine, and in respect of the sacramental rites do as the Minister does: yet
for that they do it without a calling, it is not a due administration, but a
true profanation of this sacrament of the supper. For let us a little insist
upon the similitude beforestood upon: if the keeper of the Princes broad seal
be not in the way, or for the present be not to be gotten, shall any man
presume to take it where it lies, without direction, and without
commandment? sucha one woorthily bears his punishment, whosoever he be. In
like manner, (...) one should earnestly desire the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, and even faint in soul for the fruition of it, finding
himself in his longing affection able to take it himself, (...) the
assistance of another: yet every one must consider his gifts, his standing, his
calling, and place wherein God has set him, he has not committed to private
persons the administration of the sacraments: they may not baptize their
children, they may not meddle with the Lords supper, no more then common
subjects may take the (...) seal, if the keeper be not in the way. Against
this (...) truth, Two objections answered, pretending that (...) men may
deliver the supper.
two things of importance may be objected, which I purpose to prevent before I
proceed any farther. For first, this doctrine seems not to agree with that
maxim and principle, which (...) we have resolved upon, namely, Accedat verbum
ad elementum, and fit (...), that is, Join the word of institution to the
outward sign, and there is made a sacrament: Secondly, it seems to leave
sick persous without comfort in their hearts and peace to themselves, if for
want of a public minister, themselves may not supply that want, and give unto
themselves this Supper. These are the two objections, pretending and intending
that private persons, may at some times, upon some occasions, have some right
and interest in despensation of the Sacraments. Touching the former point,
being a ruled case of Saint Augustine, August. tract (...). in Johan (...);
that if the sign be (...) to the word, a Sacrament is ordained, we doubt not
to (...) the rule undoubtedly to be true, being truly and rightly understood.
For the meaning is, if there be an outward sign which is the matter, and a
word of institution which is the form of the sacraments, Aristot. metaphis.
lib. 7 cap. 7
the essence of them is fully finished, as if there be the matter and form of
an house, we conclude rightly there is an house. Howbeit, we presuppose there
was a builder of the house to prepare the matter and to order the form. So the
former principle does presuppose, a minister to deliver, and a receiver to
receive the sacrament: otherwise we shall also war under the ensign of our
enemies unawares, who hold it to be the supper of the Lord, Bellar. lib. 4 de
Euch, cap, 2 council. Trid. sess, 13. can. 4. 7
albeit there be no eating, no drinking, no receiving thereof. If therefore, in
the constitution of a sacrament, the institution of Christ touching taking,
eating, and drinking must be observed: then we see that more is required then
the sign and the word in the work of the sacrament.

Again, touching the objection of the sick, who seem to be wholly left in
distress and discomfort, if they may not lawfully administer the Supper to
themselves: I answer, it was an ancient practice of the beza (...). and vesp.
de sacr.
Church to carry the sacrament unto the sick: besides, albeit in extremity of
sickness the minister be wanting we leave not the sick without counsel and
comfort. For this we teach, this we are ready to maintain, this we would have
all believers in health and in sickness to recall and remember, that if they
(...) believe that the Lord Jesus had suffered death upon the cross for them,
if they (...) apply unto themselves his precious merits for their redemption,
if they (...) remember the benefits of his (...) passion with all thanksgiving,
and if they truly repent them from the bottom of their hearts of all their
sins: they do eat and drink effectually, Ioh, 6, 54, 55 56, 57, 58
and to their souls health profitably the body and blood of Christ our
savior, If they do not thus, the sacrament receiud (...) (...) them
although they do not receive the sacrament with their mouth. This serves to
comfort the weak, and to keep them within the lifts and limits of their proper
calling.

Lastly, seeing the former actions of the minister are done plainly in the
sight of all, it is the duty of every one to give diligent heed, and to have
weighty consideration of these outward ceremonies, by the meditation thereof to
confirm their faith and to make the outward works to further the inward
graces. For they are offered to our senses, not that we should rest in them,
but that our weakness by them should be helped, and we by them lift up in our
hearts to think upon greater things.

Chap, 4 Of the second outward part of the Lords Supper.
HItherto of the first outward part of the Lords supper, to wit, the minister:
now we come to the word of institution The words of institution are the 2
outvvard part of the Supper
and promise annexed or contained therein, which are the second part of this
Sacrament, expressed in these words, This is my body which is given for you,
or, which is broken for you, where the name of the thing signified is given to
the sign it self, as if it should be said, this bread which I have in mine
hands, is (...). cont. Marie. lib. 4 August. contr. Adimant c, 12
a sign of my body, which shortly after shall be crucfied for you, and
delivered unto death for your salvation.

Christ took nothing but bread: he gave into his Disciples hands nothing but
bread to eat, he brake nothing but bread: and Paul says expressly of this
sacrament, 1 cor. 10, xvi
the bread which we break is it not the (...) of the body of (...)? If any
Object, that Christ's body neither is, John xix, 36
nor was broken, as Iohu, 19, 3 6. Not a bone of him shall be broken that
Objection
the Scripture should be fulfilled: I Answer the Apostle has respect to the
sense and signification which the breaking of the bread imports, being taken
for the tearing and Answer
tormenting, the pains and renting of the body of Christ, and the violent
sundring of his (...) and body one from the other. For as the bread is patted
and divided into diverse parts: so the soul and body of Christ were sundred and
separated each from other. Again, it is said, This is my blood of the new
testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins, or, This cup is
the new testament in my blood which is shed for you: these speeches are
sacramental, not proper, by the confession of the adversaries themselves, where
the thing containing, which is the cup, has the name of the thing contained,
which is the wine the fruit of the vine. So then, they which cannot abide
figures in the sacrament, must be constrained to confess a figure, and
therefore cannot blame us, when we say the words are figuratively to be
understood.

But before we come to handle the uses of this part, let us directly consider
the words of Christ delivered at the institution and administration of this
sacrament, that so we may see the true and natural meaning thereof. These
words The words of institution are variably set down,
are not recorded and reported in so many words in the scriptute, or in so
many sillables, but the sense being one, the sentence varieth and is not one.
Matthew delivers the words thus, Math. 26. 26
Take, eat this is my body, whereunto Mark, 14, 22
Mark also accords. Luke is some what more ample by way of interpretation,
Luke 22. 19
This is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. And 1
cor, 11. 24
Paul to the like purpose, but in unlike sound of words, Take, eat, this is my
body which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise, touching
the other sign of this Supper, Matthew says, Math, 26, 28
This is my blood of the New Testament, that is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. Mark is somewhat more short then the rest, Mark 14, 23 24
This my blood of the New testament, which is shed for many: but he adds
this more then the rest, they (...) drank of it. Luke says, Luk, 22 xx
This cup is the New testament in my blood, which is (...) for you. But Paul
declares the same more at large, This cup 1 cor, xi, 25
is the new testament in my blood, this do (...) often as ye drink is in (...)
of me. Thus we see expressly, a difference in Words by adding, by
detracting, by changing: yet in as much as nothing is added, or detracted, or
changed in regard of the true meaning, let us come to the interpretation and
exposition of the words, seeing the gospel stands not Ierem. in cap. ad
Galat.
in the words of the scripture, but in the mind and meaning of them. Let us
therefore come to the right understanding of the words of christ. The words of
institution expounded briefly, truly, plainly.
Take, to wit, not only into your mouths, but into your hands, representing
the soul and faith of the receiver. Eat, that is, not reserve, not adore, not
offer it, but divide by chewing and preparing to concoction. This, that is to
say, not the shows of bread, but this very bread. Is my body, that is, a true
sign of my true body, and signifies unto you my selse, withal that is mine,
or belonging either to my person, or office, or merits. Which is broken for
you, that is, which shortly shall be crucified for you, and immediately given
to death for you. Do this in remembrance of me, that is, practice these daties,
and call to remembrance christ and his merits oftentimes. So that, it is not in
our choice and liberty to do these, or not to do them: if we be not fit, we
must presently prepare to make our selves fit: and we must do them often, so
that howsoever there be no set time, yet the oftener the better, due reverence
and regard being had thereunto. Moreover, touching the other sign, observe
thus much for interpretation, This cup, that is, this Wine is the cup: Is the
new testament in my blood, that is, this Wine is a true sign of shedding my
blood, which confirms and ratifieth the new Testament, and Gods agreement
with mankind for their salvation.

This is briefly the mind of christ, and meaning of the Use. 1.
words of institution. From hence we learn, first, that christ's words are
not properly, but figuratively to be taken. True it is, the words are plain,
easy, and manifest: for tropes and figures were found out, Arist. rhetor. ad
(...). lib 3, cap. 6
not to darken, but to open: not to hide, but to help the understanding:
howbeit they must have a right construction and a sound interpretation,
otherwise the playnest sentence may breed error Cicer. de. (...). lib. 3
and mistaking. We may not take the letter in all places: for, as we showed,
the scripture stands not in words, Hieron, Contra Lucifer. and in Cap. 1 ad
Gal.
but in the meaning of the words: not in the reading, but in the
understanding: not in the outward show, but in the inward substance. Christ in
the new testament is called a lamb, a lion, a way, a bridegroom, an head, a
door, a vine, a garment, a rock, bread, water, light, and such like: these
words are easy and evident, yet must they be understood metaphorically, not
properly: spiritually, not literally. So, to come to the words of
institution, What did Christ take in his hand? bread. What did Christ command
them to take and eat? bread. What did he call his body? Was it any other
thing then the same bread which he had taken, which he had broken, which he
had given unto them? Neither is there any other antecedent going before,
whereunto it can be referred.

Now, the bread and body of Christ are in nature Disparata.
sundry and diverse things, and the one cannot be spoken of the other, and
verified of the other without a figure, as to say, one and the same thing
should be both bread and Christ's body, but if it be bread, it cannot be his
body, if it be his body, it cannot be bread. Wherefore, true bread is a true
sign and seal of his true body. Neither is this figure strange or new, but
common and usual, when mention is made of the facraments: as Genesis 17, This is
my covenant, Gen, 17, 10 11
speaking of circumcision: yet circumcision was not the covenant it self, but a
sign and token of the covenant, as also it is afterward expounded, It shall be
a sign of the covenant between me and you. The adversaries cannot deny a
figure in this speech.

Now, what difference is there between these two speeches, This is my
covenant, and, this is my body? are they not alike, and in like manner to be
understood? So Exodus, 12. 11 It is the Lords Exodus 12 (...) 13, 14
passover, properly the lamb was not the passover, but served to, put them
in remembrance of that benefit, and it is expounded aster, the blood shall be a
token for you upon the houses where ye are, this day shall be unto vou a
remembrance.

Likewise, the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. That rock was 1 cor. 10. 4
Christ, whereas properly the rock was not Christ, but the water flowing from
it did represent him. Thus then we must understand the words plainly, truly,
and briefly, a paraphrase upon the words of institution.
as if Christ had said in this manner, This bread which ye have seen me take,
break, deliver, and distribute, and which I bid you take and cate, is a sign
or sacrament of my true body, signifying and sealing up unto you, that my body,
shall be broken, crushed, and crucified for you, to purchase to you eternal life,
let these sacramental rites and actions now performed by me and you, be
hereafter put in practice by you and all faithful ministers and professors,
for the strengthening of your faith, by the remembrance of my death and by the
applying of the benefit thereof, every one to your own selves. Likewise,
having finished his supper, when he did eat the passover with his Disciples,
having taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it, being filied with wine, to
his Disciples, and said, drink ye al of this, for this wine in this cup, is a
sign and sacrament of my blood, by the shedding whereof, together with my
death following, the full forgiveness of sins and perfect salvation (which I by
my unchangeable will and decree do give unto you and all that believe in me) are
assured to you and all believers. Thus, having opened and cleared the
interpretation of the words, we shall hereafter need to spend the less time in
confuting the contrary doctrine: darkness shall fly before the light, error
before truth, and cloudy mists before the sunshine of the day. Again, seeing
the words of institution are variably and Use. 2
diversely set down by the Evangelists and the Apostle Paul: we learn that
every change of the words, where the sense is nothing altered or diminished, is
not to be condemned, as (...) or unlawful: so that the alteration being in the
form and frame of words, not in the substance and sense of the matter, the
sacrament is not destroyed. For if it had been an heinous sin to have made
any change or alteration, or to have missed of the terms or sillables of the
institution: no doubt the Evangelists would have consented in the words, and
not have swarued one from another, as we see they have done. We see how the
Apostles in the allegation of sundry places of Scripture borrowed out of the
old Testament, do not evermore strictly bind themselves to the Math, 2, 6
very words, as Matthew 26. Hebrews 10. 5. and in sundry other: but only to
the sense, and therefore Math. 4, 10
sometimes they add as Matthew 4, 10. sometimes, they leave out as occasion
serves.

True it is, to alter any substantial part, or to wrest the words to a wrong
and contrary meaning, or not at all to express the sense of the words, makes
the Sacrament void: but an alteration only of certain circumstaunces, al
change in the words of institution makes not the Sacraments void.
as of number, or person, of Letters or sillables, cannot make frustrate the
whole sacrament: albeit we allow not any private and particular man to make any
change of his own head in such circumstaunces, or to bring in a new frame of
words. So in baptism, the Greek church says, Let the servant of CHRIST be
baptized in this Water, and c. and hereby nothing is detracted from the truth
of the sacrament, because Christ Jesus has not precisely appointed, how many
words the Apostles and pastors of the Church should use in the execution of
their Ministry.

Not withstanding, the observation of the words I baptize thee, observed in our
churches, seems to draw nearer to the commandment of Christ, and to
confirm more fitly and fully the faith of the baptized, and to answer unto
the words of John the baptist, I baptize with Water. Likewise, in the Lords
supper, whereas Christ said, Take ye, eat ye, do ye this, as speaking to
many: the sacrament is not destroyed, when the words are particularly
rehearsed, and specially applied in our churches, saying, take thou, eat thou,
drink thou.

Lastly, seeing the words of institution are an outward use. 3.
part of the Sacrament, necessary to be known, read, marked and understood,
wherein the substance and comfortatable use of the Lords Supper consists: it
follows that they are to be published and pronounced openly, distinctly,
plainly, not in a strange language, but in a known tongue, that the church of
(...) and people of God may be edified. For, wherefore serves the
commandment and promise set forth in the supper, if they be not understood?
Whether we do read the Scriptures, sing Psalms, pour out supplications,
receive the sacraments, or whatsoever (...) we perform to God, that he may be
(...), and the congregation instructed, we must do all in a known tongue to
be understood. This God commands, this the Apostle prescribes, this the true
church of God practices, this reason teaches, this the Heathen acknowledges.

(...), council. Trid. sess. 22, c. 9
the sinagogue of Rome, that it might take away all fruit and comfort from the
faithful, and that it might broch horrible errors (...) and securely, and not
be (...), has not only commanded to pronounce the words of consecration
closely and (...), but forbidden to use the common mother tongue of all the
people. The people of God must not be like Parrots, or (...), or Ravens, or
such birds that chatter with voice, record men's words, and sound a sentence,
but understand not the meaning thereof. As Plmy plin. nature. (...). (...). 10,
cap. 43
makes mention of a certain (...) that had learnd to say, Aue Caesar
imperator, All hail, or good morrow Emperor Caesar, saluting (...) and the two
young princes (...) and Drusus. And Celius Rhodiginus writes, Celius Rhodiginus
that Cardinal Ascanius had a Popiniay, that could pronounce distinctly and
(...) all the Articles of the Creed.

Such birds or rather beasts, would they have Christian men to be, that would
have them (...), and not Bellar lib. 2 de (...). cap. 12
understand what they pray: (...) (...) the reading of the scriptures, but not
know what is read: (...) the sacraments, but not know the meaning of the
institution. Things without life which give a sound, whether pipe or (...),
except they make a distinction in the soundes, how shall it be known what is
piped or harped? Or if the (...) pet give 1 cor. 147. 8
an (...) sound, who shall prepare himself to battle? All things in the
church must tend to the instruct on (...) edification of all the parts and
people: but reading and praying in a strange tongue, do not edify and profit
the hearers, as 1 Cor. 14, 26, Let allthings be 1 cor, 14, 5 xi, xii, 16, xiiii
xviii 19, 26 Psalm, 67, 4, and 117, 1, and 150. 6 Esa, 45, 23 act. 2, xi Romans
xiiii, xi
done to edisieng: and verse 14. I speak languages more then ye all, yet had I
rather in the Church to speak five words with mine understanding, that I might
also instruct others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue: for how then
should he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say, Amen, at thy giving
of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou say? Wherefore, except we know
the meaning of the words, we shall be to him that speaks Barbarians, and
(...) that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto us. Even the learned languages of
Greek and Latin, not in themselves, but in regard of the hearers that
understand them not, are barbarous. For the Apostle does not here like an
Orator distinguish the tongues, and show which are (...) and rhetorical in
themselves and which rude: but holds every tongue barbarous, (...), Syriack,
Caldy, Arabic, (...), and Latin, to him that knows not the force and
signification thereof. And this to be most true, Psalm, 114. 1 Romans i xiiii
the Scriptures teath, chrysostom. in 1 cor, xiiii hom. 35
the fathers avouch, Strabo Geograph. lib. 1
the (...) writers warrant, (...). in prolog: asinar (...). de Tristib. lib. 5
Eleg. 10
the very Poets declare, yea their own doctors Johan. Beleth. paris Theol.
explice. divine: offi. in proaemio.
do determine. Wherefore to conclude, it is the ordinance of God, it is the
doctrine of the Apostles, it is the duty of all christians, when the word is
red or preached, when supplycations are offered, when the sacraments are
administered, to use a known tongue understood of all: and without this, the
scriptures are vain, the prayers are barbarous, the sacraments are fruitless,
to such as know. not what is read, what is asked, what is promised, what is
received. And (...) far of the second outward part of the Lords Supper, Nicol.
lyra in 1 cor. xiiii. ad verb. verse. xvi (...). (...). tom. 3 tractat. xv.
to wit, the word of institution: for a Sacrament without the word, is as a
picture without sense, or an image without life.

Chap. 5 Of the third outward part of the Lords Supper
THe third outward part of the Lords supper follows, Bread and wine are the
outward signs of the Lords (...)
which are the elements of bread and wine, fittest signs for this purpose, to
signify the spiritual nourishment of the soul, by eating the body and
drinking the blood of christ. That these are appointed as the substance and
matter of the supper, it appears by the words of Christ, and his Apostles
delivering this sacrament. For the Evangelists express, Math. 26, 26 Mar. 14,
22 Luke 22, 19 act. 2, 41, 42. and 20, 7
that Christ took bread, gave it, and said, Takeye, and eat ye. So like wise,
it is said of the church newly planted by the Apostles, that such as gladly
received the word, and were baptized, Continued in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread. And chap. 20 cor. 10, 16
it is recorded, That the first day of the week, the Disciples came together
to break bread. And Paul says 1 Cor. 10. the bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? And in the chapter 1 cor. 11, 23 26,
27, 28
following, the same Apostle often mentions and remembers the bread of this
sacrament. In like manner Christ took the cup, Math. 26, 29 Mar, 14, 25 Luke
22, 18
wherein was the fruit of the vine. By these, Christ is truly exhibited unto
us: he is truly offered unto all: he is effectually given to the faithful, as
has been oftentimes remembered unto us.

This being the plain and evident truth, let us see the uses, first such as
concern both the signs jointly and in Gener. use. 1
general, then such as belong to each of them in several and in particular. To
begin, we learn from hence to acknowledge a difference between baptism and
the Lords supper: in baptism we have one sign as the material part, in the
supper we have two signs, Why we have two signs in the Lords supper and only
one in baptism?
partly to note out our whole, full, and perfect nourishment in Christ, having
whatsocuer is requisite for our salvation, and partly to show, a fuller
remembrance of his death, for the wine which is a figure of his blood, does as
it were present it and represent it before our eyes. So then, albeit the same
participation of Christ and the same washing away of sins by his blood, are
sealed up in baptism and in the supper: yet the manner Difference between
baptism and the Lords supper.
of sealing them in each is diverse. Again, baptism is a sign of our
entrance into Gods Covenant: the Supper is a sign of our abiding, and
continuing in that covenant. Touching baptism, it is sufficient for infants if
they be borne in the church: in the supper, the condition of examy^ning our
selves, and remembering the Lords death is required. They differ also in often
celebration of them: baptism is to be received but once only in all our life,
because the promise once made, is always firm and forcible to such as believe
and repent: but the supper is oftentimes to be received, because an often
renewing of that Covenant, and calling it to our remembrance is necessary, to
increase and strengthen faith. They differ also in the order which is to be
observed in the use of them: for baptism is to be given before the Supper, and
the supper may not be given to any, except to such as have been first
baptized, or reputed so to be.

As first a child is borne, before he be fed: so must Baptism go before,
whereby our new birth is sealed: then the supper must follow after, whereby our
daily nourishment is declared and confirmed. Lastly, they differ in the signs,
there is only one sign in baptism, which is the Water: but there are two
signs in the Lords Supper, to wit, the bread and the wine.

The second general use is, that if Christ took, gave, and Gener. vlc. 2
delivered the substance of bread and wine: then they must needs retain their
former nature and their proper substance, as well as their qualities, as fight,
taste, smell, bigness, whiteness, sweetness, rednesle, roundnesse, and such
like properties. But the Papists turn all things Against the bare shows of
bread and wine: and accidents without subject.
vpside down, matter into form, substance into accidents, creatures into
shows, and subjects into things adjoined: they bring in new shifts and fables
against all divinity, philosophy, reason, sense, and experience, setting up
their own inventions, and building castles in the air. Let them prove the
annihilation and removing of the substance of bread and wine away, and the
Arist. phis. lib. 1, cap. 3
consisting of accidents without subject, which they are never able to do. For
as the water in baptism remains in his nature and substance: so do the bread
and wine in the Lords supper. And albeit in both the sacraments, the signs be
changed to a special use: yet are they corrupted into shows, and turned into
shadows. The heavens Psalm. 10 2. 26
shall be changed at the end of the world: yet hence it follows not, that they
shall be clean abolished and consumed to nothing. All young scholars are
taught in the schools, Accidentis esse est (...)
that an accident has no being without a subject: yet here these sophisters,
against all the rules of Logic, porphyr. cap, 5 de accidente.
and grounds of reason, (...) have accidents and shows of bread and wine to
be in no subject. Thus, whereas in all places of learning we are taught, that
accidents may (...), not the substance of things: they (...) have the matter
and substance to perish, not the (...). We see whitenes, roundnes, (...),
(...): we cast the sweetness: we touch al these qualuies: (...) (behold a popish
wonder, where at marueil and be (...)) these, these I say are not in the bread
and wine, because they are gone, neither in the body of christ, because it is
not white or black, round, or red. So we shall have a (...) thing, yet nothing
white: a round thing, yet nothing round: a smell, yet nothing that smells: a
taste of bread, yet nothing that tastes, a breaking, and yet nothing that is
broken: so that here we have some what made of nothing, and nothing made of
somewhat. For if any should ask them, what round or white thing is this,
showing the bread? Or what sweet thing is that, pointing out the wine in the
cup? They cannot say, it is bread and wine (for they hold that none are lest)
they are not able to shape any answer: for they will not say, the body of
Christ is white, round, sweet, red, or such like, Wherefore, these accidents
of bread and Wine rouing without subjects, are shows of reason without
substance, colors without truth, and fancies without settled judgment: and as
well might they imagine, walking without feet, an house without a foundation,
a vessel without bortom, or a body without space or place.

Again, what is it that (...) nourish? What is it that does (...) and refresh?
For we feel our bodies strengthened by the creatures taken and received. And
we read in their own Histories that king Jews the Gentle for the Aimoin.
exadem. lib. 5. cap 19.
space of 40. days did eat nothing else. What is it then whereby we feel our
selves to be fed? Can their accidents do it, hanging in the air by miraculous
Geometry? Can witness, or rednes, or roundnesse nourish us where no substance
is to be found or felt? Can dryness, or moisture, can smelling or seeing
nourish without some material body? They cannot. It must be substance that is
turned into our substance: for never was it heard, that accidents were turned
into substance. But whereas we have been taught, that accidents are in their
subject, now we must hold for our new learning, that substances are in their
accedents. Wherefore, let us leave these doubtful and deceitful builders that
go about to build without ground or foundation, which cannot stand.

The third general use, arising from both the signs, is this: if Christ
delivered his last Supper in bread and wine, then Gener. use. 3.
these signs may not be altered, but must be The bread and wine be-the matter
of the Sacrament may not be changed in the Lords Supper.
retained for the perpetual use and comfort of the church. And howsoever it be
left to the choice and liberty of the church, what bread or what wine they will
use: yet that it ought necessarily (as I take it) to be bread and the fruit of
the vine, may appear by diverse good considerations. I will propound the
reasons that draw me to this opinion, let the Church judge of them, seeing the
1 cor, 14, 32
spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets. First, the institution of
the supper and the example of Christ himself, whom the Church is to imitate
and follow, who said, Do 1 cor, 11, 25
this in remembrance of me. He said not, do the like, or do what pleases you,
and swerve from my example where you will, but do this which ye have seen me
do. Whosoever therefore change either the bread or wine, do not that which
Christ commands, but another thing then he appoints. Again, no other
signs are so significant and effectual as these are for this purpose, to
strengthen and to comfort them that are in trouble, and almost in the present
Psalm 104, 14 15
estate of death, as Psalm. 104. He brings forth bread out of the earth, and
wine that makes glad the heart Pro, 31, 6 Judge. 9, 13 (...), 10, 19
of man, and oil to make the face to shine, and bread that strengthens man's
heart. Likewise the wiseman says Pro. 31. Give ye strong drink unto him that
is ready to perish, and (...) to them that have grief of heart. So that we are
heerby effectually and significantly put in mind, to have a most sweet feeling
of christ, to seek strength in him, and that it is he which abundantly
cleereth our hearts. Thirdly, the matter and form of every thing, arist.
Metaph lib. 7. cap 7 plato in (...).
are holden to be of the nature of it, and to constitute the essence: so it is
in the sacraments, where the signs are the matter, and the words of
institution are the form. True it is, circumstances may vary and be changed,
as time, place, sitting, standing kneeling, and such like: but the essential
parts may not be changed. If (...), both of them be of the essence of the
sacrament, such (...) take either of them away, destroy the sacrament, and
bring in a nullity thereof. Wherefore, if the signs, which are the matter, might
be changed: then the words also of institution which are the form might be
altered, and a new word brought into the Church: but a new word cannot be
brought in, therefore no new outward sign or matter. Fourthly, if the bread and
wine in the supper might be changed, and yet the sacrament in substance
remain: then in like manner, water in baptism might be changed, and yet be
(...) baptism; for of things that are like, there is a like respect, and like
conclusion to be inferred. But this cannot be, as we have showed before in 2.
book, chap. 5. where we have proved that the minister cannot baptize with any
other liquor or element, then with water, as the matter of that Sacrament.
Neither let any object the case of necessity: for no necessity can make that
lawful which simply and in it self is unlawful. Fifthly, if we admit and
grant a (...) in the signs at the pleasure of men: why may we not also change
other parts of the Sacrament? Why may we not in stead of the minister appointed
of God and called (...) the Church, admit pryuate persons, and receive other
(...) enforced upon the church by the papists? Do we not hereby open a gappe
for them, to (...) in all their trash and trumpery besides the written and
reueiled word of God? Sixthly, we have showed in the (...) book, that Nadab
and Abihu the two sons Aaron were smitten by the immediate hand of God Leuit
10. 1. 2
for offering the oblation with strange fire. But all signs brought into the
sacraments beside the scripture, are strange signs and consequently procure
strange judgments. And we see how the prophet Ioell threatening from God a
dearth of corn, and wine, and of oil, declares also that the offerings shall
cease, where he Joel, 1, 9, 19
says, The field is wasted, the corn is destroyed, the oil is (...), the new
wine is dried up, the meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from
the house of the Lord, the priests the Lords Ministers shall mourn: showing
hereby, that they were restrained from changing the out ward signs. If any
pretend greater freedom and liberty in the time of the gospel: let them show
their (...), and we will believe them. Lastly, it is confessed on all sides,
that without consecration and sanctification, there can be no Sacrament: for
without this halowing, the matter in (...) is bare water, the bread in the
Supper is bare bread, the Wine is Common Wine. Now every creature 1 Timothy 4, 5
is sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, as the Apostle teaches 1 Timothy
4. and therefore we cannot assure our hearts, that god will bless any other
creatures, as fish or flesh in stead of bread, water or beer in stead of Wine,
seeing the word has not sanctified these elements for this purpose. They are
sanctified by the word for the ordinary nourishment of our bodies, but they
are not by any special word sanctified for the use of the Sacraments. If
then it be simply unlawful, to change any thing in the matter of the (...), no
pretense or necessity can (...) make it lawsull. And as when a lawful Minister
is wanting, a pryuate person may not be taken: so when the matter appointed for
the administration of this sacrament is missing, an other may not be assumed.
For as well may we change the minister of the Sacrament into a pryuate man, as
the bread and Wine (being the signs) into another matter. If the Sacraments
cannot be had according to the precise and pure institution of Christ, they may
lawfully be deferred or omitted: for the danger stands not in the want (as
we have declared before) so long as we are free from the contempt of them.

The fourth general use, arising jointly from both the signs is, if Christ
delivered, and the Disciples received Genera. use 4.
bread and wine as the outward signs of this Sacrament: then we learn that
the doctrine of transubstantiation is a dotage Aagainst transubstantiation.
of man's invention. Though this devise be now received in the Roman church, as
a matter of salvation, as an Article of faith, and a maine point of religion,
Council. trid. sess. 13, cap. 4.
that by virtue of these words. This is my body, this is the cup of the new
Testament, the substance of bread and wine is gone, and nothing remains but
only the shows, likeness, and appearance of them: yet, if we examine the
matter by the words of institucion, by the nature of a sacrament, by the
proportion of faith, by the true properties of a true humain body, by force of
reason, by judgment of the senses, by confession of the adversaries
themselves, and by the manifold contradictions among themselves: we shall find
it to be a late devise and invention of the Papists, first decreed and
determined in the counsel of Laterane, under pope Innocentius the 3. in the
reign of King John of England, Anno. 1215.
not yet 400. years ago. There it was hatched at that time, and made barth
Carenza. summa council.
a main matter of faith, aproued in the church of Rome, but yet not then
receiud over all the world. This error is a spice of the error of Marcus, who
went about to make his fellows and followers believe, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Epiphan. haeres. 34.
that he did tra^substantiate wine into blood, in the sacrament. Thus do the
church of Rome at this day, he was he noted for an heretic by the fathers. I
will not, for shortness sake, bring all the reasons that might be brought to
overthrow and ouerturn The bread and wine remain in their proper nature
the turning of the bread into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood;
but allege some few among many, whereunto we require them to answer if they
can. Neither let the^ pretend, that they have bin answered already, inasmuch as
no sound and certain answer can be brought unto them, to satisfy us or
themselves. Our reasons for the present shall be these.

First, that which Christ took in his hands, he brake: that which he brake, he
gave: that which he gave his Disciples, he commanded them to eat, that which
he commanded them to eat, he calls his body. This appears by the
testimony Math, 26, 26 Mar, 14, 22 Luk, 22, 19
of the Evangelists, and coherence of the words. But he took bread and brake
it: therefore he gave bread, he commanded to eat bread, he said of the bread,
This is my body. Now if he took bread, but brake it not: or if he brake bread,
but gave it not: or if he gave bread to his Disciples to eat, but told them,
not this which he gave them, but some other thing beside that, was his body:
the latter part of the (...) starteth from the beginning, and the middle
swarueth from them both.

Secondly, the Apostle after the words of consecration, does oftentimes call it
bread, as 1 Cor. 11. As often as ye shall eat this 1 cor, xi. 26 27, 28 1 cor.
x. 16
bread, and drink this cup, ye show the lords doath til he come. And again,
Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again, Let a man
examme himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.
These men say, it is not bread: the Apostle says, it is bread: whether of
these we shall believe, judge you. So in the former chapter he says, the
bread which we break, is it not the commanion of the body of Christ? Likewise,
touching the other sign, Math, 26, 29
our savior expressly calls it wine after the thanks giving, Mat. 26. I
will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that day, when I
shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. This fruit of the vine is
wine, therefore the substance of it remains. Now if the bread had been turned
into the body, or the wine into the blood of Christ, and if the Apostle would
have spoken properly, he should have said, As often as ye shall eat, not this
bread, but this body of Christ under the form of bread, the blood of Christ
under the form of Wine. And again, he that eats the body and drinks the
blood of Christ unworthily. And again, let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat and take in his mouth the very body of Christ his creator. But thus the
Apostle has not spoken, neither could he so speak truly, properly, and
fitly: therefore we do truly, properly and fitly conclude, that there is no
(...).

Thirdly, Christ speaking of the cup says, Take, Luk, 22, 17 19
divide it among you, and of the bread he says, he took it, and brake it. But
if the substance of bread be abolished, or changed into the body of Christ, and
likewise the nature of the wine turned into the blood of Christ, there could be
no true distributing or breaking: for the blood of Christ is not divided into
parts, neither is his body broken.

Fourthly, if the strength or force of transubstantiation depend upon these
words of institution, This is my body, This is my blood: then there can be no
real change before these words be fully finished, and pronounced to the end. I
herefore, when they begin to say (...) is: What is it? What mean they, I say,
it is? Is it any other then bread and wine by their own confession till the
words be ended? So then, these sentences shall not be true, when they say,
(...) is my body, this is my blood, except they mean, this bread is the body
of CHRIST, this wine is his blood: wherefore, bread and wine remain, their
nature is not changed and altered.

Fifthly, these words, This is my body, must be understood, as the words
following, This cup is the new testament: but the cup is not turned into the
new testament, nor into the blood of Christ: therefore the other words must be
figuratively understood, not (...): for there is one respect of them both:
neither can any reason be rendered, why a figure should be admitted in the one
part, rather then in the other.

The sixth reason: Christ is said to give to his Disciples that which he said
was his body. If then this be properly taken, we shall thereby make a proper
Christ and make him a Monster of two bodies, as they also make the church a
Monster of two heads. For so there must be one body which gave, and another
body which was given. But it is most absurd, that he should give and be given,
hold himself and beholden, offer and be offered: which differs little from
the (...). de fabul. (...). lib. 2
heresy of the Helcesaits, who held there were sundry Christ's, two at the
least, one dwelling in heaven above, the other in the world here beneath: so
these make Christ to have a double body, visible and invisible; a visible
August. de (...). cap. 34
body sitting at the table, and an (...) body made of the substance of bread,
which (as the papists hold) (...) given to the disciples, as likewise they
teach of the headship of the church that one head is invisible to us m the
heavens, another visible to us upon the earth. The 7. reason: it destroys the
nature of a sacrament, which stands Iren. lib 4 contr. (...). cap 34
of an earthly and heavenly part: one out ward, the other inward: one seen,
the other understood: one a sign, the other a thing signified: of which we
have spoken before, book. 1. chap, 3. But if there be an actual
transubstantiation, then the outward part is abolished, and disanulled.

The 8. reason: in baptism the substance of water remains, though it have
words of consecration, and be made a sacrament of our regeneration: and
therefore in the Lords supper, the bread and wine are not changed and don away
utterly. The scripture speaks as highly Math. 26, 26 1 Pet. 3. 20. 21
of the one as of the other.

The ninth reason: if bread be really turned into the body of Christ, and the
wine into his blood: then the body and blood of Christ are really (...), for
the words are severally pronounced, first of the bread, then of the wine: yea
the soul of Christ should be separated from his body, for the bread is turned
only into his body, and not into his soul. But his soul, his body, and his
blood are not really separated.

The 10. reason: if the bread be turned into his body indeed by force of a few
words uttered by a priest: then the priest should be the maker of his maker,
and so every Masse-monger should be preferred before Christ, as much as the
creitor has (...) honnour then the creature, the builder then (...) house, the
workman then the work. But they are not (...) to publish it in their own
words and writings, stella clericorum.
that the priest is the creator of his creator, He that created you, has given
you power, to create him: he that has created you without your selves,
Creatura vobis mediantibus vobis.
is created by you, by the means of you. These are the speeches of their
wisemen, if they be not ashamed of their own words.

The 11. reason: the bread in the Sacrament after the words of consecration, is
subject to as many changes and chances as it was before: the bread may mould,
putrify, and breed Worms, Hesych in Leuit. l. 2. c. 8 Humbert. cont. Nicet.
and was accustomably in many places burned: the wine may (being immoderately
taken) make drunken, it may wax sharp and turn into vinegar: yea both of them
may be boiled and made hot: both of them may be vomited up, as certain lepers
did; both of them may be mingled with rank poison, as a certain Bernard de
monte polotiano de Domcastro. platin. in vita clem. 5
Monk gave the poisoned host to Henry the 7. a noble Emperor of famous memory,
which when he had taken, he dyed. The like may be said of Victor the 3. a Pope
of Rome, who was poisoned after the same manner Hermannus Contractus.
in the chalice, as the Emperor was in the bread. But the precious body and
blood of Christ cannot be mingled with poison, but is an excellent
counterpoison against the biting of the old Serpent and all infection ofsinne
whatsoever; the body cannot mould or putrify, the blood of Christ cannot
become sharp or sour, as the outward signs may, therefore the substance of
bread and wine remains. The 12. reason: there is something in the sacrament,
material and substantial, which goes the way of all meats, according to
that saying of our savior, Math 15, 17
Perceive ye not yet, that what soever enters into the mouth, goes into the
belly, and is cast out into the draught? But none of the accidents, as shape,
color, quality, taste, and such like are avoided, because they are altered in
the stomach, before they come to the place of auoydance: Origin. in math. cap.
15
and it were blasphemy to think that the body of Christ either enters into
the mouth, or goes down into the belly, or is cast out into the draught,
howsomany of them have also maintained this monstrous impiety: Therefore, the
substance of the bread and the wine remain in their own nature in the
sacrament.

The 13. (...): If there were a miraculous conversion of the bread and wine, it
would appear to the outward senses. as Ioh. 6, The multitude Ioh. 6, 26
saw his Miracles. There was never Miracle wrought by any bodyly creature, but
sense judged it to be so: but seeing our eyes see, and our taste discerns that
it is bread, we cannot imagine, there is any miracle. The Miracles that Moses
did in Egypt, when he turned water into blood, and his rod into a Serpent: The
miracles August. de Trinit, lib. 3 cap. 10
that Christ did, when he turned water into wine, the eye saw, the taste
discerned, here was no deceit, no fraud, no collusion. And thus every
hedge-priest should be a worker of Miracles, that only can read his portuise,
and say over his pater noster with an Aue mary. This is an honor that may be
challenged, but cannot be granted unto them.

The 14 reason: if there were any transubstantiation there should be an actual
conversion of the bread into the body of Christ; but this cannot stand. For
when one thing is changed into another, the matter remainetin, the form is
altered: but here they make the form to abide, and the matter to be changed.
A strange Metamorphosis, and fitting the fable of this counterfeit turning. Now
the matter of (...) is not in the body of Christ, because it is perfect in it
self, and so glorified, that it can receive no access. Besides, nothing can
be converted or changed into a thing before being and preexisting, which was
really before the change or conversion; as Christ turned the water into that
wine which was not before, Exodus 4, 3 Ioh. 2. 8 Gen, 19, 26
and Moses turned his rod into that serpent which was not before: and Lots wife
was turned into that pillar which was not before. But the body of Christ is
before their transubstanriation, whereupon it follow weth, that the bread cannot
be changed into his body.

The 15. reason: if Christ did (...) the bread into his body when he saud This
is my body: then in like manner, the Apostle did (...) the (...) of the
Corinthians into the body of Christ, when (...) (...), Now ve are 1 cor, 12, 27
the body of christ, and members for your (...). (...) (...) can they allege,
why (...) should be in the one sentence more the^ in the other? For the whole
college and company of divines of Rome and Rhemes, and all the multitude of
papists through out the world shall never be better able to prove their
transubstantiation out of these words This is my body: then out of the other
(...) are the body of Christ.

The 16. reason: if the bread were turned into the body of Christ and received
in the mouth: it should go far better with our bodies then with our souls,
because our bodies should really receive the body of Christ, but our souls
should not, being spirits: and bodies cannot be mingled and intermedled with
spirits. Wherefore, we cannot believe and receive this real conversion of one
substance into another. The 17. reason: if the bread be transubstantiated into
the body of christ, and so received by us: then either it is turned into our
bodies, or vanishes away into nothing, or returns and departs back into
heaven. But it is not turned into our bodily substance, for then we should grow
bodily and not spiritually, carnally not mistically, into one person with him:
neither does it vanish to nothing, for this were horrible blasphemy once to
imagine and conceive of the body of christ: neither does it depart into heaven,
for he was there before, and the heavens contain him to the end of all things.
Therefore, the bread cannot be said to be turned into the body of christ,
except one of these be granted. And thus also we may reason of the wine. If it
be turned into the blood of Christ, it must necessarily pass into our
substance, or vanish away, or return to the heavens: for no fourth way can be
imagined. But none of these can stand either with divinity or philosophy,
either with faith or reason, either with scripture or nature, and therefore
consequently transubstantiation must fall.

The 18. reason: if the disciples had not understood christ to call the bread
his body sacramentally: they would have been greatly troubled (who often
doubted of the least things) and demanded the understanding of them. As the
hearers of Christ Ioh. 6, supposing he had spoken of a carnal manner of eating
his Ioh. 652, 60
flesh, were troubled and offended, saying, How can this man give us his flesh
to eat? And verse. 60, This is an heard saying, who can hear it? Wherefore,
who sees not, that they would have marueiled and required farther, if they had
understood christ to have changed the bread into his body, and the wine into
his blood? But they doubt not, they demand not, they marvel not, they murmur
not, and therefore believe not this iugling of transubstantiation, or turning of
one substance into another. And if they believed it not, how should we receive
it.

The 19. argument: it ouerturneth sundry Articles of our Christian faith. We
believe that Christ Jesus was begotten of the father before all worlds, and
borne in time of the Virgin Mary: this the Scripture teaches, this the Creed
delivers: this every true Christian professes and believes. But if the
bread be transubstantiated into the body of Christ, and the wine into the blood
of christ: then his body is made and borne of bread and wine, and the priest
after the words of consecration may say, a little pretty son is borne unto us,
and newly made. Again, we believe that Christ was crucified and died for our
sins, that he was buried, rose again, ascended, and sits at the right hand
of God the father almighty. But if the body of Christ be made of bread as
often as the Eucharist is celebrated, then Christ being on the Cross might be
elsewhere then on the Cross: when he died, he might be where he suffered
nothing: lying in the grave, he might be out of the grave: yea he might be in
the grave after his resurrection and rising out of the grave: whereof
notwithstanding the Angels said, Mat, 28, 5
he is not here. Lastly, we believe that christ shall come from heaven to
judge the quick and dead, and that in the same manner he ascended, Revel. 1, 7
whom we doubt not but men shall see, as Revel. 1. 7. Every eye shall see him,
yea even they which pierced him through. But if Christ's body be made of bread,
he shall stare and start out of the pixe, and not come from heaven, and that in
another shape then when he ascended: nay, thus he should come daily unto us, and
yet no man can see him, nor perceive his coming. Al these devises, overthrow
foundation of faith, savor of nouelty, and bring in heresy against all
certain grounds of true religion.

The 20. argument: if by virtue of Christ's words, transubftantiation were
brought to pass, and the true body of christ were really present on the earth:
then the bread should be changed into whole Christ, that is, into his body
endued with his magnitude, quantity, quality, color, and all his dimensions.
For Christ said not at his supper, this is the substance of my body without
accidents: but Luke 21 16 1 cor. 11, 24
This is my body which is given for you, and which is broken for you.
Therefore, the body was visible and seen of them all, it was felt, it had all
accidents agreeable thereunto, and the substance of Christ's body alone without
his qualities was not crucified on the Cross, neither yet could be crucified.
Not withstanding, we see not Christ's body upon the earth, nor any adioy nt
thereof is perceived or discerned. Where are they then? Are they in substance
of christ's body which is in heaven? And not in the substance of his body which
is on the earth? Then they make Christ to have two distinct bodies: for one and
the same body cannot have his properties and dimensions, and yet be without
them, which necessarily implies a contradiction, and consequently falsehood:
especially considering how great a difference they make between the body of
Christ in heaven, and this body that lies and lurketh under the accidents and
shows of bread in their box.

The 21. reason: it destroys the nature of a true body, it takes away the
defense used against heretics, and brings in the heresies of Marcion, of
Eutiches, and the Manichics, which August, de quod vuit de.
denied Christ to have a solid, and true humane body, and held that he had only
a fantastical body without any material flesh, blood, or bone, in appearance
and sight some what, but in deed and substance nothing. For they teach that his
body is in infinite places at once, and those discontinued, void of quantity
and quality, not circumscribed, not visible, nor any way sensible: that being
in heaven, he is really and corporally on earth, though not in the distance
between heaven and earth, nor in those places where the host is not: which is
to assign innumerable bodies to our savior Christ, and consequently to make
him no body, which is in esfect as much as to deny he is come in the flesh, 1
Ioh, 4, 3, and 2 Ioh. 7
which is the very doctrine of Antichrist himself, as John speaks, Every
spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom we have (...). And in his 2.
Epistle, Many (...) are entered into this world, which confess not, that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh: he that is such a one, is a deceiuer and an
Antichrist. But Orcam propounds this as the doctrine of the schools, that
Occam. in cen tilo. theol. conclus. 25, 26
The body of Christ is every where, as God is every where, and that if there
were an host that filled all the world, the body of christ might be with every
part thereof when it should be consecrated. And Holcot treading in the same
stepes of the schools, not of the scriptures, says, If there had been a
thousand hosts in a thousand places at the same time, that christ did hang
upon the cross, Holcot. in 4 lib. sentent. quest 3
christ had been crucified in a thousand places. But it is an inseperable
property of bodies, to be local and contained in place: August. epist 57, ad
dardan.
take away space of place, and true dimensions from bodies, and they are no
where, as Augustine teaches. Besides, hence the fathers concluded the truth of
Christ's body because, Luke 24, 39
he might be seen and handled, and because he had flesh and bones, according
to the (...), Behold, my hands and my feet, for it is I my self: handle me
and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. But if he be
neither seen nor handled in the sacrament, nor discerned to have flesh and
bones: how shall his humanity be (...) and maintained against heretics
impugning the same?

The 22. reason: it takes away judgment from the senses, and makes the
sacrament of truth to be a sacrament of forgery and falsehood: for the senses
of seeing, of tasting, of touching, of handling and smelling, do judge bread
and wine to be in the sacrament, and not man's flesh truly and properly:
neither can arist. lib, 2 de anim. cap. 6
all the senses be (...) in their proper objects, as even the philosophers
themselves do teach, and that truly,

The 23. reason: it is an horible act and unnatural cruelty for man to eat
man's flesh, and for man to drink man's blood: and therefore the papists are as
humane as the Cyclops, Canibals, and other barbarous people. It is more brutish
and barbarous August. de doctr christ. lib. 3. cap. 16, cyril. anat. 11,
to eat man's flesh, then to kill a man: and to drink man's blood then to shed
it. Thus they make christian people eaters of man's flesh and blood suckers,
which is beastly and horrible wickedness.

The 24. reason: the Apostle makes an opposition between the table of the
Lord, and the table of devils, saying, cor, 10, 20, 21
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of devils: where he shows,
that to eat the flesh offered to idols is to be partakers of the idols. as
the bread which we break, is the participation and communion of the body of
the Lord. Hence he concludes, that they should not eat of those things which
the Gentiles sacrifice to idols, because they have fellowship with the diuils
that eat of them, even as they are united to Christ which partake of the bread
in the supper. If then the flesh offered to idols be not transubstantiated: why
fhold the sacramental bread be turned into the body of christ, seeing it
suffices to make us partakers of the Lords body to eat of the bread, as it was
sufficient to make them partakers of the idols, to eat of the things offered
unto them? The 25. reason: if the institution of Christ be a sufficient
direction unto the church what to hold in this question, we shall easily give
this transubstantiation a fall. We see in the cases of matrimony that did
befall, our savior brings them to the first institution, and thereby
dissolueth the doubts and difficulties that arose, saying, Math, 19, 3 4, 8,
From the beginning it was not so. So when any controversy arises about the
Lords supper, the ordinance of Christ is able to take it up, how great or
grievous soever it grow. Now, there is no sentence, no word, no syllable, no
jot, no title in the description of the supper, that favors or sauoreth of
transubstantiation, or signifies and insinuates any such matter. True it is,
christ says Math. 26, 26
This is my body, but to be does not signify to transubstantiate: for then
when he says, Ioh. 15, 1, and 10, 7 and. 14. 6
I am the true vine, I am the door, the way, and such like, he shall be turned
and transubstantiated into a natural vine, into a materal door, into an high
way, from whence would follow infinite abuses and absurdities. Besides, if the
word ( is) in the institution fignifie, is transubstantiated, that is, changed
from one substance into an (...), from bread into flesh, from wine into blood:
then the change should be made before all the words be uttered, so that hence it
would follow, that it cannot be done by virtue of the words, which goes before
the pronouncing of the words. Last of al, the maintainers of
transubstantiation, as the builders of babel, have their tongs divided, and
their languages confounded: they cannot accord together, but vary and dissent
one from another, Mark. 14, 56
like the false witnesses that arose against christ. First, they knew not
certainly, whether the bread be turned into his body, or come in place
thereof, the substance departing. Secondly, some allow not these speeches, Thom.
p 3 qu 75, art. 8
bread is Christ's body, or bread is made christ's body: but will have it said,
christ's body is made of bread: Canon. conuertantur
others condemn this speech also, that bread is made christ's body. Thirdly,
they know not what is broken, whether bread, or accidents, or nothing: others
say, the true body of christ is broken, Fourthly, they agree not, whether their
water in the chalyce mingled with wine, be transubstantiated: some say it is,
other say it is not: some more sober then the rest, are afraid what to say,
durand. lib. 4
and ask who is able to decide the question? Others say it is turned into the
humors of his body: others virknit the knot thus, that the water is turned into
the wine, and then the wine into his blood, and therefore are circumspect to
give this cautel that a little water be mingled, being afraid, least, if more
water were put in then the wine, the wine should be transubstantiated into
water. Fifthly, they cannot agree with what words their consecration is wrought,
whether accidents be without their subject, whether the accidents norish no
less then the substance of bread and wine: likewise what the rats and mise do
eat: how and sro^ whence the worms are oftentims in gendred Eucharist, and so
consume it: whether the shows of bread be the body without the blood, and the
shows of wine the blood without the body. It were infinite see D. sutl. de
Miss. lib. 5. cap 16
to note out all their contentions and contradictions: these may suffice to
show how the enemies of God fight one against another, and all of them with
their own shadwoes. And thus much of the late doting devise of
transubstantiation, which is the soul and life of their popish religion: the
deniers or doubters whereof, they pursue with fire and sword more eagerly, then
such as are enemies to the blessed trinity.

The last general use is this: if christ delivered both these signs, not
only the bread, but the wine also to his Gener. use 5.
disciples: then both kinds by the minister are to be delivered, christ's people
must receive the supper under both kinds.
and both kinds by the people are to be received, not bread alone, nor wine
alone, but bread and wine: the bread in token of his body given for us, and the
wine in token of his blood shed for us. This is the ordinance of Christ: this
is a greeable to the scripture. Notwithstanding, the Church of Rome has
decreed, that it is not necessary for the people to comunicate in both kinds,
and holds them cone. Trident sess. 21, cap 2
accursed that hold it necessary for the people, to receive the cup, cosecraced
by the priest. Thus it appears, they labor nothing more, then to take from
the faithful the sweet comfort of the Lords supper. This is a sacrilegious
corruption of christ's institution, devised by satan, broached by Antichrist,
published by his adherentes in the corrupt times of most palpable darkness, as
may appear by these reasons.

Frist, if none may drink of the consecrate wine but the priest, then none
should eat of the bread, but priests: so that they must either exclude the
people from both which I trust they dare not, or admit them to both, which as
yet they do not. For to whom Christ said, Math, 26, 26 27
Take and eat, to those gave he the cup and said, Drink ye. Wherefore, the
signs being both equal, all communicants must drink of the one, as well as
eat of the other, there being the same warrant for the one, that there is for
the other, and the let that would bar the one, will hinder the other: so as
Math. 19, 6
the things which God in his goodness has joined together, man without sin
cannot separate.

Secondly, when Christ instituted this sacrament, he said, Math. 26, 27 Mar.
14, 23 1 cor. 12, 13
Drink ye all of this: and by all he understood of the Communicants. And the
Evangelist Mark adds, They al drank of it, to wit, all that were present at
his last supper, who had before eaten of the bread of the Lord. This also
appears by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. They have been all made to drink into
one spirit. This commandment of Christ being general, imposes a necessity
upon the people, when he says, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, do ye this. These
commandments are perpetual, unchangeable, and always in force: not
arbitrary, not temporal, not repealed, but bind the conscience to the end of
the world, against which no limitation, or dispensation can be allowed, being
the commandments 1 cor. 14. 37
of God, not of man.

Thirdly, the cup is a part of Christ's will and testament. Now touching the
nature of a testament or will, the saying of the Apostle is known, Gal. 3, 15
Heb. 9. 16, 17
If it be but a man's testament, when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it,
or adds any thing thereto: where he shows, that the dead man's will may not be
changed, nothing can be put to, nothing taken out without forgery and
salsehood. This is the law of nature and Nations. But the Lords Supper is a
sacrament proper to the new testament, as Christ says, Luk, 22, 20
this cup is the new testament in my blood which is shed for you. This
testament the Lord Jesus made the night before he was betrayed, he sealed it by
shedding his most precious blood,- he has given Legacies, not of earthly and
temporal, but of heavenly and eternal goods. And seeing he has appointed the
cup of this his testament to be delivered and drunk of all those for whom his
blood was shed: it is intolerable boldness and presumption to take away the use
thereof from the greater part of the Church, and an infallible token of an
unshamefast and shameless harlot, to alter her husbands will, to defraud and
defeat his children of that worthy portion which their father allotted (...) and
so to keep back part of their inhetitance and (...).

Fourthly, the blood of Christ shed upon the Cross belongs not only to the
pastors and teachers, but to all the faithful that come to the table of the
Lord, as appears by the words of Christ, Math, 26, 28 Luke 22, 20.
This is my blood which is shed for you and for many: why then should the blood
of Christ be denied, or the cup of the Lord be barred from them? If then the
blood of Christ were shed for the people, as well as for the ministers: surely
the cup belongs to one as well as to the other. If the people have the
greater, who shall keep them from the less? If they have their part in the
thing signified, who shall deny them of the outward sign? For as the fruit
and effect of the blood of Christ is common to the people with the pastor: so
should the cup also, which is the communion of his blood shed for the
redemptionof the peoples sins, be divided indifferently between the pastor
and the people.

Fifthly, the 1 cor. 11, 23
Apostle delivered that to the Church which he had received from the Lord
Jesus: Now the Church ought diligently to observe the written traditions and
verities of the Apostles, which are committed to posterity to be kept
inuiolably. But he has delivered, how the Lord, after taking, blessing,
breaking, and distributing of the bread, likewise took the cup, blessed, and
distributed it among them, so says the Apostle must the Churches do. If then
he received this from the Lord, to deliver both kinds to the people; let the
Church of Rome consider with her self, from whence she has received the
contrary, to withhold one of the kinds from the people: for both cannot
proceed from one and the same spirit of truth, which is never contrary to it
self.

Sixthly, if all the faithful that come to the Lords Table, must show forth
the Lords death until he come, and this be done by them as well by drinking of
the cup, as by eating of the bread: then all the communicants must receive the
sacrament under both kinds, 1 cor. 11. 26.
until the second coming of christ. But the faithful must show forth the
lords death by eating of that bread and drinking of that cup, as the Apostle
teaches, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye show
the Lords death until he come. Therefore, all communicants must partake the
sacrament under both kinds.

Seventhly, the Apostle gives an express commandment to (...) whole church,
which al must obey that come worthily to this holy table, Let a man examine
himself, 1 cor, 11, 28
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. Where he gives a
double commandment, first to appear reverently, then to receive worthily.
Now, all that must prove and try themselves, are commanded not only to eat
bread, but to drink of the cup: but al must try and examine themselves:
therefore al are commanded both to eat and drink at the lords table. If this be
a commandment to examine: then the words following of eating and drinking,
are likewise commandments. There is no halting in these, let them admit both,
or let them deny both. Eighthly, if the faithful take not the cup in the supper
of the lord, the condition of Christians under the Gospel, shall be worse then
of the Isralites under the law. For the people of Israel in the wilderness
having the same sacrament in effect with us, 1 cor. 10, 4
Did all drink of the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was
Christ, as the Apostle affirms. But out condition is not worser and weaker
then theirs: therefore all the faithful are to drink of the cup of the lord.
Bellarmine, the Souldan of the Romish Synagogue, bellar. lib. 4 de euchar. C. 27
answers thus, They drunk not water out of the rock when they did eat of
the spiritual meat, but in another place, and at an other time. But this is
an answearlesse answer which cannot satisfy. For albeit the sacraments of the
Isralites as figures and types did represent the same graces that our
Sacraments do: yet it is not necessary they should in all points answer each
other, and in all respects agree together. Besides, the Church of Rome at no
time aloweth the people to drink of the Wine, a seal of the blood of Christ:
they keep them from the cup of the Lord, both when they give them the bread,
and at all other times, and thereby make their estate worse then the estate of
the Jews. Indeed, if they did at any time permit all the people to drink of the
cup, they might pretend this example of the Israelites: but inasmuch as they
utterly deny them this part of the cup, they overthrow themselves in their
malice, and yet in their blindness they do not see it. Lastly, many of the
fathers, did both eat Manna and (...) water out of the rock, if not in the
same place, yet at one and the same time, exodus 16, 21
inasmuch as they gathered thereof every morning, and it ceased not, Josh. 5. 12
until they entered the frontiers and confines of the land of promise. But they
never allow without a toleration and dispensation, the people in any place, at
any time, upon any occasion, and in any respect to taste of the cup in the Lords
supper. Ninthly, if the cup of the new testament may be taken from the Lords
people: in like manner the water in baptism may be taken away from them. For
the blood of christ, whereby remission of sins is purchased and procured, is
represented by the wine of the Lords Supper, as well as by the water in
baptism. But the water in baptism, without great sacrilege, cannot be
omitted or neglected: wherefore then should the cup be taken away.

Lastly, if any part of the supper might be taken away from the people: then
like wise the word of God may be taken from them, for in this point there is
the same reason and respect of them both. A Sacrament is nothing else but a
visible word, and a sealing up of the word: and the offense seems to be the
same, whether a man break the seal, or rent the writing. But the word cannot
be withdrawn from Christian people, it being the instrument of faith, and the
life of the Church. Wherefore it is the greatest wrong and injury done to the
people of God to take from them the cup of salvation. The answer to this reason
must be, to confess the parts and yield the conclusion: forasmuch as by
forbidding the people the reading of the Scriptures, they have robbed them of
the word of God, and taken from them Luke xi, 52
the key of knowledge, neither entering themselves into the kingdom of heaven,
nor suffering those that would enter. No marvel then, if they take the cup of
blessing from the people, who have taken from them the free use of the word of
God. To conclude these reasons, it is Antichrist, who, contrary to the doctrine
of christ, contrary to the institution of the supper, contrary to the practice
of the Apostles, and contrary to the use of the former churches, has excluded
the people languishing and th^^sting after the blood of christ, as the dry
earth for the sweet shewers of rain, from taking the cup of the lord, and
left them a dry communion to eat the bread of the sacrament alone. Having
considered the truth of God by sundry reasons, grounded in the scripture, that
the people have good interest and title in the cup, denied unto them: let us
answer the Objections for taking the cup from the people of god
objections of the adversaries, made against the former doctrine. First, they
pretend, that christ administered it to the apostles only, and not to any of the
people: and consequently the institution for taking the cup can be no general
commandment for all men: thus rhem. test. upon Math. xxvi, and Mar. 14
the Rhemistes reason. I answer, first it may be doubted and disputed, whether
only the Apostles were present at his last Supper. For seeing diverse were
added unto the church, and professed the faith of christ, seeing he had other
disciples beside the twelve, seeing many Godly men and women followed him to
see his miracles, and to hear the gracious words that proceeded out of his
mouth: why should we think that none of them were admi^ted to his table, who
had often heard his preaching, and depended upon him in their living. Again,
the passover was celebrated in that house, Math, xvvi^ 17, 18
of a faithful man, as may be collected by sundry circumstances: now the^,
either the lord Jesus annexed that famely unto his, as the law in one case
appointed, or else we shall have two passe-ouers at one time in one house,
which has no warrant of scripture, no color of truth, no probability of
reason. We read in the institution and celebration of the passe-ouer of joining
house to house, Exodus, xii, 4
and taking his neighbor next unto him in case of the insufficiency of one
household to eat the lamb: but we never read of killing two, lambs, and
keeping two passeouers under one roof. Besides, the small remnant of the
faithful among the Jews, would no-doubt rightly and religiously observe the
passe-ouer after the example of their lord and master, rather according to the
Exodus, 12. 6
precept of Moses' then aceording to the practice of the Jews: in imitation of
christ, Ioh. 13, 1 cum, 18. 28
rather then according to the tradition of the elders. Furthermore, we are to
consider, that in eating the passover, they sorted themselves together
according to the number of the persons able to eat up the lamb: for they
commanded to take Exodus xii 4. 5
A lamb without blemish, a male of a year old: and if the household be to
little for the lamb, he shall take his neighbor which is next unto his house.
Now christ with his twelve disciples alone, were not sufficient to eat up this
lamb of a year old, being great and large according to the sirian kind, as
may be supposed by the Arist, bistor animal, lib, 6 cap, xxvii plini. hist.
nature, lib. 8 Cap 48
description of Aristotle, Pliny, and others. Neither does it appear that any
remained, or was burned with fire, Exodus xii. x
according to the institution of God, because the Evangelists declare, that so
soon as the supper was administered and a psalm sung of thanksgiving, Math,
xxvi 30
they went out into the Mount of Olives. Why then should we not think, that
christ added and annexed other to his family, seeing his own disciples sufficed
not, especially the blessed virgin his mother who was not long from him, Ioh.
19 xxvi 27.
whom afterward after his departure, he commended and committed to John, to be
protected and provided for, who from that time took her home to his house as
his own mother. But to leave these consideratio^s as conjectures, we answer the
former objection, that in as much as christ delivered both signs to the same,
persons, they might bar the people from the bread as well as from the cup. For I
would know why the bread is necessary, but because it was instituted by christ,
and retained by his Apostles? Wherefore, the institution makes the one as
requisite as the other. Besides, if other heretics should arise, as great
enemies to the peoples partaking of the bread, as the church of Rome is to
their communicating of the cup of the Lord: how might they better be repressed
and refelled, then by alleging the first institution of christ, and showing
the practice of the Apostles: so that the reasons brought to confute the one,
will serve directly to overthrow the other. Moreover, the disciples at the first
ministration of the supper, performed not the office of the minister, nor any
part of his duty, but of the people Christ was the minister thereof, he took the
bread, he blessed, he brake, he gave the bread, saiing, This is my body.
Likewise he took the cup, blessed, and gave the same, saying This cup is the
new testament in my blood. On the other side, the disciples took it, did eat
and drink, which are the proper duties of all the people: Lastly, the Apostle
says not in the first person, we ate and drink, as speaking of himself and
other teachers of the church: but directing his speech to all 1 cor, 1, 2
that are called and sanctified in Christ in every place (according to the
inscription of the epistle) he says, As often as ye shall eat this bread 1
cor. xi, 26
and drink this cup ye show the Lords death til he come. Now these
Corinthians, to who^ he specially wrote, could not live until the second
coming of christ to judgment: therefore this eating and this drinking
belongs to all that call upon the name of god to the end of the world.

Secondly, they object against the former truth, this out of Object 2.
Act. 2, They continued in the apostles doctrine, and in breaking of bread: and
Chapter 20, they came together to break bread. It is not said, to deliver the cup
unto the people act, 2, 42, and xx, 7
but to break bread: whereby they gather, it was ministered unto the people in
one kind only, and not in both. I answer, by a common Synecdoche, Answer.
one part is put for the whole. For among the Hebrews, this phrase in
scripture to eat bread, is to receive whole nourishment and full refreshing by
eating and drinking: as appears by Esa, 58, 7 Lam, 4, 4 Math, 15. 33 Luke 24.
30 act. 20. xi
many places, where mentioning only bread for food, it were madness to imagine
and gather that they drunk not. Besides, the Apostle puts the other part, to
wit, drinking of the 1 cor. 12, 13
cup, for the whole celebration of the supper, when he says, By one spirit we
are al baptized into one body, and have been al made to drink into one spirit:
where we see, as our savior added the universal note drink ye al of this: and
as the Evangelist Mark accords, saying they al drank of it: so the Apostle
does not pretermit it, but says, al were made to drink: as if the Lord Jesus,
the Evangelists and the Apostles would prevent before hand, the corruption and
followed in the church of Rome. Wherefore, seeing drinking of the cup, does not
properly note out the whole action, because no man was ever so grossly blinded,
to suppose that the cup might be alone administered: it follows, that by this
member expressed, we must understand the other, and by one part the whole.
Furthermore, it is a ruled case among themselves, that it is flat sacrilege,
if a priest consecrate not this sacrament in both kinds, but do it in bread
only. If then the former scriptures, Act. 2. and chapter 20. prove the receiving
under one kind because bread only is expressed, and so the cup to be excluded:
it will likewise follow, they consecrated in one kind, because the wine is not
expressed: and therefore, by these places, neither priest nor people should
take the cup, if they will not admit a trope or figure. Neither can they say,
that Luke discribeth not, what the Apostles consecrated or received, but what
they delivered to the people: for the Evangelist declares Act. 20. 11. not
only that the Apostle brake the bread, but Act. 20, 7
did eat thereof himself: so that they must confess, that Paul also
received in one kind, and consecrated in one kind, or else necessarily grant
one part put for the whole: as likewise we say 1 Cor. 11, where he does
expressly touch and teach both kinds, 1 cor. 11, 26 27, 28, 29
to the eating of the bread joining the drinking of this cup: yet sometimes 1
cor. 11. 20 29, 33
he expresses only the one sign for shortness sake, and the church had
received this usual manner of speaking to call the Lords Supperthe breaking of
bread, as verse 20. When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat
the Lords Supper: and verse 33. When ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another: likewise verse 29. He discerns not the Lords body: and yet in the
sentence going before, he says that such as eat and drink unworthily, do
eat and drink their own judgment. Wherefore, as the Apostles always
celebrated the supper by conseeration both of the bread and of the cup: so the
people always received in both these kinds, to their great comfort and
consolation.

Thirdly they allege, that there is an union and conjunction of each sign,
that the body is in the blood, and the Object. 3
blood in the body: that christ is wholly and perfectly under each kind,
because now in his glorious body, concomitantia.
there is no separation of the body from the blood, or blood from the body. I
answer, surely if this were so, it were a fault and frivolous Answer.
thing to do that by more, which may be c done by fewer, to use two kinds,
which may as well be done and is done under one, as a wise Philosopher
teaches. Besides, if one may reason in that soit, the whole supper might be
abrogated, for we are made partakers of christ in Gal. 3, 27
baptism, and he dwells in our hearts by Heb. 3, 14. 15 Ephesians. 3, 17
faith which comes by the word ofGod. Again, were not Christ and his Apostles
as wise as they? Were they ignorant of this union? Did they not know this
accompanying of the body with the blood, and blood with the body? Is the
present church of Rome wiser then he, in whom all the Col, 1. 19, and 2. 3, 9
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid? If they think so, let them tell
us plainly: if not, let them lay their hands upon their mouth, and submit
themselves unto him who administered it in both kinds, and commanded his
Apostles to do the like. Moreover, Christ would have us in his supper consider
his blood separated from his body, and set his death before our eyes, and his
precious blood shed out of his side: so that, delivering the cup, he said,
Math. 26 27, 28,
Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new testament, which is
shed for many, without which sheading, there is Heb. 9, 12
no forgiveness of sins, as the Apostle teaches. Wherefore, seeing these two
are contrary one to the other, and cannot stand together; to wit, the blood to
be in the body and to be out of the body, to be shed sor us and not to be shed,
and that the sacrament leads us to the consideration of the death, and
especially of the piercing and pouring out of the blood of Christ: we may
conclude, that this Council. Trid sess. 3, can. 3
union of the body with the blood, and blood with the body, flatly crosses and
overthrows the institution of Christ. And why I pray you, do their
sacrificing priests receive the blood twice, and the body twice, drinking first
the blood in the body, and again eating the body in the blood? Nay, does not
this union devised, alter the (...) of Christ, and confound the several parts
of it, making him to speak otherwise then the evangelists express? For when
he said, This is my body, they will have him mean, this is my body and blood:
Again, when he said this is my blood, they will have him mean, this is my
blood and my body. Last of all, this late invention, turns and ouerturneth
the nature of the parts, distinguished one from the other: while we eat the
flesh they make us drink the blood, and while we drink the blood, they imagine
we eat the body. Thus, to eat and to drink shall be all one with them: for we
shall eat liquid and moift things, and we shall drink dry and hard things.
And is not this drinking of flesh, and eating of blood, and inuerting and
euerting of the nature of things? But thus God strikes his enemies with
giddines of spirit. For after they have broken the pure institution of christ,
and brought in a carnal presence of his body (one absurdity being granted,
arist. (...). lib, (...), cap. 2. and 3
a thousand follow) infinite abuses have ensued upon heaps, the flood-gats
being set open, whereof there is no end or measure. Let the^ therefore repent
themselves of this sacrilege against god, and injury against his people,
restoring unto the^ the communion under both kinds, according to the ordinance
of christ, and directo^ of the Apostles. And thus much of the general uses,
arising from both the signs jointly considered. Now, let us partic. use. 1
come to the particular uses offered unto us, in each of the signs. And first,
touching the bread. Is bread simply considered, the first sign in the lords
supper? Then it is not necessarily required, that it be administered in
unleavened bread. For bread is oftentimes named and repeated: but the word
(unleavened) is never added. Wherefore as it is in self indifferent, whether
the wine be red or white, and whatsoever the kind or color be (if it be wine:)
so is it not greatly material, whether the bread be leauened or unleavened, so
it be bread. Which overthrows the error of the church of Rome and her
favorites, who hold it Bellar. lib. 4 de Eucha. cap. V,
neeessary, that the bread used in the Sacra. be unleavened. They pretend the
institution of Christ, who (say they) made the Sacra. of unleavened bread,
instituting it after he had eaten the passover, which was to be eaten with
unleavened bread Exodus xii. 8, xviii.
according to the law of Moses, neither was there any leaven to be found in
Israel 7. days together. Thus they charge us to break the institution of
Christ. But see here the (...) and partiality, of these proud spirits, who fly
to the institution, and stick precisely to circumstances of (...), when it
serves any way to their purpose: but when the question is of matters of
substance not of circumstance, as touching communicating under both kinds,
touching the necessity of eating and drinking, and of many receiving together
against their half communions, private masses, and reseruations, they cannot
abide to be tied and yoked to the institution. Indeed we deny not, but christ
might use unleavened bread at his last supper, having immediately before eaten
the paschal lamb. This peradventure is truly coniectured: yet no such thing
is expressed in the gospel, nor prescribed as a rule necessarily to be
followed. The Evangelists teach, he took bread: but make no mention or
distinction what bread he took, nor determine what bread we should take, no
more then limit what wine we shall use, but leave it at liberty to take leauened
bread or unleavened, as occasion of time, place, persons, and other
circumstances serve, so we take bread, as their own Gregor. i, in Registr.
prophets have confessed, (...) their own council. Florent. sess. vlt
counsels have concluded. Wherefore, to consecrate in unleavened bread is not of
the substance of the supper, no more then to eat it at night or after supper,
as christ administered and the apostles first received it. For if any would
bring in a (...) of that time, as well as of that bread which christ used, we
see as fair a warrant for the one as for the other: nay we have a more certain
direction for the time which is expressed, then for the kind of bread which is
not defined. Besides, if Christ on this occasion used unleavened bread: it was,
because it was usual, common, and ordinary bread at that time, as we also
should use that bread, which is usual and common. So the Apostle speaks of
that bread which was daily used among the Gentiles, saying, 1 cor, x, xvi
The bread which we break: he adds, neither leuened nor unleavened, but
understands that in common and continual use. Thus then we conclude, it is
no breach of christ's ordinance, nor a transgression of the first original
institution of the Lords supper, to eat either the one or the other. part.
use. 2


Again, touching the other sign, which is the Wine, the church of Rome may
justly be charged with transgressing the ordinance of christ, who by her sole
authority would type us to mingle water with wine for Rhem. Test. fol. 452 nu.
23
Great mystery and signification, especially, for that water gushed with blood
out of our Lords side. So, they condemn all those Churches as doing impudently
and damnably, that do not mix (...) with wine in the sacrament, and say it
cannot be omitted without (...) sin. True it is, the Church in former times,
where the wine, provided for the Lords Table, was of it self, heady, strong,
hot, fiery, and fuming, was wont to allay it with water, that it might be mild
and temporate: least that which was taken (...) help and further the soul,
should (...) and (...) the body. This began for conueniency, not for (...): for
fitness, not for signification: for sobriety, not for any mystery. But the
water is no part of Christ's institution, neither can it be proved, that Christ
or his Apostles used water with their wine, or commanded others to mingle wine
and water in this mystery, or that Christ's apostles ever received it as a
matter of faith, or taught it to be a necessary part of this sacrament. For
Alexander the 5. Bishop of Rome, was the first that Barthol. Caranza sum.
council. Florent (...). 458
mingled water (...) wine at consecration, and ordained that the oblation
should be of unleavened polid. Virg. de inuentor. rerum lib. 5, cap, 9
bread, and not of leauened, as till that time had been used. Wherefore, let
us retain and maintain the plain and simple institution of Christ, who in
his last Supper gave wine, not water to be drunk, for he calls it the fruit
Math, 26. 29
of the vine, which is wine and not water.

Again, they may be pressed and hampered with their own dreams and devises.
For, whereas they hold that the wine must be mingled with water, and that the
elements after the words of consecration are transubstantiated, and remain in
their own nature no more: I would ask this question of these Watermen, rowing
in the troubled Sea of their own decrees (who are near of kin Papists are
near of kin to the old heretics called (...).
to the old heretics called Aquarij) whether the water mixed with the wine be
turned into blood? If they say it is not, then they deny transubstantiation of
all that is within the cup, and so shake the virtue of their consecration in
pieces: if they say it is, then will they make Christ a watery body and
elementall: besides, it cannot be by virtue os Christ's institution, where
water is neither expresled nor included. So then, their best defense is to
answer with the Pharisees, Matt. 21, 23
We cannot tell. To conclude, let us not seek to be wiser then Christ, nor to
mingle together more mysteries then we have learned of him, as Paul says of
his own practice, 1 cor. xi, 23
That which I received of the Lord, I have delivered unto you. Neither prophet,
nor Apostle, nor Angel from heaven is to teach otherwise then Christ himself
has taught, as he charged his disiples, Teach them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. He has supreme authority in the Church, his
doctrine alone should be heard, as the father himself witnesses from heaven,
Math. 17. 5
This is my beloved son, in whom I have delight, hear him. We are not to
regard, what other before us have thought meet to do, but what Christ did,
who is before all other, and called himself the truth, Cyprian epist. 74
and not custom. Thus much of the third outward part of the Lords Supper, to
wit, the two signs of bread and wine.

Chap. 6. Of the fourth outward part of the Lords Supper.
THe last outward part remains, which are the The 4 outward part are the
communicants.
communicantes: whose actions are outward, to take the bread and wine into
their hands: then to eat the bread and drink the wine to the nourishment of
their bodies, Math. 26, 26
as is directly proved by the institution of this sacrament, where christ gave
the bread and cup into their hands, the Disciples received the one and the
other, they did eat the bread and all drank of the cup. These being the
necessary actions of every receiver, to take, to eat, to drink: it beats
down many falfe doctrines of the Church of Rome, as their reservation,
ostentation, elevation, adoration, circumgestation, procession, and pryuate
communion: it teaches also many necessary truths to direct our knowledge and
increase our obedience, which we will consider in order.

First of all, did Christ command his Disciples to eat and. drink that he
delivered, and posted them not over to eat thereof when they were departed,
neither willed them to defer their eating until afterward: then all keeping
and reserving of bread in boxes, pixes, and other vessels of the church for
days, weeks, and months, all showing it to the people, con, Trid (...) 3,
can, 5
lifting it over the priests head, and going with it in procession, is utterly
unlawful. For, it is no sacrament unless it be used according to Christ's
institution and commandment: but, to the institution it belongs, as one the
behalf of the minister to take, to bless, to pour out, and to distribute: so
on the behalf of the communicants to take, to eat, and to drink, in them al,
to show thereby the Lords death, and to do it in remembrance of him: which
cannot be performed, but by observing the whole action. For, how can they show
the Lords death, or do it in remembrance of christ, unless they take and eat?
And as the paschallambe was not that passover, unless it were killed and
eaten: no more is the bread and wine a sacrament, except they be received and
digested. The passover was the same in effect with the Lords supper, Reu. 13, 8
who was the lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Now god commanded,
that none of it should remain unto the morning, but the remnant Exodus 12, x,
should be consumed with fire. The like may be said of Man, the same in
substance with this sacrament: it was not to be kept and carried about, Let no
man Exodus 16, 19
reserve thereof til morning. Besides, there is the same reason of the cup and
of the bread: but they reserve not the wine, they carry it not about to show
the people: why then should they keep the other part? Likewise, when christ
said to his Apostles, Math. 28, 29
Go baptize the nations: it was no baptism by the hosij consess, de eutharift,
cap. 39
confession of the adversaries themselves, unless there were some person
baptized: so, when christ said Take and eat, there is no sacrament, unless
there be a receiving and eating. For, as the one stands in washing, so does
the other in eating and drinking, not in keeping and reserving, not in carrying
in procession on a white horse, not in hanging it up under a Canopy, nor in
bearing it to the sick with bell and candle. Christ took bread and gave it to
his Disciples, saying, Math. 26, 26 27
Eat ye: he took the cup, and when he had given thanks he said, drink ye all
of this, do this in remembrance of me: as often as ye shall eat this bread 1
cor. xi, 26
and drink of this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. But, they hang
in it the pixe, bear it in boxes, and carry it about in public tryumphes, and
in common calamities, when any judgment and war, plague, pestilence, and
famine, and like visitation is among them: then Jack in the box goes abroad
in solemn Council. Trid sess. 13. cap. 5
processions to be seen, which is the way to increase, not to slack: to
kindle, not to quench: to provoke, not to revoke the judgments of God gone
out against them. Besides, they show this sacrament to the simple people, to
fall down to it as to a God, they put it upon the breasts of the dead, and
sometimes lay it in the grave with them, I think to declare it to all the
world, they wish Christ dead, buried, and forgotten for ever, that the bishop
of Rome might with his shauelings rule and reign as a God upon the earth. Can
light and darkness, can heaven and earth, fire and water, sweet and sower be
more contrary, then these vain things, to the institution of Christ? Who never
said, keep it in vessels, hang it under Canopies, carry it in processions,
origem. in Leuit. homil. 5
give it to the dead, lay it up in their tombs bring it abroad in common
judgments: but take ye, eat ye, drink ye, and by receiving, eating, and
drinking show ye forth the Lords death until he come to judgment to judge
the quick and the dead. This Sacrament is an holy feast, an heavenly banquet,
and therefore not to be hidden in a box, as a light put under a bushel, but to
be set on the lords table for all his ghuests to feed thereon.

Again, if the substance and essence of this sacrament stand Use. 2
in the lawful use of eating and drinking: then al elevation and holding up of
the sacrament over the priests head, all adoration, falling down, honoring it
with divine worship, and calling the sacrament Guil. alan. de sacrific. euchar
cap, 41 bristo. (...). 26
their lord and God, as it is destitute of all antiquity, so it is full of
gross and palpable idolatry. For whereas it was accustomed, to hold up the
alms and offerings consecrated to God for the poor, thereby imitating the
heaue-offering of the Jews, and stirring up the people to the like charity and
devotion, degenerated to the lifting up of the host and bread in the sacrament.
So that, where Christ says take ye, eat ye: these bread-worshippers have
changed it into, look ye, gaze ye, worship ye, giving his glory to dumb and
senseless creatures. True it is, we confess that the Sacraments, as
mysteries sanctified to an holy use, as vessels of gods grace, and as
instruments fitted to work great things, are not to be contemned or refused,
but to be received with due regard and to be used with all sobriety (...) yea
we confess that christ God and man is to be worshipped every where: we honor
his word, we reverence his sacraments. Notwithstanding, The Sacrament is not to
be adored.
we put a difference between God and the sacrament of God, the same honor is
not due to the one that is due to other, and therefore we cannot adore the
elements with divine worship, for many reasons. First, because christ in the
institution of his supper said, take, eat, drink: he said not, worship, fall
down, bow the knees before the Sacra. and call upon it in time of need. We
heard before in the case of unleavened bread, they appealed to the institution
of cstrist: why do they now fly from it, turning eating and drinking into
worshipping and adoring? Wherefore, is it not a great iniquity and wickedness,
to omit what christ commands, and do what he commands not? Secondly, God
only is to be worshipped with divine honor, as Math. 4, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him Math. 4, 10
only thou shall serve. And Exodus 20. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. Now the sacrament is not christ, it is an institution of christ:
it is not god, but an ordinance of God; for god is not visible, but the sacra.
is visible, that al may know it, and see it with their eyes: the sacrament is
eaten, but God cannot be eaten and swallowed up of us, 1 king. 8, 27 Acts. 7,
48, 49
whom the heavens and the heavens of heavens cannot contain or comprehend.
Thirdly, christ reproves the Samaritans, because They worshipped that Ioh 4, 22
they knew not: but the Papists know not the body of Christ to be contained
under the accidents ofbread and Wine, for the scriptures have not taught it,
CHRIST has not delivered it, the Apostles have not showed it. Besides, they
knew not the priests intent, whereon they say the essence of the Sacrament
depends, so as if he had no purpose of consecration, they cannot deny
themselves to be idolaters and breadworshippers. Fourthly, John. 4, 24
the true worshippers must worship God in spirit and in truth, as Christ
sets down, Ioh. 4, 24, that is, not according to our own imaginations and
diuises, but as God has prescribed: but, to fall down to the sacrament, is a
bodily sernice, a new-forged worship, and an humane invention. Fistly, without
faith no man can please God: but says comes by hearing, Heb: xi, 6
and hearing by the word of God, which yet they could never show unto us:
therefore, they can have no assurance of pleasing God in their will worship.
Sixthly, if this sacrament be to be worshipped, then it is united personally to
Christ, because adoration should not be due to Christ as man, except God and
man in the union of person were one Christ: but there is no personal union
between (...) and the sacrament of Christ: therefore not to be worshipped.
Seventhly, no man in his wits and right mind will honor that with divine
worship, which himself may take in his hand, and eat with his mouth, and
which may be deuouied by Mise, Rattes, dogs, Worms, or other venime: for how
shall that be adored as God, that cannot defend it self from the teeth of men
and beasts? As Ioash answered, Iud 6, 31, 32
Will ye plead Baals cause? If he be God, let him plead for himself against
him that has cast down his altar. Lastly, seeing they adore Christ in the
pixe, where the bread is; and in the chalyce where the wine is, why do they not
likewise worship him in the priest and in the faithful people, and every man
in his brother, when they have created and eaten him up? The same Christ that
was surely enclosed in the pixe, is by their doctrine, really contained in the
body of priest and people, when they have eaten and drunken their supposed
sacrifice: Why then adore they not the flesh of christ, after that it is entered
into the mouth of man, as well as in the golden box, or in the gilden chalice?
Nay, why may he not be adored in the bodies of mise and vermin by them, if it
fall out that they eat up their God? Shall he be any where without honor? Or
will they worship him where they list, and ouerskip him where they please?
Howsoever therefore Christ is to be worshipped, yet we must take heed we
worship not a piece of bread in stead of christ, which is most gross and (...)
Idolatry. Moreover, if christ command the bread to be eaten and the wine to be
drunk then they are not to be Use. 3
offered up to God the father, as is usually wont to be done in the pageant of
the Mass. This is a deep dungeo^ of iniquity, and a monster of many heads,
Conc. triden sess. 22, c 1
turning the holy sacrament into an unbloody sacrifice for the quick and the
dead, abolishing the fruit and remembrance of the death of christ, disanulling
his priesthood, giving him to his father, whereas the father has given him to
us, and imagining thereby to pay a price to god, which he should receive as a
fatisfaction for our sins. True it is, the Lords supper may after a sort be
called a sacrifice, not as the church of Rome means, In what sense christ's
supper, may be called a Sacrifice.
but because therein we offer up praises and thanks giuings to god, for that
sacrifice of atonement once made upon the cross, which is most acceptable to
god: and because such as come aright thereunto, offer up themselves wholly to
god, a reasonable, holy, and living sacrifice: and lastly, because thereby we
call to our remembrance (...) bloody sacrifice of christ withal (...)
circumstances thereof, the shame of the cross, the darkness of the heaven, the
shaking of the earth, the renting of the air, the cleaving of the rocks, the
reproaches of the Jews, the taunts of the soldiers, the opening of the graves,
and the conquering of the devil. For the christians in former times, The
fathers of the church living among the gentiles, called the supper a sacrifice
perceiving that many both Jews and gentiles, refused to embrace the faith of
christ, and to join themselves to the church, because they pretend the want of
sacrifices among them, (and nature engrafted in all nations this principle,
that we have no free access to God, no true peace to our selus, without a
sacrifice) the fathers to win such as were without, affirmed that the church
had also a sacrifice and thereupon entitled the sacrament of the supper with
the name of a sacrifice, See more in the end of the book.
for the causes before remembered. But for a mortal man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, to presume in the pride of his heart, under the forms of bread and
wine to offer up christ the son of God in the sacrifice to his father, and to
dare to desire the father favorably to behold and accept his own son, is
idolatry, blasphemy, and horrible impiety, to be detested of all true hearted
Christians.

Touching the original of The original of the word Mass.
the word Mass, it seems to come from an ancient custom of the church,
sending away such as communicated not. For the deacon was accustomed to bid
them depart, that were nouices in the faith, and such as by Church Discipline
polid. Virgil de invent. rerum lib. 5. cap 10
were removed from the communion. This dimission of them was noted by the word
Missa, signifieng a sending away and licensing to depart: and thus some of
sueton. in caling. cap. 25
the heathen used it. The name then being in it self not evil, is turned into
an evil practice, and therefore as it is used and understood of our
adversaries, we reject both the name and thing it self, for these causes.
First, no angel, no man, no creature is of that dignity and worthiness, that
he may offer up and sacrifice the son of God: for the priest is above the
sacrifice: they therefore that will be the priests to offer christ, advance and
lift up themselves above christ. Secondly, if christ be really offered in the
Mass, then he is killed truly and indeed: for a real sacrifice proves a
real death, and when christ was sacrificed really, he dyed really, as when the
beasts were sacrificed, they were killed. And Holcot one of the schoolmen
says, If there had been a thousand hosts in a thousand places, at the same
time that Christ did hang upon the cross, Holcot in 4 lib. sent. (...). 3
christ had been crucified in a thousand places. Wherefore, they that really
sacrificed our Savior Christ, did in that act really and wickedly kill him: so
that the priest s of Baal, if they will be sacrificers of Christ, must
acknowledge themselves therein the real murderers of Christ.

Thirdly, new sacrifices are not to be instituted by men, without
commandment of god, as Moses teaches. Deuteronomy. 12. we must not do h what
seems good in our own eyes, but take heed and hear all these words which
he commands us. Now, Christ never said, Sacrifice ye my body and blood to
God. Fourthly, Christ took the bread and gave it to his disciples, he did not
offer it up to God the father, he took the cup and bad them all drink of it:
he did not turn himfelfe to God, and desire him then to accept the sacrifice
of his body and blood. Fifthly, if the bread and Wine remain in their former
substance in the Lords supper: then bread and wine only are offered, not the
body and blood of Christ, but they remain: for christ delivered 1 cor. x, 16
bread to his Disciples, and Paul teaches that it is the bread which is
broken, and that as ofren asthe (...) eat this bread and drink of this cup,
they show the Lords death: therefore their real Sacrifice is real idolatry.
Sixthly, it appears in the institution of the Supper, that Christ consecrated
the Bread apart, and the wine (...), and afterward delivered them both apart,
but the body of Christ was never sacrificed without the blood, nor the blood
without the flesh: for Christ offered upon the Altar of the cross the
sacrifice of his body and blood together, this is the cause that he said,
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, not take ye to offer and to Sacrifice.

Seventhly, the Scripture teaches us one offering and Sacrifice for sin once
performed and offered. Heb. 10. We are sanctified by the offering of Jesus
Christ k once made: and ver. Heb. x, x, 12
12. This man after he had offered one saerifice for sins, sits at the
right hnnd of God, And the Apostle 1 Timothy 2. There is one mediator between God
and man, the man Jesus Christ, who gave himself a ransom for all men. So 1
John 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Likewise Heb, 9. By his
own blood he entered in once unto the holy place, and obtained eternal
redemption for us: not that he should offer himself l often, as the high
Hebru. 9, 12
Priest entered into the holy place every year, with other blood (for then
must he have often suffered since the foundation of the world) but now in the
end of the world has he been made manifest once to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. We have plentiful testimonies of this truth in this
Epistle, as chap. x. Where remission of these things is, there is no Heb. x, 18
more offering for sin. If then we have remission by the sacrifice of Christ,
all other sacrifices are superfluous and abrogat his all-sufficient sacrifice.
So Rom, 6. In that he died, he died for sin Romans 6, 10
once. And 1. Pet. 3. Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for
the vninst. If then this perfect offering were once only to be offered, then
he is not offered, neither can be offered again in the Mass. And, if the
only oblation of Christ once offered by himself be sufficient: all other
oblations and Sacrifices are vain and superfluous. For how is that perfect,
which is often repeated?

Eighthly, to make a lawful sacrifice, there is required necessarily a fit
minister lawfully called of God, for Hebr. 5, 4, 5
no man takes his honor to himself but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron: so likewise Christ took not to himself this honor to be made the
high priest, but he that said to him, Thou art my son, this day I begat
thee, gave it him. But Christ is the only priest of the new testament, his
priesthood is immortal and eternal, he lives for ever therefore the Popish
priesthood is a plant never planted by the heavenly father the Ioh. 15. 1, 2
true husbandman, and the popish priests were never called of God, to sacrifice
the body and blood of Christ, he gave unto them no such authority, Math 15, 13
and therefore, in time shall be rooted up. If they pretend the precept and
planting of God, let them show their commission that we may see it, and let
them bring forth their charter that we may try it, otherwise we must take
them for usurpers, and counterfeit Officers in the city of God. Ninthlie, the
Apostle teaches, that without shedding of blood is no Heb. 9, 22
remission: But in the vnblodie Sacrifice of the Mass, there is not effusion
of blood, he does not suffer, he is not killed, he does not shed his blood, he
does not die: therefore in the Mass is no remission of any sins.

Tenthly, if Christ be daily offered in the Mass, then he does daily
satisfy for sin, for the end of his offering is Roma. 4, 25
to make satisfaction, as Romans, 4. 25. He was delivered to death for our
sins, and is risen again for our instification. And Gal, 1, 4. He gave
himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this present evil world;
But he does not make satisfaction, for our sins, no more then now he dies
and rises again, for then Christ would not have said, John 19. 30
It is finished: nor the Apostle, u He entered once into the holy place.
Wherefore, no more sacrifice for sin remains to be offered by such as
injuriously usurp the priesthood of christ.

Last of all, all true christians are Priests to offer up their bodies an
acceptable sacrifice to God, which is their reasonable service of God, and to
offer up a broken contrite spirit, as 1 Pet, 3, 9. Ye are a chosen generation,
1 (...). 2, 9
a royal priesthood and an holy nation. And Revel, 1. He has loved us and
washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings and priests unto God
his father. These are the Priests that now remain, this is the priesthood
which we profess. Whosoever makes himself any priest of another order in the
new testament, abrogateth and abolisheth the Priesthood of christ, being after
the order Hebr, 6. 20. Psalm. 110, 4
of Melchizedech, who was both king and priest.

Now then, as they commit sacrilege against Christ, that presume to offer him
up an unbloody sacrifice to God the father, to make peace and atonement
between God and man: so they add another iniquity as drunkenness to thirst,
making their oblation not only profitable to take away the sins of the
living, but available to cleanse The Mass is no propitiatory sacrifice for the
dead.
the sins of the dead, that are come to the end of their days.

Indeed we deny not, but the Mass may be beneficial to the rabble of Friars
and sacrificing Priests that make it gainefull to themselves, who through
their sale and merchandise of Masses, dwell stately, go sumptuously, fare
delicately, drink wine in silver and gold, abound in pleasures, and heap up
great abundance of all riches: shall we not now say, the Mass is profitable?
But other profit of the Masses, then these to the Masse-mungers, we know none.
We know, we find, we feelethem otherwise many ways pernicious in themselves,
dishonorable to God, and hurtful to the people. For first the Sacrament was
instituted to no such end and purpose, as to help the dead, and to be a
propitiation for their sins. For Christ said take and eat, this is my body:
drink ye, this is my blood: but the dead cannot take any thing offered unto
them: they can neither eat, nor drink: wherefore, this supper being
spiritual meat and nourishment for the soul, cannot avail the dead, who are
neither fed nor nourished. Secondly, it profits as much to be baptized for
the dead, as to receive the Supper of the Lord for the dead: for both
Sacraments were instituted of Christ, and there is the same respect of both.
But it can do no good to baptize one for another, the living for the dead,
therefore the living, coming to receive the Sacrament of the Supper, cannot
relieve the dead.

Thirdly, there is no forgiveness of sins after this life, we have
forgiveness in this life or never. Whatsoever is bound on earth, is bound in
heaven. Here is the time, here is the place, here is the occasion offered to
work, as the wiseman teaches, Ec, 9, All that thine hand shall find to do, do
it with all thy power: for there is Eccle. 9. 10
neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go. And Heb, 3. To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Wherefore then is a sacrifice offered for the dead, for whom there is no
relief, no redress, no remission? Fourthly, it is vain to offer for those
that have ended their days, and are already come to the end of their race,
John, 9. 4 and 11, 9. 10
whose estate can never be changed.

The night comes, when no man can work, and Chapt, 11, Are there not twelve
hours in the day? if a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he
sees the light of this world. If a man walk in the night, he stumbleth,
because there is no light in him. And Paul, 2 Timothy, 4. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my race, I have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid
up for (...) the crown of righteousness. But this is the state of all the dead,
they are entered into judgment, they are not subject to any chang. Lastly, if
the sacrifice of the Mass could wash away the sins of the dead, then the
sacrifice of the Mass should surmount and exceed the sacrifice offered by
christ himself upon the Cross. For this helps the living, it avails not
the dead: and so we should have other means to take away sin then his
oblation and there should be another propitiation for the sins of the world.
And thus much of the popish idol of the blasphemous mass.

Furthermore, did Christ deliver his last Supper to all his Disciples that were
present? Did none stand by, and gaze Use. 4
on while other received? Then hereby fall to the ground the private
communions of the popish Church, where al Against private mastes in the church
of Rome.
is devoured by the priest, nothing delivered to the people. For whereas the
ordinance of Christ and ancient order of the church was, for the minister and
people to receive the Conc. Trid. ses. 22. cap. 6
Sacrament together: among them the priest accompanied with his boy to make
answer, receives the sacrament himself alone, without distribution made to
others, yea although the whole congregation be present and look upon him,
whereby God is dishonored, the communion is abolished, the people of God are
there by depryued and robbed of al comfort. How is this a feast which the
priest prepares for himself, not for others: receives by himself, not with
his brethren: he speaks to himself, and not to the assembly: he uses a
strange tongue, and no man knows what he means: the people is taught
nothing, they understand nothing, they hear nothing, they receive nothing; and
a few childish, apish, foolish, and unseemly gestures excepted, they see
nothing: they taste nothing, they partake nothing, neither comfort of heart, nor
memory of Christ, nor benefit of his passion. But Christ in his last Supper,
did not eat up all alone, but after the Disciples had supped as Matthew Math.
26, 26
sets it down, he took bread and blessed he brake and gave it to them,
saying, take ye, eat ye: neither did he drink alone of the fruit of the
vine, but taking the cup he gave thanks, and gave to them all, saying, Drink ye
all of this. So then, albeit a certain number of communicants are not limited
and determined: yet Christ in these words apoin(...)eth a company to be
present, as apeareth by the number take ye, eat ye, drink ye all, divide ye
it among your selves, do ye this in my remembrance, ye set forth the Lords
death, when ye come together to eat, tarry ye one for another, as often as ye
shall eat this bread.

These words cannot be understood of one particular man, but necessarily import
a greater number of men: nay, the Philosopher teaches that the word ( all)
must be verified at the least Arist. li. 1. de coel. cap. 1
of the number of three, which is the least and lowest number that would be
admitted to this supper. Neither do we read that so soon as one was gained to
the faith, that the Apostles administered this Sacrament to him, much less
would they minister to themselves alone, when none were converted in a nation
or city.

Secondly, Christ expressly commands us to do as himself did, when he left
this farewell token and pledge of his (...) to his Disciples, saying, Luke 22,
19
Do this in remembrance of me. But he, after the words of consecration, did
not offer a sacrifice to his father under shows of bread and wine, but gave
the bread and cup to his Disciples, and left his own example as a direction
for us to follow: so that the distribution and deliverance of the signs is of
the substance of the Sacrament, as well as the breaking of the bread or pouring
out of the wine, and it is not lawful in any sort to change the testament of
Christ, or to corrupt the meaning of the testator. Thirdly, the Apostle
teaches how he received from the Lord that which he delivered to the
churches, that the people should eat of this bread and drink of this cup: 1
cor. xi, 23
and proves that the faithful are made partakers of the Lords table, not by
gazing or looking on while others eat, but by eating: not by standing still
while others drink, but by drinking. as 1 Cor. x. We that are l many are one
bread and one body, because we are all partakers of one bread. Fourthly, the
same Apostle reprooueth the Corinthians, which presumed to the Supper of the
Lord besore others, and did not tarry for their brethren when they came
together to be partakers of the sacrament, as we see, 1 Cor, 11. Every man a
hen they should eat, 1 cor. xi. 20, xxi
takes his own supper before, this is not to eat the Lords snpper. And
afterward, Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. Now because the Corinthians brake this order and ordinance, he
charge them to come irreverently, to receive unworthily, to eat and drink
judgment unto themselves. Shall they then that are faithful christians,
patiently bear the injury done them by these sacrificing Masse-mungers, who
never bid the Lords ghuestes, nor call them to his table, nor tarry for them
till they come to this heavenly banquet, but like the priests of Bell, do eat
and drink up all themselves.

Fistly, the same Apostle wills and warns all persons which come to this
communion, diligently to prove and examine 1, cor. 11, 28
themselves, and then to come to this supper, as we see, 1 cor. 12. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this cup: so
that he would not have any excluded from receiving, which have tried their
hearts by examining, and are thereby rightly propared to this great work.
Lastly, the names given to this Sacrament, noting the nature thereof, do
afford us a good consideration to strike through the heart of this private
Mass, being called sometimes the supper of the Lord, and sometimes a communion
among our selves. If it be an holy supper and spiritual banquet, why are none
bidden and called thereunto? If it be a communion, why does the Priest
uncharitably swallow all alone? whereby they make it a communion, but without
company: a supper, but without ghuests: meat, but without eating: drink, but
without drinking: a table, but without sitting down: a participation, but
without any that are partakers: a banquet, but without seeding thereat, the
people departing as hungery and thirsty as they came. Wherefore, as no man
celebrated the Passover aright, or received profit thereby, but such as did
eat the flesh thereof: so can none come to the supper of the Lord as he ought,
though he look upon others, except he eat of the bread and drink of the cup,
according to the commandment of Christ, the author thereof. And thus much of
the sole communions and private Masses brought into the church against the
example of Christ against the use of the Apostles, and against the name and
nature of the sacrament it self.

Hitherto we have pulled down the Heresies of the Church of Rome, and have
raked in the dirt and dungh ill use, 5
of their devises, the savor whereof has annoyed heaven and earth: now let us
observe out of this last outward part of the sacrament, how we are directed and
instructed thereby to further our knowledge and obedience. Did Christ command
the faithful of his family to eat and drink that which he delivers without
laying any further burden or bondage upon them? then we must understand, It is
no precept of Christ to receive the Lords supper fasting.
it is no precept of Christ to receive the Lords supper fasting before any
other meats and drinks.

True it is, the people, whose zeal goes beyond their knowledge, make a great
scruple of conscience in this point to come fasting August. epist. 118.
which custom we do not condemn, but commend, so it be without superstition in
themselves, and judging of others. But howsoever many make as great a matter to
communicate fasting, as to come in faith: yet this is no necessary rule or
commandment binding the conscience to the observation thereof. For, the Word
of God and institution of the sacrament are perfect directions to the church,
teaching all matters of faith and obedience, yet they teach no such practice.
And our blessed savior teaches his disciples what they should do, the
Evangelists deliver what they did, and among all their doctrine we find not
this precept of fasting. Again, Christ administered it not fasting, the
Apostles received it not fasting: not that we are bound to celebrate the
supper at that time: but to show that Christ would never have chosen to do it
after Supper, if that time had bin simply unlawful.

Besides, the Apostle 1 cor. 11. reproouing the abuses crept into this
Sacrament, and laboring to reduce it to the first institution, exhorts the
Corinthians to tarry one for another, and if any be hungry 1 Cor. xi, 36
that he cannot tarry, he must before hand (...) at home, that so he may
better wait for the rest of the congregation. Now he would never have given
counsel and commandment, if it had bin unlawful or ungodly to take some
little repast and short refreshing before, in regard of the present infirmity
and weakness of the body. Lastly, he teaches in another place, That the
kingdom of heaven is not Romans 14. 17
meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy ghost. To
conclude, as he wills that he which eats, despise not him that eats not,
and he which eats not condemn not him that eats: Romans 14, 3, 5 19
so must it be in this indifferent practice, he that can take it, let him take
it: but let not him that receives fasting, judge him that fasteth not: and let
not him which fasteth not, condemn him that receives fasting, he stands or
falls to his own master. Who art thou then that iudgest an other man's
servant? Let every one be persuaded in his own mind, and look to the warrant
of his own work. Let us follow those things which concern peace, and where
with one may edisie another. If any list to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the (...) of God. And thus much of the communicants of this
sacrament, and likewise of the rest of the outward parts of the Lords supper.

Chap. 7 Of the words of (...) in the sacrament of the Lords supper.
ALthough we have spoken before sufficiently of consecration, Book. 1. ca. 8
what it is, and how it is wrought, to satisfy all such as are sober minded
and simple Lovers of the truth: yet be cause special points are here to be
observed, and that the adversaries turn the true consecration into a taine
magical incantation, to work a miraculous or rather a monstrous
transubstantiation: it shall not be amiss to assure and handle this point
again, that thereby the truth of God may be cleared, the ignorant instructed,
the aduersaties satisfied, and consequently their mouths stopped. Consecration
is consecration, what.
a change or converting of the outward elements into another use, by observing
the whole institution of Christ, which gives it his effect. We confess a
turning and changing, not of one substance into another, not by abolishing of
natures, not by close pronouncing of certain words: but in the use and in
respect of us, The use of the elements is changed: the substance is not changed.
and in regard of the promise of God. (...) he water which flows out of the
rock in the wilderness, signified the same to the fathers, which the Wine
(...) to us in the supper. Notwithstanding, it was a common watering to the
beasts of the field, and to the people of God, the cattle drank thereof as
well as the people, and therefore there could be made no change there in but in
respect of men, Number. 20, (...)
to whom God gave his gracious promise; which teaches us to account of the
outward signs otherwise then of common meats and common drinks. The stones
hammered in the quarrey, the timber hewed in the forest, the gold tried in the
furnace, were common stuff, before they were laid in the building of the
Temple, Matt. 23, 16
and so made holy and sanctified to God and man. The sayings and sentences Act.
17, 28
of the heathenish poets were profane, before they had passed through the pen
of God, and were taken up by the holy ghost. So we teach of the bread and
wine, before the institution of christ is used and observed, they are common:
but afterward they are holy. We confess and (...) not, but say plainly, there
is a change in the sacraments: the elements which before were ordinary meats,
now become spiritual in respect of the use: before they served only to feed
the belly, now they serve to seal up the nourishment of our souls.

The discussing of this question, Two mea^s of consecration, to wit the word
and prayer.
together with the foundation of this consecration and sanctification of the
creatures, is taken out of 1 Timothy 4. 4. Every creature of God is good, and
nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanks giving: for it is
sanctified 1 Timothy 4, 4, 5
by the word of God and prayer. These are the two means, the word and prayer,
whereby the elements are changed, though not transubstantiated, yet they have
a dignity and pre-eminence, which they had not before, they are no Just in. in
Apol. 2
more common bread, common Wine, common meat, but a Sacrament of Christ's
body, a warrant of Gods promises, an holy Mystery, and seal of the covenant
between God and us. The first means of this consecration, and setting a part
of the creatures to our use, is by the word of God. If we have the evident and
express word to warrant our use of the creatures of God, we may use them for
our necessity and comfort: if we have no word to bear out the practice, they
are not sanctified unto us. The tree of knowledge of good and evil, was not
sanctified unto. Adam, though it were good in it self (as all Gene. 1, 31
creatures are) because he had a word of commandment not to eat of it,
Genes. 2, 17
Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for
in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death. After the fall
and after the flood, all creatures were not sanctified, some were accounted
Gene, 7, 2
unclean, all might not be eaten, all might not be offered: as under the law,
Leuit. 11. 3
among the beasts, only they were clean that did chew the cud and divide the
hoof: and among the fishes of the Sea, only such as had skales and finnes
were called clean, the rest were unclean unto them, because the word did not
allow but restrain the use of them.

So likewise for this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not every creature is
sanctified, not a (...), not any flesh, not any fish, not oil: but only bread
and Wine. These two are consecrated, all the rest are cancelled by the word.
The second means, whereby the creatures are sanctified, is by prayer. For
albeit that God by the coming of his son into the world has sanctified all
meats and drinks, that nothing of it self is unclean, Romans 14, 15
but to him that counts it unclean: yet something must necessarily be done
on our parts, otherwise that which is holy, we may profane: and that which is
good, we may turn into evil: and therefore the apostle adds prayer, which
is both a thanksgiving to the Lord that he has sanctified and prepared them
for us, and likewise a petition that they may be healthful for us, and we
thankful for them, whereby our food, our apparel, and all the succors of
this life are sanctified to his glory and our comfort.

These be the two means of consecration: if these or any of them be wanting,
there can be no true consecration. If then in the time of the law they should
have eaten swines flesh, which indeed Leuit. xi, 7
part the (...), but chew not the cud: they should have sinned, because it was
not sanctified: and therefore albeit they had prayed for a blessing all the day
long, and given thanks never so much, yet could it not make their practice
lawful, which the word of God had made unlawful.

Or, if they had offered a clean and holy sacrifice, and not made humble and
earnest prayers to God to accept them and their oblations, it could not have
due effect, but the word of God had been hindered by their unworthiness. So,
in the administration of the Lords sacred Supper, we use the word of God which
warranteth us to take the bread and Wine, out of this word we allege the
promises of God to the true believer: and hereunto we join prayers and
thanksgiving, that God would (...) us and (...) us in the participation of his
own ordinance. Thus, albeit we have no forged transubstantiation, we have a
true consecration: if the word of God and prayer of the church can work it,
which are the means left unto us for this purpose: if we be Ierem. 20, 7
any way deceived, it is the Scripture which has deceived us.

It remains now, to mark the uses of this point for our use. 1
farther instruction. If by using the whole (...) of Christ according to his
commandment, we confess a change and conversion wrought in the use of the
signs: then we are falsely charged and slandered, to have no consecration. We
pronounce the same words of consecration that christ pronounced: we observe
the same things that christ observed, and charged us to do: we show forth
plainly the death of Christ as it Gal. 3. 1
he were described in our sight and among us crucified: we speak openly in a
known tongue and the people understand us: we pray unto God to accept us, and
render him thanks for the work of our redemption: lastly, we take the outward
elements and join the word unto them, and thus they are made to us a
sacrament.

Nay, if to offer up to God, our selves, our souls, our bodies, our alms for
the poor, our prayers and thanksgiuinges unto God the father for our
redemption, be an oblatiou and a sacrifice: We have both a Sacrament and a
sacrifice in our Churches, though we offer not up Christ's body, to be a
propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead, unto his father. We offer up as
much as we offer up as much as christ coman ded us
Christ commanded us to offer: but that sacrifice was once offered up upon the
Cross: he wasthe priest, he was the altar, he was the sacrifice, there is no
other sacrifice left to be offered for sin: and he which presumes to offer
him again, is an enemy to the Cross of Christ, treads the son of God
under his foot, counts the blood of the new Testament unholy, and has
renounced salvation by Jesus Christ.

Now if we, cleaning precisely to the institution of Christ, do not
consecrate: what may be thought of the Popish priests, who whisper their
words closely, that no man hears: use a strange tongue, that no man
understands: bring in pryuate Masses, whereat none communicate: deliver dry
Communions, wherein no man drinks: exhort no man, speak to no man: and if
they do consecrate, they consecrate only for themselves, and not for others.
Wherefore we detest the opprobrious and blasphemous speeches of the profane
pistes, who in 2 Samuel, (...), (...) 2 King. 1839 (...)
the spirit of Shemei and of Kahshaketh, rail falsely, vilely, and
slanderously against our communions, affirming that they are no other then
common bread and wine, without grace, without virtue, without sanctification,
bare signs of Christ absent, no better then our common breakfasts, dinners and
suppers. Thus they speak basely, proudly, and scornefully of our communions,
but all the world knows they speak untruly. We hold an effectual
consecration in both the sacraments, though we deny a real conversion into
the body and blood of Christ: the water in baptism is no more common water,
Gal. 3, 2 (...)
it is not void of a spiritual effect, it is not without grace and
sanctification. So the bread and wine are changed, not from one substance into
another, but from one use to another; not in themselves, but to us: not in
their own nature, but in their end; and thus they are not the same they were
before.

Again, are these signs sanctified and consecrated, that are delivered and
received: then hereby we learn, what use.
is to be thought of the remnants and leauings remaining after the Lords
Supper. For who sees not hereby, that the bread and wine of the holy use and
lawful participation appointed, are not a Sacrament? They differ nothing from
common bread and wine sold in other places, and taken in our houses. Therefore,
Hosich. in leuit. lib. 2, c. 8
among diverse, the remainder was accustomably used to be burned; Euagri, lib.
4 cap. 8 Niceph. lib. 17, cap 25
among some it was given to little children that were in the schools; among
others, they did eat in the hieron. com. in, 1, Cor. XI
common assembly at their feasts of love: so that out of the sacred use of the
Sacrament they did eat it as common bread, they did drink it as common wine.
We see in baptism, the water remaining and not used, is no part of the
Sacrament, but may be applied to common uses. So it is in the Lords Supper (for
the Sacraments of the new testament are alike and of the same worthiness) no
more is consecrated then is received and applied. This also is evident by Numb
20, (...) 1 cor, X. 4
the rock in the wilderness: where the waters flowing from thence, represented
the blood of Christ to the Isralites that drank thereof, not to the beasts
and cattle that were (...) by it. So much was consecrated water as they
received, not all the rest. So when John Matthew. 3. 6
baptized in Jordan, not all the Rvuer, but all that which was applied was
sanctified. So when he baptized in John 3, 23
Enon, because there was much water (...), not the whole stream was hallowed,
but so much as he used. Wherefore, whatsoever remains after the celebration
of the sacraments, may be (...) lawful y to common and ordinary uses.

Moreover, if the sanctification of every creature, whether Use. 3
in the sacraments or out of the sacraments, be by the word and prayer, as
appears by the Apostle: it teaches a profitable instruction, namely, that no
creature of God is to be received, no gift to be used, no blessing to be
enjoyed, tending to the health of the body, or comfort of the soul without
this duty of prayer and thanksgiving to the Lord. Indeed every creature of
God in it seife is good, and every gift is holy: yet if we partake them without
praising the name of the giver and creator, to us they become unholy, unclean,
and vnpure. Now, if this be needful in using the common creatures and guiftes
of God: much more is it necessary in receiving these pledges and (...) of
feeding our souls to eternal life. Behold here, the cause that moved Christ
when he had taken the bread, to give thanks to his father: wherein he shows
what belongs to the duty of the minister and of the communicantes, to wit,
that we ought to lift up our hearts to God, to praise him fo giving his only
begotten Son to be our redeemer, and humbly to pray unto him that our
unworthiness hinder not the effectual working of his Sacrametnes, but that
through his goodness and mercy they may have their full force in our hearts,
for the pardoning of our sins, for the increase of his graces, for the
confirming of our faith, for the quickening of our obedience, and for the
preserving of body and soul to eternal life. Thus we bless God when we
praise him, and give him the honor due unto his name, We bless the meats we
eat, the drinks we drink, the things we receive, as Paul says, 1 cori.
x, 16
The cup of blessing which we bless: How the signs in the Sacrament are
blessed
when prayer is made to God, that they may be healthful to us, and we
thankful for them.

Lastly, if in the Sacrament there be a consecration and separation of the
outward elements to so holy an Use. 4
end: it warns us to be careful to use and receive We ought often to receive
the lords supper.
oftentimes this Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For here are not bare signs,
bare tokens, bare figures without fiuite and without grace: they are
consecrated signs, and hallowed elements, effectually sealing up remission
of sins. And what is more plain then that which the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor.
11. As 1 cor. xi, 25
often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come. Thus the Lord Jesus speaks, Do this, as often as ye
shall drinks it in remembrance of me. And have we not many worthy and
effectual Reasons redred to move us to frequet the Lo. table
considerations, to move such as profess the same doctrine, to resort
oftentimes to the same Table of the Lord? It is the commandment of Christ,
so that we ought to make some conscience of this duty, as of other
commandments prescribed unto us. It is a commandment of God Exo. 20, 13
Thou shall not steal. Few, but to make some conscience thereof, because it is
Gods commandment. So is this here, often to come to the Lords Table: yet
what little account is made hereof all the year long, every one sees, and
the faithful soul agreeueth. The high God possessor Gene. 14, 12
of heaven and earth has required and commanded it: yet who regards? The
Lord has spoken, and yet who obeys? If a father should command a duty of
his son, or a master of his servant, he could not patiently endure to be
disobeyed: Mal. 1, 6
and shall we not think that God will require his laws at our hands? Again,
to his commandment he has annexed a promise, which makes our sin and
unthankfulness the greater, if we show not our selves ready in yielding to this
duty. Besides, seeing this sacra, is a special prop to stay up our faith, and
geth with it Christ and all his merits and heavenly treasurs: we are utter
enemies to our own selves, to our own souls, and to our own salvation, if we
neglect ^o great mercy offe^e^ unto us. Wherefore, it is not left free unto us,
and committed to our discretion to receive or not receive this were no lawful
liberty, but unlawful lycentiousnesse. Here in the faithful find very great
comfort, and an effectual means to strengthen their faith. Even as the sick
man that feels his sickness, and knows his own weakness, should have a
special care to look to his stomach, that thereby he may receive norishment
and gather strength: so we are all spiritually diseased, assaulted of Satan,
tempted of the flesh, overcome after^imes of sin, and must seek strength of
says from this heavenly nourishment. God of his compassion has set up his
Sacrament, as a sign upon an high hill, whence it may be seen far and near
on every side, to raise up such as are fallen, to strengthen such as stand, to
comfort such as are weak, and to call unto him such as run away from him,
whereby he gathers them under his wings. It is as the brazen Sepent, Number.
21. 9
that coming unto it with a faith to be healed, we might live and not perish.
It is a banner displayed, that every Ch^^stian souldi^r should resort unto it
as unto his own comfortable Supper, to be had in often use and continual
remembrance, to put us in mind of his continual mercy laid up for us in the
blood of Christ, and to ratify and seal up the same far more lively, then
the ba^e word only. When the words of Christ's institution are spoken, Math,
26. 26 28.
This is my body which is broken for you: this is my blood which was shed for
you: When these words I say, are read unto us our of the scriptures, they
confirm our faith: but much more when the Sacrament is seen with our eyes,
that we behold the bred broken, and look upon the wine poured out: but most of
all when we taste and handle, when we eat and drink the outward signs. We
see, when one makes a bare promise to another, with words only between
themselves, he begins to doubt (to whom the promise is made) of the
performance thereof: if he add an oath for confirmation, the promise is more
assuredly ratified: but if he give his hand writing, and seal it to the
party, the matter is made out of doubt. Thus we do reason and help our faith.
We have the promises of God, we have the oath of God, we have the words and
writings of God, we have the seals and Sacraments of God, these are not
reserved in the Lords keeping, but are put into our own hands to see them, to
keep them, to use them for our comfort and assurance. I speak after the
manner of men, if we have a free promise from an honest man, penned fairly in
writing, ratified under his own hand and seal, and all given unto us to lock
and lay up, we doubt not of the possession.

Now, let us consider the Lords doing, and see what he has done for us: who
is not as man, that Number, 23. 19
he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should deceive. God sent his
son Gai. 4, 4
into the world to take our nature upon him, to be like us, Heb 4. 15
even in his infirmities, he named himself Math 1, 21
Jesus, that is, a Savior, because he should save his people from their
sins: after his death he sent his Apostles to preach the glad tidings of
remission of sins and everlasting salvation: he ordained his last supper
immediately before his death to testify and assure them unto us, not only by
sounding them in our ears, but by beholding, tasting, smelling, feeling, and
feeding to seal them in our hearts, and also daily to be repeated and
ministered unto us. Seeing then, we have both his promises and oath, his word
and writings, his seals and Sacraments in our keeping, what would we have
more? He would not make half so much adoin assuring his promises, if he loved
us not: he would not set such authentike seals to his deed and obligations,
unless he meant good earnest. His bare word and naked promise is very good
payment: but he respects our weakness, whose merciful kindness must not be
neglected through our unthankfulness. Thus much of consecration, and the uses
thereof.

Chap. 8. Of the first inward part of the Lords supper.
HItherto we have spoken of the outward parts of this Sacrament, by doing
whereof confirmation is performed: What are the inward parts of the Lo. Supper
now follow the inward parts to be considered. For in Sa. we must consider not
what they be of themselves, but what august. cont. maximin. li. 3.
they signify unto us, These inward parts are four in number, to wit, the
father, the spirit, the body and blood of christ, and the faithful. All these
have a Sacramental relation to the outward parts, and declare the inward
truth of them. The actions of the minister, are notes of the actions of God the
father: the word of institution is made effectual by the holy spirit: the
bread and wine are signs and seals, representing the body and blood of
Christ: the outward actions of every receiver, do note out the inward actions
and spiritual works of the faithful. Thus then the agreement answeareth
aptly, and the proportion falls fully between the parts, The agreement
between the outward and inward parts
As the Minister by the words of institution, offers unto the communicants
the bread and wine to feed thereupon corporally and bodily: so GOD the Father,
by the Spirit offers and gives the body and blood of CHRIST, to the
faithful receivers to feed upon them spiritually.

Now then, let us remember the sencible and external actions of the Minister,
that thereby we may consider the spiritual and inward actions of God the
Father. And first of all, the taking of the bread and wine into his hands, and
the consecrating or blessing of them by reapeating the promise, by (...), and
thanksgiuings, does seal up these holy actions of God the father, by which he
from all eternity even before the foundation of the world, did separate, elect,
ordain, choose, and call his son to perform the osfice of a mediator between
god and man: and when the fulness of time came did send him into the world, to
perform that Osfice, whereunto he was appointed. This we see proved unto us in
many places, as John, 6. Labor not for the meat which (...), but for the meat
that endures unto everlasting life, which the son of man shall give unto
you: for him John 6, (...)
has God the father sealed, that is, has installed him into his office, to
reconcile men unto God, and to bring them to everlasting life. And Chapter Jesus
gave himself, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, Galath.
1, 4
according to the will of God even our father: so that whatsoever Christ did,
he did it by the will and appoinment of his Father. According to the testimony
of the Apostle, Heb, 5, Christ took not to himself (...) honor, to be made the
high Priest, Hebru. 5, 5
but he that said unto him, (...) art my son, this day I begat thee, gave it
him. And as the father ordained him to that office, so in time he sent him, as
the Evangelist (...). Luke. 4, 18
The spirit of the L. is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the (...) to the poor, bind up the broken hearted, preach liberty to
the captives, etc. So likewise 1 John 4. Herein is that love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and John 4, 10
sent his son to be areconciliation for our sins. And Gal. 4, When the
fullness of time was come, God sent (...) his son made of a (...), and made
under the law, that he might redeem them that are under the law. Thus we
see the inward actions of God the Father, aunswearing to the outward actions
of the Minister.

Now, let us come to the uses of this part. First of all, this sealing and
sending of his son, serves to confirm use. (...)
and assure us of our salvation in Christ. For seeing GOD has (...) and
appointed him into this office, our faith cannot fail, our confidence cannot
fall, our hope cannot make ashamd, Rom, 5, 5
seeing the love of God is thus shed abroad in our hearts through the Holyghost,
Romans (...), 16
who bears Witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, and by
whom we Ephesians. 4, 30
are sealed unto the day (...) redemption. Again, let us seek salvation no
where else then in him alone, whom God the Father has sealed, and set apart
to that end. For even as the body is norished by no other meats and drinks
then by such as Deuteronomy, 8, 3 Math 14, 4
God has appointed to this purpose, Ezekiel, 4, 13 Lenit, 26, 26
as a staff to sustain us: so is the soul fed by no other means then God
has before ordained. The cause of our salvation is in the love of God toward
us, which is notably represented by the taking and blessing of the outward
elements. He might have left us to our selves, to work out our own destruction:
but his mercy is greater then his justice.

Thirdly, by these outward actions of the minister, we must seek confirmation
and strength of our faith, being assured use. 3
that God the father took his son, and appointed him to these ends. We must
not wander and gaze about, and think we have nothing to do, but when we take
and receive the bread and the cup into our hands: we must in every sacramental
rite consider the things signified, and ponder in our hearts the fitness and
agreement between them both. So then, as we behold with our bodily eyes the
minister (representing the person of the father) taking, blessing, and
separating the bread and wine to that bodily use: so surely and certainly we
must learn that God the father has ordained and sent his only begotten son,
Math. 17. 5 and 3. xvii
in whom he is well pleased, to be the meditator for the pardon of our sins.
Hence we see the infinite love of God toward us: and let us labor to comprehend
Ephesians, 3. xvi: i xix.
the length, breadth, height, and depth thereof, that spared not Romans 32.
his own son, but gave him for us all unto the death: hence we see, that
exceeding compassion of the son, that loved his enemies more then himself,
and accounted not his own life precious to himself: hence we see the gracious
and glorious work of our redemption, wherein the mercy and justice of God Psalm.
85, 10
meet together, and kiss each other, teaching us to take sweet delight and
comfort in the meditation thereof day and night withal thanksgiving: hence we
have assurance of salvation and consolation in all troubles and tentations:
hence we see the greatness of our own sins that could not be pardoned, but
by the death of the son of God, and therefore we must hate them with an
unfeigned hatred as our greatest, most dangerous and deadly enemies: and lastly,
hence we see, that if God the father thus loved us, we ought earnestly to love
him again, and to serve him in all duties of holiness and true righteousness:
neither ought we to love him only, but for him all our brethren, as the
Apostle reasons, 1 John 4. xi
Brethren, if God so loved us, we ought to love one another.

Thus we have showed, how the taking of the bread by the minister, signifies
the fathers appointing of his son: the ministers blessing, the fathers
separating and setting a part his son to his office: the minsters delivering
of the bread, the fathers giving of his son. If then we draw near to the
Lords table with faith, reverence, and repentance, nothing can be more sure and
certain to us, then the taking and receiving of Christ, for when we receive the
bred from the minister, we with all receive the body of christ offered by the
hand of God the father.

Lastly, the breaking of the bread, pouring out of the wine, and delivering of
them both into the hands of the use. 4.
communicants, (...) these actions of God, his chastising of his son, and
breaking him with sorrows upon the cross for our redemption, offering him
unto all, even unto hypocrites, and giving him truly to the faithful with all
the benefits of his passion. Indeed, the minister gives the outward signs to
all receivers; but God gives and applies only to the faithful, the shedding
of Christ's blood for their daily increase of their faith and repentance. But
here it may be objected, that not a bone of him was Objection
broken. Exodus xii. 46
as it was figured by the passover, and performed at his passion: the
verifieng and accomplishment whereof we read John, 19. 36. I answer, there is
a dubble Answer
breaking of Christ: one corporal, whereof the places before do speak: the
other figuratively, whereby is understood, Esaias. 53. 4. 5
he was tormented and even torn with pains, as Esa. 53. He was wounded for
our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Lo what is meant by the
breaking of the bread, his soul was tormented, his spirit was crushed, his
hands and feet were pierced, he sweat drops of Water and blood, and cried out
aloud upon the cross, Math. 27, 46
My God my god why have thou for saken me. Wherefore let these rights be
rightly marked and observed of us for our comfort and consolation: Let us, when
we see the bread broken and wine poured out, meditat on the passion of christ
how he was wounded and torn for our transgressions. Although not a bone of
his body was broken in pieces, yet he was broken with afflictions, bruised with
sorrows, and tormented with bitter anguish of his soul, by whose stripes we
are healed, by whose condemnation we are justified, by whose agonies we are
comforted, by whose death we are quickened. Whosoever rests in the outward
works done before his eyes, never attaineth to the substance of the sacrament.
Thus much of the first inward part.

Chap. 9. Of the second inward part of the Lords supper.
THe second inward part is the The second inward part of the Lords supper, is
the holy spirit.
holy spirit, who assures us of the truth of Gods promises. As we have in the
word of truth, the forgiveness of sins, increase of faith, grows in
sanctification, a great measure of dying to sin, and a greater care to live in
newnes of life, promised (...) us: so does the spirit work these things Roma.
8, 15 Galat. 3, 2, 5
in the hearts of all the (...). This appears in many places. Romans 8. rehaue
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba father: the same spirit
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. To one is
given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, and to (...) the word of knowledge,
by the same spirit: to another is given faith, by the same spirit: all these
things woorketh one and the self same spirit, distributing to every man
severally, as he will So then as we are weak in faith and slow to believe:
so we have the spirit given unto us to help our infirmities and to open our
hearts to receive the promises. This truth being cleared, the uses offer
themselves to be considered. use. 1.
And first of all, inasmuch as the spirit works these things in the hearts of
all the faithful, from hence we gather, that such as never find any change
or renewing of the mind, or reformation of life after the receiving of the
Sacraments, may justly suspect themselves, whether ever they had faith or not,
and whether ever they repented or not: and therefore ought to use the means to
come by faith and repentance. For, the work of the spirit accompanies the
outward work in the elect of God, as also we see in the hearing of faith
preached, he must open the heart that is closed up, before we can receive
with meekenes Iam. 1, 21
the word that is grafted in us which is able to save our souls.

Indeed, every person present may hear the words of institution, may see the
Wine poured out, may eat of that bread and drink of that cup, as they may
also hear the sound of the voice that comes unto them: but the whole force,
effect, and power rests only in the Spirit of GOD, sealinge up the truth
and substance of those things in the hearts of all the children of God.

Again seeing these things are done and performed by the working of the
spirit: they are confuted and co^uinced, use. 2
that think they cannot be made partakers of the body and blood of Christ,
and be united to his flesh, unless his body be shut up under the accidents of
bread and shows of wine, and so his flesh be given unto us carnally, that we
may eat him with our mouths, and convey him into our stomachs. But we see
here, the Holy Ghost is the bond of this union, he works in us faith,
which pierces the heavens, and lays hold on Christ. It is said of Abraham
the Father of the faithful, that John 8, 56
he reioiced to see the day of Christ, he saw it and was glad. For as we
cannot see him with our bodily eyes, nor hear him with our bodily ears nor
touch him with our bodily hands: no more can we taste or eat him with our bodily
mouths. By the hand of faith, we reach and apply him: by the mouth of faith we
receive and eat him. Let us believe in Christ, and we aug. tract. in John 26.
and 27
have eaten Christ: let us not prepare our teeth and our belly, but a lively
faith working by love. Wherefore, albeit the humane nature of Christ go not
out of the highest heavens: yet we that live upon the earth are partakers of
his body contained in the heavens, and his flesh and blood are communicated to
us as truly and effectually, as if he were Objection
there on the present with us. If any say, How can this be? can that which is
absent from us, be present with us? can Answer.
heaven be in earth, or earth be in heaven? He ere unto I may most iustlye
aunsweare, although this be a great mystery and marvelous in our eyes, yet we
must confess and consider, that the Holy Ghost is the author of this union,
and as it were the conduit-pipe of this conjunction, who by his divine power
joins together things that are severed in place, and begets faith in us,
which is the instrumenr and hand, 1 Ioh. 17, 20
whereby we receive and apply Christ with all his gifts unto our selves, as
John. 17. Father, I pray thee for such as shall believe in me, that they may
be one, as thou O father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us. He ereunto comes the saying of Paul, Ephe, 3. Christ dwells in our
hearts by faith. Like wise Act, 13. Byhim every one that believes, is
justified, that is, absolved and discharged, And John 3. so many as believe in
him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Thus we see our fellowship
with christ, is from the spirit, and by our (...). The spirit is the principal
worker: faith is the means and the instrument. Neither must this comunction
seem unto us impossible, through the great distance and distinction of place. We
see the sun daily with oureies, which though it be situate in the heavens, and
separated from us in place, communicates his effect and power unto us, that
dwell upon the earth, neither do we marvel thereat, and yet is the sun but
a Deuteronomy. 4, 193
creature subject unto us, and distributed to all the people under the whole
heaven to serve their use. Shall not Christ then the son of righteousness
make us truly partakers of his flesh by the unsearchable power of his spirit,
and the supernatural gift of a lively faith, who can as easily join together
things far off, as those that are nigh? Are not the faithful, severed in
place, and scattered through the world, joined as nearly together as the
members are, 1 John r, 3
to become one body where of Christ is the head? As the Apostle teaches, That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may also have
fellowship with us, and that our fellowship also may be with the father and
with his son Jesus Christ. We see this like wise lively laid out before us in
the estate of (...), though the husband and wife be sundred for a time and
separated one far from another, yet the band of matrimony does so join and
unite them, that the wife is one flesh with her (...), albeit he be a thousand
miles distant from her: so is it between Christ and the faithful, he loved
the church and gave himself for it, and they are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, which coupling and combining together with Christ is
wrought (as we have showed) by the spirit, principally, by faith
instrumentally, by both most effectually. We need not therefore any carnal and
bodily presence of Christ to join us to him, seeing it is truly and
certainly performed by these means, whereby we grow to a perfect man in him.
For, as the Sun is more comfortable to the world by his refreshing beams and
sweet influence being absent, then if his natural body and compasle lay upon
the earth: so the flesh of christ being in the glory of his father, much more
comfort and refreshes our souls and bodies by his heavenly grace and
spiritual influence, then (...) he were present fleshly before our eyes. And
as the Sun, not discending from heaven nor leaving his place, is not
withstanding present with us in our chambers, in our houses, in our hands, and
in our bosoms: so christ being in the highest heavens, not coming down, nor
forsaking his glorious habitation, yet Math. 28, 20
nevertheless is present with us in our congregations, in our hearts, in our
prayers, in our meditations, and in the sacraments. But of this we shall have
occasion to speak more in the chapter following, and we have already spoken of
it in the former books.

Chap. 10. Of the third inward part of the Lords Supper.
THe third inward part is The third inward part of the Lords supper, is the
body and blood of (...).
the body and blood of christ, that is, the body of our Lord delivered unto
death for us, and his blood shed for the remission of sins, and consequently
whole christ. This is the chiefest part of this sacrament. For the body and
blood of Christ are thus made and separated to be the lively meat of our
souls, and have that force and efficacy of (...) in our souls, which bread
and wine have in our bodies. This is the cause why Ioh. 6, 48. 50
Christ often calls himself the bread of life, Ioh. 6. I am that bread of
life: this is that bread of life which comes down from heaven, that he
which eats of it should not dye; I am that living bread, if any man eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever. Thus every receiver is given to understand,
that as God does bless the bread and Wine in his Supper, to preserve,
strengthen, and comfort the body of the receiver: so Christ apprehended and
received by faith does nourish us, and preserves body and soul unto eternal
life. He died in the flesh, that he might quicken us: and he poured out his
blood, (...) he might cleanse us from our sins. Wherefore, How the
sacramental rites do serve to strengthen our faith.
whenever as the Lords ghests we see the bread on the Lords table, we must
set our minds on the body of Christ: when we behold the cup of the Lord, we
must think upon the blood of christ: when we look upon the bread broken, and
the Wine poured out, we must consider how the body of chirst was pierced,
punished, crushed, crucified, torn, tormented, and his blood poured out for
our sakes: when we feel, that by bread our bodies are nourished and
strengthened, and by the wine our vital spirits are comforted and refreshed, we
believe that by the body of Christ delivered to death for us, we are fed to
everlasting life, and that by his blood poured out upon the cross, our
consciences are sanctified, and we feel his quickening power, which does
confirm us in our communion with him. Thus is this part of the supper
spiritually to be applied: thus are the bread and wine made a sacrament to us,
and not bare signs: thus the memorall of christ's death is repeated,
whichalbeit it were once finished on the cross, and now his passion is past
long ago: yet to the faithful in regard of the force, it is still fresh and
always present. Now, it is not without cause and good consideration, that
Christ would have the bread first delivered as a sign of his body, and then
afterward the wine as a sign of his blood, severally and apart administered,
because his body and blood are not represented to us, as his humanity now
dwells glorious in the heavens, but as he was offered up a sacrifice on the
cross, his blood being (...) out of his body. For to the end it may be
nourishment to us, it must be crucified. For, as corn of it self is not fit
food for us, unless it be threshed, winnowed, ground and baked for us: so is
it touching christ, he must suffer, be crucified, and die, that we may live by
him, and reign with him.

This is the truth which in this point is to be considered. Use. 1
Now let us lay open the uses which of us are to be learned. Is christ the
inward part of the Lords Supper represented by the bread and wine, offered to
all, but rcceiued only of such as are faithful: then his body is not enclosed
in the bread or in the accidents ofbread, nor his blood included in the wine or
under the shows of wine: Against the real presence
he is not personally, locally, carnally, corporally, naturally, really,
substantially, and sensually present in the Sacrament. The question is not, The
true state of the question set down.
whether the words of christ be true, for they are known, confessed, and
believed, so that as he is the truth, so all his words are words of truth:
neither is the question, whether the Sacrament be a bare sign or bare figure,
we say Christ is truly represented, sealed, and exhibited: neither is the
question whether God'bo omnipotent and almighty, this is a part of our faith
and an Article of christian belief: neither is the question simplye of the
presence of Christ, whether he be truly and undoubtedly present in the
Sacrament of his last supper, we acknowledge and receive as much. But the whole
question is of the meaning and understanding of the words of institution, and
of the manner of his presence. We confess and teach the people committed unto
us, that confess. Gal lic. art. 37. confel. Anglic. art. 12 Call instit lib 4.
cap. 17
christ's body and blood are truly, verily, and indeed given unto us, that we
truly eat and drink them, that we are relieved and live by them, that we are
made bone of his bone, that Christ dwells in us, and we in him: yet we say
not, that the substance of bread and wine is abolished, or that christ's body
discendeth from heaven, or is groslie and corporally present in the sacrament:
we are taught to lift up out hearts to heaven, Col. 3, 1, 2, 3
where christ sits at the right hand of God the father, and there to feed
upon him. But he ere is the state of the question and controversy between us.
The church of Rome teaches, that after conc. Trid. (...) 13, cap. 1
the words of consecration the bread and wine are abolished, and the body and
blood of christ come in place, so that they make them corporally (...), not
only in the sacrament to be eaten with the mouth but in the pixe, in the
Mass, and in their solemn processions where is neither eating nor drinking.
Yet Berengarius in his recantation was taught to say, and forced to subscribe,
that De con did 2 ego Bereng
Christ is in the sacrament sensible (or sensually) is touched with the
singers, divided, broken, and rent with the teeth, and not only the accidents.
More over, they make it to be eaten, not only of evil men, but of beasts, and
to fill up the measure of blasphemy, to be cast out into the draught, as some
of them have taught and affirmed. Thus then the difference stands between
us, they hold that christ's body and blood are carnally eaten of wicked men
without faith, of brute Beasts without reason: but we deny, that CHRIST: is
thus present in the Sacrament, for his body cannot be under so little a
quantity of bread and Wine: besides it is impiety to (...) that the person of
CHRIST or his body and blood can be truly received of Dogs, (...), and
Mise, be chewed with the teeth, swallowed down the throat, digested in the
stomach, and be cast out into unclean places. This we deny, this we do not
believe, this we abhor and detest from the bottom of our hearts. What is it
then we teach and profess? We deny that the body and blood of Christ are
carnally contained under the shows and shadows of bread and wine: we deny them
to be eaten and drunken ofwicked men or unreasonable creatures: we deny that
they are truly and properly both in heaven and on the earth, in pixes, and on
the (...). These are aug. tract. 25 in Johan
meat for the mind, not for the mouth: for faith, not for the teeth: for our
belief, not for the belly.

This carnal eating of Christ is Sundry reasons rendered to (...) the real
presence
confuted and convinced by many reasons. First, Christ sat down at the Table
and the Disciples with him, afterward he took bread, gave thanks, brake it,
gave it, and said. This is my body: likewise he took and gave the cup, and
said, Drink ye all of this: whereby we see, when the Apostles received Luke
22, 19
the Sacrament, Christ sat at the table with his true body: but the body which
they took, sat not at the table, therefore they took the sign of his body.
Likewise, the blood which they received was not in the body which sat at the
table, therefore it was not properly Christ's blood, which was not as yet
really and actually shed. The same body could not sit at the table, and not sit
at the table: the same body could not be in their hands, and out of their
hands: the blood of Christ could not be out of his veins in the cup, and in
his vines within his body: he could not sit visible at the table, and be
invisible in the mouths and bellies of the (...). Wherefore the real presence
brings with it real contradictions which cannot stand together.

Secondly, the end of the Lords supper is, to call his death to a continual
remembrance, as Luke 22. Do this in Luke 22, 19
remembrance of me: and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. Ye show the Lords death until
he come. Now to what end should we need the remembrance of Christ, if he were
corporally present in the sacrament, if he were taken in the hands, if he were
holden in the mouth, if he were eaten with the (...)? And to to what purpose
should we show the Lords death till he come, if he come (...) and be present
bodily in the sacrament. Besides, the wisest a nong the Philosophers teach us
that arist lib de memoria.
sense is of things present, but remembrance is of such things as are absent:
as hope is of such things as are to come, not seen, Romans 8, 24
and this the Apostle teaches.

Thirdly, Christ received a true body withal the natural properties of an
(...) body, like to us in all things sin Heb. 4, 15
only exc pted, and is therefore called the son of (...), the son of
(...), the son of man, our brother partaker of flesh and blood, he is said
to have taken upon him the seed of Abraham, and not the Angels nature Luke 24,
39
to be visible Luke 24, 39, Behold my hands and my feet for it is I my self,
(...) me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. For
if he may be in many places together, in some place visible, and in some
invisible: in some to be handled, in others nor to be handled, he can have no
true body of a true man. And if this were not a strong reason, It is not felt
and seen, therefore no human body: the Disciples might have answered unto
Christ, why do thou bid us behold thy hands, and see thy feet, and handle
thy body, and thereby to try thy humanity, seeing thou have a body which cannot
be seen, touched, or handled?

Fourthly, christ has left the earth with his bodily presence, and is (...) up
into he (...), far above all principalities and powers, and is sit do vne
act. 1, 9, and 3 22
on the right hand of his father, as Act. 1. While they beheld, he was taken
up. And Mar. 16. After the Lord had spoken unto them he was received into
heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. So Act. 3. Whom the heavens must
contain, until the time that all things are restored. Likewise Phil. 3. Our
conversation is in heaven from a hence we look for a savior. And again, Luk,
24. (...) he blessed them, he departed from them, and was carried up into
heaven. So Ioh. 12. The poor always ye have with you, but me ye shall not have
alwais. I am come out from the father, and came into the world: again I leave
the world and go to my father. If these things be true, that Christ is
Catechism. Trident. in exposit. Simbo. apostol.
departed from us, if he be no longer among us, if he be taken up into heaven,
if he must be contained there until the restoring of all things, if we must
look for a savior from heaven to change our vile bodies, if he be carried up
to his father and have left the world: then he is not now present with us, his
body is not in every altar, he does not lurk and lie under the shows of bread
and wine. For, to be departed from us, and not to be departed from us; to be
contained in heaven, and not to be contained in heaven; to leave the world, and
yet to remain in the world; to sit at the right hand of God, and to lie hid
under every altar, cannot stand together any more, then to be a man and no man,
to be christ and not christ, to be a savior and no savior, to be God and not
God.

Fifthly, christ reproves the caparnaits, because they thought his body was to
be eaten infleshly manner with the mouth of the body, and should descend into
the stomck, which is the way that all other meats do pass: when they heard
him preach of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, they said, Ioh, 6 60, 63
This is an heard saying, who can hear it? They murmured and departed from
him, because they thought they must eat him with the mouth and teeth, chew
him, and swallow him up. But christ expounds himself, and declares that
(...) meant not carnally, but spiritually. It is the spirit that quickneth, the
flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you are spirit and life,
that is, the flesh of Christ thus eaten, thus chewed, thus digested bodily,
carnally, and grossly, cannot profit: but truly and spiritually taken it is
meat indeed.

Now, to show What it is to eat the body of christ spiritually.
what it is to eat spiritually, and to pull off the garment of this similitude
that the truth may more plainly appear, by spiritual eating we do not
understand, that which is fained, standing in a conceit, opinion, or
imagination; neither that the body and blood of christ are turned into a
spirit, but we mean by spiritual eating sucha communion and participation of
christ, as is wrought by the powerful working of the Holi-ghoast, inasmuch
also as it is attained by faith only, and pertains to a spiritual and
eternal life. And howsoever the benefit of this conjunction reach unto the
body, which thereby is mortified, and sanctified, and afterward shall be
glorified: yet this fruition of christ is not called corporal but spiritual,
because this food does not pertain to the maintaining of this present life,
but it is referred to the life which is eternal. Now, this (...) everlasting
is called spiritual, (...) the bodies themselves shall be partakers thereof,
which therefore 1 cor. xv, 44
by the Apostle are called spiritual bodies. Thus then stands the
comparison, as there is a present life that is bodily, Sadeel. de spirit. mand.
cap. 1.
so there is another life to be thought upon which is spiritual and eternal:
as we are borne to this present life, so are we borne again to life eternal:
as this bodily life is sustained by bodily meat and drink, so Christ with all
his merits and mercies is the food of the spiritual life: Comparion between
the bodily and spiritual eating.
as the body has his mouth, whereby the meat and drink is received, and so
passes into the body by bodily feeding: so the soul has her mouth, namely,
faith which apprehends the most holy nourishment of the body and blood of
christ: and lastly as the meat by a natural force is concocted and digested,
that it may pass and disperse it self into the whole body, so the efficacy of
the spirit beginning faith in us, does so powerfully and mightily work in our
souls, that it quickneth us through christ, to whom we are nearely united. Thus
we see, we have no carnal communion with christ, nor bodily eating of christ.
Wherefore, let the capernaiticall papists, or popipish (...), prepare their
faith, not their teeth, their Souls, not their belly;, to eat the flesh of
christ, and drink his blood. And if they be ashamed of the name of the
Capernaites, let them also be ashamed of the error of the capernaits: but if
they clean to their error, they must be content to borrowe their name, for
the name and opinion must go together.

Sixthly, Christ exhorts the people to beware of false Prophets, that come in
Sheep clothes, Matthew. 7, xv
but indeed have Wolves hearts, saying, If any shall say unto you, Lo, hoere is
Christ, or there, Matt. 24, 23
believe it not: behold he is in the (...), go not forth: behold he is in the
secret places, believe it not. And the Apostle Paul exhorts, Col, 3, To
seek those things that are above, where christ sits at the right hand of
God. But if Christ lurk and ly hid under the accidents of bread and Wine,
then we might believe such as say, Lo, here is Christ, there is Christ, he
might be pointed out with the finger on every altar, and so often as the Priest
lifts up his idol, he might say to the people, behold here is Christ whom
we have newly made, look upon him whom we have newly fashioned.

Seventhly, the fathers under the law, did eat the same spiritual meat and
drink the same spiritual drink that the 1 cor. x, 1, (...)
(...) and other Christians did, though they had differing signs, they had the
same christ. But they did not eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood
bodily, for as yet he was not come in the flesh, therefore he is not present in
his natural body in our Sacraments. This Paul sets down 1 cor. 10. They
did all eat the same spiritual meat, they did all drink the same spiritual
drink: for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that
rock was christ. Where the Apostles (...) is to prove, Aug. tom. 6 tract. in
Ioh. 26. and in psalm. 77 Gratian can. inquit. 80.
that the Israelites were not inferior to the Corinthians, in respect of the
Sacraments of Gods favor, and therefore had no more to boast of, then the
Israelites had: whereupon he satith, they had the same drink, the same
Christ. Now if they did not eat the same in substance which the corinthians did
eat, then the Israelites were far inferior to them touching their
Sacraments, and so the Apostles reason should be of no force.

Eighthly, Christ is in such sort in heaven in his humanity, as that he is not
on the earth Math. 9, 15 John 13, and a
with his body, and consequently not in the Sactament, as we see, Math. 9. Can
the children of the bride-chamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with
them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them,
and then they shall fast. But if he were remainning on the earth and contained
in the pixe, the bridegroom could not, nor would not be taken away And the
same Euangehst, chap. 26. says. Ye have the poor always with you, but me ye
shall not have always. Like wise John, 13. When Jesus knew that hie hour was
come, that he should depart out of this world unto the father, heeriseth from
supper, and chap. 14. I go to prepare a place for you, but I will come again:
if I go away to prepare a place for you, I will receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there may ye be also: and verse. 28 ye have heard how I said unto
you, I go away and will come unto you. And chap. 17. Now I am no more in the
world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Again act, 1. ye men of
Galile, why stand re gazing into heaven? this Jesus which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall so come Acts, 1 xi
as ye have seen him go into heaven. If then, Christ according to his humane
nature be not on earth, how can his (...) body be on every altar? how can they
eat him with their (...)? how can they swallow him down their throat?

Ninthlie, such an eating and (...) of the body and blood of christ must be
holden as is profitable and comfortable to the receivers: for nothing is more
(...) and fruitful then these, being rightly received, Matt. (...), 26
(...) thereby remission of sins assured, and eternal glory sealed up unto
us. But no fruit to our faith can come unto us by this kind of bodily eating
the body, carnal drinking the blood of christ: for wicked men have as great a
portion in this as the godly. Nay, by their own doctrine, it may be eaten of
birds, of beasts, of Mice, of Dogs, of hogs, of vermin: to whom no profit, no
comfort, no benefit can come: whereas God would have the flesh John 6, 50
of the son of man to be eaten of those, to whom it shall be auailable to life
and salvation, I am the living bread, which came down from heaven, if any man
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Tenthly nothing can be more
gross, barbarous, or inhumane, then to devour man's flesh, and to drink man's
blood. What does more transform men into savage and (...) beasts? Nay worse
then beasts, which devour not their own kind? what is more contrary to the
pureness and holiness of Gods law Psalm. 12, 6 and 19, 9
then this? The words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver tried in a
furnace of earth fined seven fold. The fear of the Lord is clean: the law of
God is spiritual, holy, just, and good. And the gospel brings salvation to
all degrees, and teaches us, that we should deny all ungodliness, and worldly
Iustes, and that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world. But what can be more repugnant to godliness, sobernes, and righteousness,
then to tear wirh the teeth Cyril. (...), xi.
and jaws man's flesh, and to drink his blood, from which the Capernaits
abhorred? what more crosses the Religion of Christ, the law of god, and the
light of nature, then man to devour man and the bowels of one to be in the
bowels of another? And are not their stomachs strong to digest this meat? did
not god in the law command Leuit. 17, (...)
to abstain from eating the blood of beasts and from strangled? did not the
Apostles for a time renew it acts 15, (...)
among the christians, in respect of the weakness of the Jews, because Moses was
read in their sinagogue ever saboth day? to what (...) should this be done, if
the church had tasted the blood of chapter with their mouth, or swallowed his body
in their bellies? And do not the Scythians and all the gentiles that are not
utterly void of (...), abstain from man's blood, and (...) devouring his flesh?
wherefore, these men are worse Hom. Odis. lib x Virg. aeneid. lib. 3 Plin. not.
hist lib. y, cap (...)
then the Scithians, barbaria^s, and Gentiles, yea worse then the Canibals and
Indies that eat their enemies. but these devour chapter whom they call their L. and
may, like Actcons hounds (to compare one fable with another) only here ly
the differences, they deuourd their Lord under the shape of a stag or Heart,
they eat their Ovid Met. lib. 3.
may, under the forms of bread and wine: these fastened their mouth, upon
their master because they thought him absent and not present under that shape,
they openly confess their master to be present, and yet (...) profess to
devour him with their jaws, and swallow him in their stomachs, wherefore,
these men are more cruel.

Eleuenthly, if Christ be present in the Sacramant bodily and carnally: in what
body shall he be present? Whether in his glorified body as he is in the
heavens, or in his mortal body as he was upon the earth? In one of these he
must be present necessarily, if he be present fleshly. Whatsoever they answer,
they are taken onboth hands, and are stricken down as with a sword that has
two edges. Dare they say he is thus present in his mortal body? This cannot
be. For it is certain, he has not now a mortal body, but a glorified body:
this corruptible has put on in corruption, 1 cor. xv, 54
this mortal has put on immortality, and death is swallowed up in victory.
This the Romans 6, 9, x
Apostle confirms, this the Scripture teaches, this Christian faith
beleeueh. Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: death has no more
dominion over him: For in that he dyed, he dyed once to sin, but in that he
lives, he lives to God Like wise Heb. 7. 25 This man because he endures
ever, has a priesthood which cannot pass from one to another, seeing he ever
hueth to make intercession for them. And chapter 9. of the same Epistle, he is
entered into heaven, not that he should offer himself often, but he was once
offered to take away the sins of many. These testimonies duly considered, he
cannot be present in a mortal body. What then, will they be helped, to say he
is present in his glorified body? Then, he cannot now be present in the
sacrament of the supper, as he was present to the Apostles, sitting at the
table with them, and preaching unto them of his death: he cannot be present in
the same body that he did deliver to his Disciples in the institution of his
last supper. For the body of Christ was then mortal and not glorified, then he
had not suffered death upon the Crosle, he was not risen and ascended into the
heavens, to sit at the right hand of his father: so that they must seek
another place then these words of Christ, Math. 26, 26
This is my body, this is my blood, to build their real presence and
transubstantiation, for they pointed out his mortal body, because his body was
not yet glorified, when the sacrament was instituted. Besides, what a
uniserable glorified body should this be, to be subject to the pleasure of
every priest, to come at his call, to stay till he commands, nay to suffer
himself to be torn with the teeth of every receiver? Wherefore, the presence
of his glorified body, cannot be grounded upon these words of Christ touching
the Sacrament, This is my body. Neither let them say as Campion, that boasting
champion like an other Goliath, 1 Samuel, 17, x
challenging the hoaste of God, sometimes said in the Tower-conference, that
this is a fallation, conference day 3.
inasmuch as his glorification (...) it not a diverse body, and that a man
whole, and a man sick, at sundry times make not a several man. This
lesuitical denise has no color of reason, but a trick of evasion. For we
speak not of the difference between Christ's glorified and mortal body, but of
the meaning of the words this is my body: whether Christ understand his
natural and mortal body wherein shortly he was to be glorified, or whether
he understand it of his body glorified? Either it must be understood of the
one, or of the other, or of both: or rather indeed of neither, except they will
have the words taken and spoken one way to the Disciples, and another way to
us. Thus, the meaning of them when they were first uttered, should be, This is
my mortal body: but now spoken to us, taken in another sense of us to the end
of the world, This is my glorified body. So then, the same words spoken to the
Disciples should be false as we are to understand them: and the disciples
should be deceived, understanding them as we do take them. What is this, but
to bring us back again to the reproachful comparisons and blasphemous
assertions Pighi. Hierar. li, 3. cap. 3 censur, colon dial. 4 p2, 112 Cusan,
epist. 2. and 7.
of sundry Popish writers, to compare the scripturs to a nose of wax, and a
rule of lead, that they may be expounded diuersely, and framed to times, so as
at one time they may be understood one way, and at another time they may be
interpreted another way. These things before being duly considred, we may
safely conclude, that christ is not present in his natural body.

Lastly, the presence of christ in his natural body, abolisheth the light of
reason, and confounds the nature of things. For what is more repugnant to
reason, then for a man to bear himself in his own hands? that a man should
(...) up himself? that another should eat him, yet he remain untouched,
untasted, and uncorrupted? that one and the same man should be visible and
invisible, present and absent, in the teeth of the disciples, and at the table
with the Disciples, be a man of stature, and yet be contained and
comprehended in a little Cake and Cantle of bread?

Now, as by these reasons and sundry other that might be alleged, the real
presence is sufficiently convinced: so the arguments brought to maintain and
uphold it, are easily Objections alleged to maintain the real presence are
answered
answered. For as the doctrine is false: so the reasons are weak and foolish.
First they object the words of institution, for the defense of this cause. For
as in the questions of the supremacy, of Peter's pretended, of the Popes usurped
(which are many) they always allege the words of Christ's to Peter, Pasce
oues meas, Bellar, tomo. primo.
feed by sheep: so do they deal in controversies of the Supper, where we
miss not long Hoc est (...) meum, This is my body. His words Objection 1
(say they) are true, therefore we must believe them: he is a man of his
word, therefore we must credit him: if then we be deceived holding his body
to be present, he has deceived us. I answer, the question is not of the
truth Answer.
of the words whether they be true or false, but of the interpretation and
meaning thereof, which we say is figurative, and yet no other then is usual
when the Scripture speaks of other Sacraments to the church, (...), 17, 11
as circumcision is the covenant: the lamb is the passover: the cup is the
new testament; the breaking of the bread is the communion of the body of
Christ: the rock is Christ: baptism is the washing of our new birth. Are not
all these places like to the words of Christ's institution? or can they deny
them to be understood (...) and not properly? so the meaning of those words is,
that the bread which he had taken, broken, and given, is a sign and figure of
his body: it is now no longer common bread, but are presentation of his body
truly offered to all, and truly given to all the faithful. Our Savior
Christ spoke many things to his disciples figura^ively, not literally to be
taken: he said, Math. 5, 13
they were the salt of the earth, the light of the world, a City set on a
hill: he speaks of cutting off the hand and pulling out the eye: he calls
himself John x, 9
a door, John 15, 1
a vine, John 14. 6
a way: are not these figurative and metaphorical speeches? Again, the
circumstaunces of the text, the nature of a Sacrament, and the Articles of our
faith, will not suffer us to take them properly: besides this, that they
should command us an horrible and Wicked thing, to eat man's flesh and drink
his blood.

Moreover, the Evangelists never say, the bread is transubstantiated into his
body, or the wine into his blood, or that the body and blood of Christ are in
the bread, or under the bread, or with the bread: all the circumstances teach,
that the bread is a Sacrament of his body, the Wine is a Sacrament of his
blood, as circumcision was a sign of the Covenant, the Lamb a sign of the
Passover, the rock a figure of Christ.

Lastly, as Christ speaks to the evil servant, L^k xix, 22
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee: so the adversaries themselus give
sentence on our side, and one arch-papist condemns another. Bishop Fisher
writing against Luther affirms, that John 15, 1
no man can prove by the words of the Gospel, that any priest in these days
does consecrate the very body and blood of Christ, and therefore Fish, cont.
capti. Babilo^
Lindanus, among the rablement of Traditions which he reckons, rehearses the
real presence. Likewise, Tonstall another Bishop of the same birth holds,
that it were Lindan. panopl. lib, 4.
better to leave every man to his own conjecture, as they were before the
counsel of Lateran, then to bring in such questions. And Biel a man of the
same stamp, not inferior to the rest, Tonst lib 1 de Sacr p. 46.
confesses that it is not found in the canonical scripturs, that christ's body
is in the Sacrament. And let them tell us their opinion, whether that
hildebrand held this bodily presence, Gab Biel. in (...). (...)
when he cast the Sacrament into the fire, contrary to the liking of certain
cardinals present with him? Thus we see, counsels, sathers, reasons, doctors,
schoolmen, Bishops, cardinals, Popes, and others of the adversaries themselus
fight against the (...) prefence of Christ: and the Scriptures themselue
overthrow it.

Secondly, they object the words of Christ, Except ye eat John 6, 53
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
Objection
you. I answer, these words are not understood of the Sacrament, they were
uttered long before the institution of Answer
the Supper, and therefore could not be referred unto that which as yet was
not: so that Christ speaks of spiritual eating, not of carnal: by faith,
not by the mouth, whereby we abide in him and he in us: but many eat the
Sacrament of his body that have not him abiding in them, not themselves in
him. Again, without this eating of his (...) here spoken of, Ioh. 6, 54
no man can attain eternal life: but many have eternal life, that never are
partakers of the Lords Supper. Besides, how absurd is it for those to imagine
that Christ naming bread, speaks of the Sacrament of the altar? for they
would have no (...) of bread to remain, but one lie the figure, show, and
likeness of bread: so that according to the devise of their newfound
doctrine, he might more (...) say, I am no breude, or, I am the sher es of
bread, then as he does, John 6, 32
I am the true bread. Moreover, it christ promising to give bread for the
redemption of the world, had pointed out the Sacrament of his Supper: then he
should have given his flesh for the salvation of mankind, not upon the cross,
but in his last Supper. Wherefore then served his death? What need was there
to shed his blood on the cross?

Furthermore, if these words be referd to his Supper, then the svpper may be
celebrated without material bread and Wine without giving of thanks, without
blessinge, without consecration, without breaking and distributing of the
bread, without pouring our, and delivering of the wine, and without remembrance
of the death of christ. For in this place we have no mention of these things.
And shall we imagine that the sacrament is spoken off, where neither the matter,
nor form, nor word of institution, nor minister, nor external rite is once
remembered? Lastly, to eat the flesh of Christ and to drink his blood, is
nothing else but to come to Christ, and to believe in Christ, as appears in
the text, Ioh 6. 35. 44
I am that bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that
believes, in me shall never thirst. And speaking of faith he faith. No man
can come to me, except the father which has sent me draw him. This his truth
Biel. sect 84 super ca^. niis,
is so clear and evident that many of the adversaries are driven to confess
it, howsoever some of the^ seek to cast mistes before the eyes of men, that
they may not espy it, among the which are Sanders and Bellarmine. And as we
have showed before, how the Schoolmen and Doctors of the church of Rome are
together by the ears in sundry controversies about the supper: so are they
about the true interpretation of Ioh. 6. some understanding it of the
sacramental eating, some of the spiritual eating, Hos, conses de Euchar,
and some of both.

Thirdly, they object the omnipotency, of God: that he is able to turn the
bread into the body, and the Wine into his blood: he is able to make it really
present in heaven and earth, and wheresoever Mass is said: he is able to make
a body to be in many places at once, and yet not occupy a place. I answer, when
all other reasons fail, they fly to gods omnipotency as unto a sanctuary and
place of refuge. But this will not prove a real presence. For albeit God be
omnipotent and almighty: must he therefore do al things, yea offer violence to
his own body, to maintain their absurd and heretical opinions of the real
presence and of transubstantiation? Must his power attend upon their fancies
and dreams? Cannot he be omnipotent, except their positions and assertions be
granted? There is no fear of Gods power, albeit we withstand their carnal
presence. For touching the omnipotency of god, Two rules to be observed
concerning Gods omnipote^cy.
we must observe these two rules and conclusions. First, gods power is never to
be opposed and set against his express will, plainly and certainly known: for
God is not contrary to himself. Now then, it is not enough to prove that God
can turn bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, unless they prove
he will turn them into his flesh and blood. We our selves can do many things,
which we do not, and which we will not do: so we must know, it is with God, he
could have added wings to man, he might have made many worlds, if it had
pleased him. Christ of Math. 3, 9
the stones could have raised up children unto Abraham. Christ covld have
prayed to his father in his afliction, to send him Math. 26, 53
more then 12. legions of angels, but how then should the scriptures be
fulfilled? Wherefore, we are not to reason of his power, unless we be
assured of his will reueiled in his word, as we see Christ (...) against the
Saduces says, Ye are deceived, not Matt. 22, 29
knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. Where we see, he joins the
scriptures and the power of God together: so (...) he is truly said to be
omnipotent, Aug. de te^po. serin. 119
because he can bring to pass whatsoever he will: neither can the effect of
his will be hindered or resisted. Now, it is the known will of God, that
christ should have a true body, that he might be a true man with his quantity
and dimensions. The second rule to be remembered, is, No contradiction is in God.
that in God there is no contradiction: and that whatsoere necessarily implies
a contradiction, is an argument not of power, but of weakness. This the
scripture; decree, this the fathers deliver, this their own schoolmen
determine. For, 2 cor. 1, 19
in God is not yea and nay: he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself: he
cannot dye, he cannot lie, he cannot deny his word, he cannot sin, he cannot
deceive, he cannot be deceived. These and such like (...) cannot do: which if
he should do, he were not omnipotent. For this Aug. de trincap 15, lib. 15
Confess lib. 12 cap. xv
were a token of impotency, not of omnipotency: of debility, not of ability: of
want and weakness, not of strength and power. For, in every contradiction
Arist. de interp. li. 1, ca. 5
there is falsehood and a lie which cannot agree to God, who is truth it self,
and therefore he cannot make affirmation and negation, truth and falsehood, yea
and nay to be true together, which things are imposible. Yea the popish
schoolmen Thom. contra gent. lib. (...) cap 84. and 1. 2 cap 25
confute this popish fancy of the real presence, when they teach that God
cannot do any thing wherein a contradiction is employed, and that all other
things he can do, and therefore is omnipotent. Now, who sees not, that herein
is a manifest and notable contradiction, that christ's body is made visible and
invisible together; finite and infinite; circumscribed and uncircumcised; to
have dimension and to want dimension; to be compassed in one certain place and
to be in a great number of Sacraments in many places; to be included in a
little bread on earth, which is contrary to that nature of a man's true body,
and not to be contained therein; as (...) in heaven, and there having the
natural properties of a true body, which cannot (...) brought within so narrow
a compass as the wafer cake. Wherefore, the absurd conceit of the real
presence cannot be maintained without many contradictions. For, if christ's body
be visible, how can it be invisible? If it have all the properties of a
naturalbody, how can it be without the properties of a natural body? If it be
finite how can it be infinite? Lastly, if it be an inseparable and necessary
adioynt to a true body to be contained in one certain place: how then can it
be true, that his body is in ten thousand places without any circumscription?
So then, Gods omnipotency cannot build up the monstrous work of the real
presence: inasmuch as the body of Christ cannot be brought within the slender
compass of a mathematical cake, without falsehood and destruction of all the
properties incident unto a true and natural body.

Lastly, as an esfect of Gods omnipotent power, they object, the bread and Wine
are turned into the flesh and Object
blood of Christ (appearing bread and Wine still) by a wonderful Miracle
which is wrought by the words of consecration and by a mighty work of God.
This objection has been sufficiently answered already. Answer.


We have proved, that every Miracle may be seen and discerned by the
outward sense, as the Miracles of Moses, of the prophets, of Christ, and the
Apostles: and therefore the Jews said unto Christ, John 2. xviii
Show us a miracle, teaching that miracles are to be judged by sight and sense.
When Moses turned Exo 4, 5 etc.
the Waters of the Egyptians into blood, the sight perceived, the taste
discerned it. The Miracles John 2: 9
of Christ appear evidently, and were apprehended by the senses of the body.
He turned water into Wine: the taste judged there of: the dombe spoke, the ear
heard them speak. The Lame walked, the dead were raised: the eyes perceived
the motion, all (...), and were astonished. In like manner, if the bread and Wine
were changed, either the eye or taste should perceive it, and all the Disciples
would be astonished.

Again, after the Gospel was plentifully confirmed and had taken root, and
the Apostles were dead, such Miracles ceased, as experience teaches. Besides,
the holy supper is an ordinary Sacrament of the Church: but every miracle is
extraordinary, or else it is no Miracle: so that unless we will turn ordinary
into extraordinary, and make miracles as common as Sacraments, No miracle in
the lords Supper
we must remove miracles from the supper. Furthermore, if the real presence
were wrought by a miracle, every priest should be a worker of miracles and
wonders, and an ordinary calling should always be accompanied with
extraordinary gifts. But their office of priesthood has not this gift (in
their own judgment) generally given unto it. Wherefore, miracles being (...),
in 1 cor. cap, 2 (...) 6
now ceased, are not found in the supper. Lastly, Augustine gathering all the
Miracles written in the Scripture, (...), de (...). 3. c x
yet speaks not of this: nay he not only omitted it, but slatly denies any
miracle to be in the Sacrament, when he says, It may have honor or reverence
as an holy thing, but cannot be wondered at as a strange or myraculous thing.
If then it be a Miracle, it must be in the number of lying Miracles spoken off
by the 2 These. 2. 9
Apostle: so that Transubstantiatyon and the real presence are real
contraryes or contradictions, repugnant to the Scripture, to faith, to reason,
to lerning, to sense, to nature, to Gods ordinance, absurd and impossible; and
therefore of all Gods people to be abhored and abiured, being a renewing of the
old heresy of The error of Eutiches
Eutiches, who held that Christ's body after his (...), was made equal with his
divinity. To conclude this use, we do not exclude all presence of Christ out of
the Sacrament: but distinguish the manner of his presence: which we have showed
to be in the supper truly, not grossly: effectually, not fleshly: spiritually,
not bodily: sacramentally, not carnally: mistically, not naturally.

The former use was touching knowledge and faith, instructing (...).
what to hold of the real presence. The next use is touching our obedience and
duty. For, is Christ the chief substance of this sacrament, and his body and
blood given us for the food of our souls: a gift far above heaven and
earth? Then we are bound to hunger after him, to desire him with an earnest
appetite and desire, as we come to our meat and drink. Hunger is a great
thing, and we say it makes men leap over a stone wall: he that is hunger
bitten, will eat his own flesh from his arms. In this corporal hunger then
are two things that pine and pinch men: first, a pain in the lower part of
the belly, arising from emptiness: secondly, an exceeding appetite to be
filled and satisfied: such have Deuteronomy, 28, 53 57
killed, dressed, and deuourd their own childen, rather the^ they would starve:
this pain has been so great, this longing has been so extraordinary. So
must it be with us in the spiritual hunger 2 King 6. 29 Lam. 4. 10
after Christ: we must be inwardly pained in soul for (...), and for the wrath
of God kindled for our sin: and then have an hungring (...) and longing
appetite, that we may possess Christ, and lay hold on him to our salvation.
Whosoever comes to his ordinary meat without hunger, it were better not to
eat: it ingendreh gross and evil humors, and brings a surfeit to the body.
So, whosoever desires not christ with an hungry soul, earnestly longing after
him, and craving nourishment from him, cannot be filled with good things. The
want of this hunger, is a cause why so few receive Christ, and profit not by
the means ordained to that end, as the word and sacraments: these come to them
of custom rather then with conscience, and for fashion rather then with faith:
these men are not fit to be Christ's ghuests, that hunger not after him.
Wherefore, Esaias 55, 1
the prophet (...) all such as faint in their souls through hunger and thirst
of this food, Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the (...), and ye that
have no silver, come, buy, and eat: come, I say, buy wine and (...) without
silver and without money. And the Apostle Revel. 22. 17, Let him that is a
thirst come, and let whosoever will, take of the water of life freely. Likewise
the Evangelist, Luk, 1, 53. He fills the hungry with good things, and sends
the rich empty away. But where is the desire of these things? Where is the
hunger after this heavenly food? Where is the thirst after the waters of life?
Truly, of all gifts this is the greatest: yet the greatest number care nothing
for christ nor for his gifts. As the Israelites in the wilderness loathed Number.
11, 5 etc.
Manna, and desired to return into Egypt: such are there among us, no desire,
no affection, no zeal this way: they spend their cogitations and indeuoures to
gain honor, they thirst after Silver and Gold, they delight in earthly
pleasures, they covet houses, lands, and wealth of the world: these things
they abound in these things they make their happiness and their heaven. Such
as these, there are thousands in the bosom of the Church, that hunger more
after these transitory things, then after heavenly: Such are Heb. xii, 16
profane persons as (...), who preferred a mess of pottage before the
blessing: and as the Gadarens, who preferred theirswine before christ, and
therefore besought him to depart out of their coasts. But let us learn better
things: for all these shall vanish and come to nothing. And what shall it
profit Mat. 16, 26
a man if he win the whole world, and lose his own soul? Let us not labor
for the meat that John 6, 27
perishes, but for the meat that endures to everlasting life, which the
Son of man shall give unto us. Therefore, let us remember, whenever we come
to his table to be partakers of this Supper, to come with a great longing after
life, and salvation from him, as we desire bodily meat when we are hungry, and
drink when we are thirsty: then shall we by him be satisfied and saved,
otherwise we cannot lay hold on him: we may receive the outward sign, but we
cannot receive the graces of christ offered unto us. Thus much of the third
inward part of this Sacrament.

Chap. II. Of the fourth inward part of the Lords Supper.
THe last inward part of this sacrament of the supper remains, which is the
The fourth inward part of the supper is the faithful receiver
faithful and christian receiver. As every communicant sensibly and outwardly
takes the bread and wine given unto him: eating the bread and drinking the
Wine for the nourishment of his body: so the faithful receiver apprehends and
lays hold on christ by the hand of faith, and applies him particulally, that
the feeling of his true union with christ may daily be increased, John 1, xii
according to that saying Ioh. 1. As many as received him, to them he gave
prerogative to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. And
1 Cor. 10. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? Wherefore, when we do faithfully and worthily take the bread and the
cup into our hands, we must consider that withal we take and receive Jesus
christ himself offered unto us. When we eat the bread and drink of the cup,
and so apply them to our bodily uses: we must consider, that we apply christ
Jesus to our selves, even to our souls, particularly, that he is meat
indeed, and that he is drink indeed unto us, if we bring with us the hand of
says. For faith is like Faith is like the mouth of a vessel
the mouth of a vessel: if you pour Lyquor upon it all the day long,
unless the mouth of the vessel be open to receive it, the Water is spilt on
the ground, and the vesselremaineth empty: so may a man come to the lords table
every month, receiving the bread and wine that represent whole christ, yet
except he bring with him faith, which is the mouth of the soul, he receives
not Christ unto a spiritual life, to be his righteousness and sanctification.
And this is the reason, why we receive a little portion and a small quantity as
well of bread as wine, Council. Nicean ex Biblio. vatican. use 1
because the end of our eating and drinking serves for the sanctification of
the spirit, not for the silling of the body.

Now let us see what uses are offered to our consideration, in the meditation of
this truth. First, seeing only the faithful are partakers of the things
signified in this Sacrament: we see all do not receive alike, there is a
difference to be made among receivers. But as you snatch after the leaves of
the tree, and let go the fruit, want the profit of their labor: so is it among
many men in this world, who take the sign of Christ, but let go Christ.
Now, as Moses entreating of things Leuit. 11, 4
clean and unclean, notes out four sorts of beasts, some only chew the
cud, and some only divide the hoof, some neither chew the cudde nor divide
the hoof, and some both chew the cud and divide the hoof: or, as in the days
of the Gospel, some were circumcised in heart not in flesh, Gal, 2. 3
as Titus: some were circumcised in the flesh not in the heart, as Judas: some
were circumcised neither in flesh nor in the spirit, Bph, 2, 11
as the gentiles: and some were circumcised both in the flesh and in the
spirit, Act. 16. 3
as Timothy: so is there a difference among receivers, (...) sorts of receivers
some receive Christ only spiritually, not sacramentally: some only
sacramentally, not spiritually: some neither receive him spiritually, nor
Sacramentally: and some receive him both spiritually and Sacramentally. Of
these we will speak (...) and in order, as they have bin propounded.

The spiritual eating is by faith, whereby we are made one with Christ and
partakers of his benefits without the Sacraments, John, 6, 56,
where of Christ speaks, He that eats my (...), and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. Thus to eat him, is to believe in him: and
therefore he uses these words, Ioh. 6 29. 33 35
as being of one force, to believe in him and to eat him: to drink him, and to
come unto him, This is the (...) of God, that ye believe in him whom he has
sent: I am that bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he
that believes in me shall never thrist. Again, Ioh. 6. 54. 40
Christ attributes the same fruit and effect to them that believe in him, that
he does to them which eat his body and drink his blood: therefore by eating
and drinking he means nothing but believing. He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life: And in the 40. verse of the same chapter,
he says, This is the will of my father, that every one that believes in the
son, should have cternall life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Heerby we may see that Christ attributes the same to believing, which in the
other place he did to eating and (...): so that the meaning of Christ is, that
to believe in him is to eat him. And thus many receive Christ, eating and
drinking his body and blood, that never came to the Sacraments. Here (...)
some will object, If this doctrine be true, then are the Sacraments needless.
For if Object
we may (...) christ by faith spiritually without any use or coming to the
Lords supper, to what end serves the Supper? It seems by this, to be made
void and superfluous. God forbid: for the sacraments are the holy ordinances
Answer.
of Christ by his blessing appointed for our help and benefitte, so that the
most perfect christians of the strongest faith, have need to seek the strength
ofsaith against weakness and wavering in the promises of God.

Notwithstanding, we must confess to the glory of god and the great comfort
of many persons, that the faithful soul may and does often feed upon christ
to salvation, beside the use of the sacrament. For the spiritual grace is not
of necessity tied to the outward signs, as if without them God cannot or does
not sometimes bestow the same. We see in the acts of the Apostles, Act. 10, 2.
44
Cornelius and his company was sealed with the spirit of God before the
receiving of the outward sacrament. Abraham believed the promise being strong
in faith, Romans 4. 18, 10, 18
and under hope believed above hope before circumcision was given unto him.

Thus also the believing thief upon the cross, though he did nener receive
the sacrament of christ, yet he did eat the body and drink the blood of christ
to eternal life: so that he believed in him, Luke 23, 40
and was the same day with him in paradise. He was not crucified for the
profession of christ, but was condemned for the merit of his transgression:
neither did he suffer because he believed, Lumb. sent. lib 4. did. c. 1
but he believed while he suffered. He was not baptized, he received not the
Lords supper, yet his Romans 10, 10
says saved him, spiritually eatinge the true food of everlasting life. Rom,
10. With the heart man believes unto rightcousnesse, and with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation: for the scripture says, whosoever believes in him
shall not be ashamed. According to that in the prophet, The just shall live
Habac. 2, 4
by faith, And John 11. I am the resurrection and the life he that believes in
me, though he were dead, yet he shall live, and whosoever lives and believes
in me, 10. xi. 25, 26
shall never die. This ministers great comfort in trials, and tribulations, to
consider that howsoever by sickness, by persecution, by imprisonment, we may be
separated from the Supper of christ, Rom 8, 35
yet we cannot be separated from christ: though we may be hindered from eating
him sacramentally, yet we cannot be hindered from eating him spiritually: though
we may be kept from eating the bread and drinking of the cup of the Lord, yet
we cannot, by the malice of Satan or violence of his instruments, be kept from
feeding upon christ by faith to salvation.

Again, other receive christ only sacramentally and not spiritually, who are
partakers of the outward Elements of bread and wine, and so receive the bare
signs of the body and blood of Christ. For, as they are said to eat the true
body of christ spiritually, which receive christ with the mouth of the soul,
that is, by a true faith, and are truly joined to him: so they eat him
sacramentally, that handle, eat, and drink the signs and seals of his true
body; but because they want faith, they want the means to receive christ
himself.

Thus many have bin baptized, that were never regenerated and inwardly purged,
Act. 8, 13
as appears in Simon the sorcerer whose heart was not upright, so that albeit
he were partaker of the Sacrament of regeneration and repentance, yet he
remained in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity. So, many have
resorted to the Lords Supper, that never drew nourishment or strength of Faith
from him to life and salvation: and thus many thousands in the world come to
the sacraments.

(...), some neither receive Christ spiritually nor sacramentally: and such are
they, that never come to christ nor receive the sacraments of christ: such are
they that live out of the bosom of the church, as it were out of the Arc of
Noah, as Infidels, Jews, Turks, Saracens, Persians, and such like, these mast
needs perish in the deep floodes of Gods endless judgments. For, as christ is
the fountain of life, and the wel-spring of all Colos. 1, 19 and 2, 3
heavenly treasures that accompany salvation, and the Sacraments his
instruments whereby these graces are conveyed unto us, and the church the
parties to whom both these belong: so such as are without Christ: without the
sacraments, without grace, without the church, and consequently without the
privileges that pertain to the heirs of his eternal kingdom, lie in
darkness, and in the shaddowe of death, Mat. 15, 26
and are as Dogs to whom the childrens bread does not belong.

Lastly, other receive Christ both spiritually by faith, and sacramentally with
the mouth, who are partakers both of the signs and of the things signified,
who eat of the bread of the L. Aug. tract. 59 in Johan.
and the bread which is (...) L. And thus the apostles thatsat at the table
with christ at his last supper, did receive him, applying the outward part to
their bodies, and the inward part to their souls. Also, thus all the faithful
that come to the table of chapter to the end of the world, do receive him
spiritually and sacramentally to the great comfort of their own souls: and thus
must every one of us seek to come to chapter whensouer we come to the sa. of chapter
Wherefore, we see what difference and distinction is to be made between those
that receive christ, that we be not deceived in the manner of the receiving of
him.

Again, seeing only the faithful are the inward part of this sacrament, it
is not to be administered to such as show themselves unfaithful and
unrepentant, so far as they may be known so to be. Such as are without faith,
without repentance, without sanctification have no right and interest in this
blessed communion. For, if every one should without difference be admitted and
received: the Church of God, which is a blessed fellowship of Saints, should
be turned into a stye of unclean Swine, a stable of unclean beasts, a cage
of (...) birds, and as Christ speaks, the (...), 2, 16 Luk, 19, 46
house of God should be made a (...) of thieves. God did shut out of his Ezekiel,
44, 9 Leuit, 10, 10 Math, 7, 6
sanctuary every stranger vncircum cised in heart and in the (...): he
commanded also the priests to put a difference between the holy and profane,
between the clean and unclean. (...) her to belongs that saying of Christ
Math. 7. Give ye not that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, least they tread you under their (...), and (...) again all to
rent you. If therefore such as remain in gross and open sins of blasphemy,
swearing contempt of Gods word, adultery, (...), uncleanness, wantonness,
drunkenness, maliciousness, and such like, offer themselves at any time with
the rest of the members of the church to partake this supper, and as it were
insectious leapers come into the Lords host Leuit, 13, 3 45, 46 Numb, 5, 2, 3 2
King 15, 5
to be admitted to the sacrifices: it is the Pastors duty to use the power of
the keys, and bar them from this Sacrament, until there appear in them the
testimonies of repentance, and the confession of their offenses. Should not the
shepherd fever the rotten and (...) sheep from the fold? Does not 1 cor, 5, 6
a little leaven sower the whole lump? Will an householder admit into his house
every one that vanteth himself to be of the household? The Idothers, by the
light of nature, Hesiod, (...) oper (...) dier. Eustath in (...). lib. 1
would not suffer all to approach to their sacrifices, their heathnish
sacrifices, but cried out that profane persons should be packing and get them
thence, and not presume to offer with unwashed hands. Such as have a very
clear (...) aine and spring of Waters committed unto them, if they see (...)
swine come to ward it, Chris. hom. 83. in Mat. cap, 37
must not suffer them to trouble the spring and annoy the water. Shall they
then, that have the sacred and hallowed spring, not common water, but of the
precious blood of Christ springing up to eternallife committed unto them, Zeph.
3, 4
suffer such as are notoriously (...) with sin, to profane the blood of
Christ, and make a mock of him to their own destruction? Wherefore such as
are open Wicked persons are not, without open repentance, to be admitted to
the Sacrament of the supper, but to be separated from the Church, as dead
members from the body, and as rotten sheep from the flock, 1 Cor. 5, 7 use. 3.
that the rest may be preserved in sound doctrine, and in innocence of life and
conversation.

Moreover, if only the faithful receive christ, let every one prepare a true
and lively faith in his heart. It is not enough to have the bodily hand to
receive, the mouth to taste, and stomach to digest: but we must bring with us
the hand of faith. For this holy supper, albeit by Gods ordinance it be a
spiritual thing, yet through the unworthiness of the receivers, it becomes a
mere corporal and earthlything. The passover was a lively figure of Christ,
Reave, xiii, 8
representing the lamb slain from the beginning of the world: but such as
did eat thereof unworthily, it was to them an instrument of destruction, and
as the messenger of death. Iudu was one of the twelve and did eat the paschall
lamb with the rest, but he did not eat christ with the rest: he did receive
damnation to himself, John 13, 2
Satan entering into him, and procuring the confusion of soul and body. It
seems he received the supper of the Lord, Ioh. xiii. 30
forasmuch as Ioh. 13 the Evangelist notes, that as soon as he had received
the soppe, he went immediately out. Wherefore Luke 22, (...)
that which Luke affirms, cha, 22. Behold the hand of him that betraieth me
is with me at the table, albeit it be set down after the supper, yet, was
uttered before the supper, according to the usual manner Hill. in Mat. c, 30.
and lib. 8 de Trinitate
of the scripture. And this is the judgment of sundry writers Hill. in Matt c.
30, and lib, 8 de trinitate. Clem. Romans constable, l, 2, c. 61
both old and new. But inasmuch as he was present at the Passover, which was a
figure of the passion of Christ, God by this one fearful example teaches, that
he never suffers the abuse of his Sacraments to go unpunished. The Apostle
says. 1 cor. 11. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
his own judgment: Zanch, de redemp, lib, 1 cap, XIX and 16 Beza in 10. 13 and
tractat. de excom.
for this cause many are sick, and weak among you, and many sleep. Ungodly
persons that he and live in sin, together with all impenitent persons,
attribute to much to the outward sign, and rest therein as in the comfort of
their souls. Adam thought after his fall, if he could reach out his hand and
take the fruit of the tree of life and eat thereof, Gen, 3, 22
he should live for ever. For these words used in that place, Least he put
forth his hand to the tree of life, and eat and live for ever: do respect the
purpose and intent of the man, not the event and issue of the matter: inasmuch
as the eating of that fruit all the days of his life could not give grace, or
restore him to that life he had lost, and to that high estate from whence he
was fallen. Now, as he imagind, if he could but taste of the tree of life again,
it should go well with him: so his posterity in all ages, dream of a secret power
inherent in the sacraments, whereas by taking the same unworthily, and by
judging of them corruptly, sin is increased, god is offended, and the
punishment is dubled. The ark was a testimony of gods presence, a witness of his
love and leag with man, and an assured sign that God would make his dwelling
place among them, that he would abide with them, that he would walk before
them, that he would be their gracious God, and that they should be his people:
but the Priests, elders and people attributed overmuch unto it, and far greater
things the^ they 1 Samuel 4, 3
ought, They said, Wherefore has the lord smitten us this day before the
Philistims? Let us bring the arc of the covenant of the lord ovt of shiloh
unto us, that when it comes among us, it may save us out of the hanas of our
enemies. Eue^ as the church of Rome, when any judgment or calamity is upon
them, carry forth their breaden-god on procession, hold him up to be seen, and
adored, and thereby think to have themselves deliuerd, and Gods wrath to be
appeased. These never thought of turning to God with all their hearts, and of
changing their lives: but ascribe salvation and deliverance to the Arc it
self, and attribute power to the outward sign, which of it self and in it
self was no better then a few boards joined together, and therefore through
their vain confidence 1 Samuel, 4, X
they were destroyed, the Arc was taken, the two sons of Eli were slain,
and the whole host was discomfited. Thus is it with the sacrament, and with
such as come without faith to the Sacrament. The sacrament indeed is holy, the
sacramental rites are holy, the bread and wine are holy: but let them be
received of persons that are profane and unholy, they make the sacraments to
themselves unholy, so far are they from conferring grace and holiness to all
receivers of them. For can the Sacraments make him holy that is unholy? Or a
godly man, that is ungodly? Or make him to fear an oath, that is a blasphemer?
They cannot: nay to such the Sacraments become unholy, and the receivers grow
more unholy, as Judas did after the partaking of the passover. Wherefore, God
as a just judge would drive Adam out of the garden of Eden, least putting forth
his hand to the tree of life, he should take and receive it unworthily, Mercer
in 3 cap. Genes, analys, Fra^ci Iunij in Gen
thereby profaning Gen, 3, 22
the sacrament, and so eat to himself judgment. The Sacrifices were holy
ordinances of God, yet when men that lived ungodly came unto them, they turned
to be sin to them: so is it with all those that come without faith and
feeling to the Supper of the Lord, let us not therefore be faithless but
faithful.

Lastly, if the faithful only receive with profit: then such as are
Hypocrites and wicked livers cannot be partakers use. 4.
of the body and blood of Christ, no more then God and Satan can be joined
together. True it is, such may receive the bare signs, but they receive them
to their condemnation, because, Wicked me^ do not receive Christ.
through want of faith and repentance they offend God, repel Christ from them
and all his benefits, and draw unto themselves temporal and eternal
punishments. For, no man can eat christ, and withal eat his own damnation.
Again, whosoever eats the flesh of christ and drinks his blood, shall live
for ever, and has christ d welling in him to salvation (for christ can never
be separated from his saving graces) but the ungodly shall not live for ever by
christ with God. For christ is not eaten with the teeth or mouth, as the
gospel directly determines. John, 6. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, has eternal life: my flesh is meat indeed, my blood is drink
indeed, John 6, 14
he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him.
But infidels and wicked persons have not eternal life, neither abide in
christ, therefore by the doctrine of christ our savior, Aug. tract in Johan XXV
they neither eat his flesh, nor drink his blood. We must open the eyes of
our faith to behold him, and the mouth of our soul to receive him: for by
faith only we are made partakers of him, which the ungodly want John 4, (...)
he that drinks of the blood of christ shall never be more a thirst.

Thirdly, we know that satan the prince of darkness, rules in all the hearts of
the children of disobedience, and sits in their consciences 2 Cor. 14, 4
as the God of this world, and fills them full of iniquity, as we see in
the example of Judas. Now, if these receive the body of Christ: then christ and
the devil should dwell in one subject together, and be ioynt-possessors of
one and the same house: Luk, xi. 21
but this cannot be: these cannot be at one: these can never be friends
reconciled: there is no 2 cor, 6. 14
fellowship between righteousness and unrighteousness, there is no communion
between light and darkness, there is no concord between Christ and Beliall.
Fourthly, the Apostle teaches, that where christ is Romans 8. 9
he works mortification and dying to sin, Romans 8, If any have not the
spirit of Christ, the same is not his: and if Christ be in you, the body is
dead because of sin, but the spirit is life for righteousness sake. But the
wicked are not dead to sin, they are dead in their sins and trespasses: and
they have sin not only remaining but reigning in them, therefore christ
cannot be in them. Fifthly, where christ is, there are all things necessary to
salvation: and to whom God gives his son, Romans 8. 31
to him he gives justification, sanctification, redemption, repentance,
remission of sins, and eternal life, as Romans 8. If God be on our side, who
shall be against us? Who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to
death, how should he not with him give us all things also? But the wicked have
not these gifts accompaning salvation, they are not justified, they are not
sanctified, they are not regenerated: therefore they cannot have christ from
whom these flow. Sixthly, we are charged to try and 2 cor. 13, 5
prove our own hearts, whether Christ be in us or not, that thereby we may
discern of our estate and standing in the faith, 2 Cor. (...). Prove your
selves whether ye are in faith: examine your selves, know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? To what
purpose serves this trial and examination, if christ may be in us, and yet
remain rejected? Wherefore, Christ cannot be in us, if we be not approved,
but refused of God.

Lastly, the Apostle charge the Church of the Corinthians, not to eat things
sacrificed to idols in 1 cor. X, XX
the idols temple, because they cannot be partakers of christ and the Dinels,
nor drink of the cvp of Christ and of the cup of Dyuels, 1 Cor. 10. 20. 21.
These things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice them to Devils and
not unto god, and I would not that ye should have fellowship with the Devils,
ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of Devils. Where
he shows that a man may come polluted with idol sacrifices to the Lords
Supper, but then he cannot be partaker of Christ indeed and in truth. Thus we
see the doctrine of the church of Rome stricken to the ground, which hold it as
a principle of their faith and teach it to others, that wicked men do receive
and eat Bell. de sacr. Euch. li. 1. c. 14 Lumb lib. 4 sen. did. 9. c 2
christ himself in the supper, making christ indeed to be no Christ. For
whereas we have showed, that this sacrament consists of the outward signs
which are bread and wine, and the inward truth represented by them which is
Christ's body and blood, according to the doctrine of the holy scripture, and
the common consent of all antiquity: the Romanists have turned this truth
topsie turuie, and have laid a new plat-forme of the (...) of the Supper. Hence
it is, that they have abolished the signs of bread and wine, Bellar. de sacr.
euch. lib 1, cap. 13
and make Christ Jesus an outward part, as it were thrusting him out of the
doors to be received of all both good and bad, and the grace of Christ to be
the inward part taken only of the faithful. Thus they make a deuorcement and a
separation between Christ and his saving graces, which can never be parted and
divided. For whosoever receives Christ, pertaketh the merits and graces of
christ: and whosoever enjoys the graces of christ, imbraceth withal christ
himself. Besides, if christ be the sign, and the sanctifying graces of Christ
the thing fignified according to the rule of the church of Rome: what shall we
say of the accidents and shows of bread and wine, whereunto shall they be
reduced? what part shall they act and play in this comedy? wherefore we hold
it as a strong truth, which we have euinced by sundry reasons, that wicked
men are not made partakers of christ.

Chap. 12. Of the first use of the Lords supper.
HItherto we have spoken of all the parts of this sacrament, as well outwatde
as inward, which is the first (...) to be considered in the doctrine of them
as we showed before: now we are to handle the uses or ends of the Lords
Supper, which are Three ends of the iordes Supper.
principally these three: first, to show forth with thanksgiving, the death,
cross, and sufferings of christ. Secondly, to teach us our communion and
growth with and in christ, thirdly, to declare our communion and growth in and
with our brethren. In these three, stands the knowledge of those rich and
great benifites which are bestowed vponall worthy communicants, which have
sactified and prepared their hearts for this holy action. These things being
duly considered, The false ends of this sacrament rehearsed and refelled.
do directly condemn the church of Rome, who burying these true ends of the
Lords Supper, the commemoration of his passion, the merit of his cross, our
communion with Christ, and our fellowship one with another, have altered it
like the ship-mans hose into all forms and fashions, and make it profitable for
all purposes, for peace and war, for tempests and calm weather, for the
fruits of the earth, and distemperature of the air, for the whole and sick,
for men and beasts, for the living and for the dead. And to begin with the
last, as none of the least corruptions of this Sacrament, it was concluded in a
Counsel, that as a prayer therein is made for the living, conc. cabil. can. 33
so the remembrance of the dead is to be made in all Masses. It is adjudged an
excellent remedy against storms and tempests of the sea, and therefore al
seamen are warned in times of danger to call to their minds and remember to
sing the Masses d which are accustomed to be sung for te^pests. And as they
make it good in storms: so they make it serve turn in the day of battle to
save them from the sword of the enemy; for the Priests are charged to say the
Masses used for them that go to wars. Besides, these abuses, they make it
available to purge and clear offenders suspected of any crime, Number. 5, 19
like the bitter and cursed waters, making trial of the suspected wife,
whereupon the counsel of worms determines, that If any monastery be
suspected of theft, let him be purged by the taking of the sacrament. Thus
Sybicon Bishop of Spire in the counsel of Mentz did by it purge himself of
adultery, about the year 1100, an use never intended by the spirit of God,
nor practiced by any of the Apostles, to institute it to discover secrets.
Likewise, sometimes it is taken to be good against inchanters and enchantments:
sometimes to be good for the remedy and recovery of sickness, to deliver
souls out of purgatory, to preserve from the plague, to save cattle, to cure
the fever, to recover again things lost, to take away toothache, to clear the
eyes, and what not? All these fancies and supposed ends of this Sacrament agree
not with the institution of christ, nor with the former uses set down, which
now we come to handle and to prove out of the doctrine of the Apostles
themselves.

Touching the first and principal end, that is, the remembrance, meditation,
and showing forth the death of christ with all thanksgiving: this he commanded
to us at his last (...) from us, which ought much to stick in our minds because
the last words of a dear friend ready to part from us, do often times leave
behind both deep impressions and devout affections in us. Indeed, when we
read of the passion and death of christ, it does not much move us: to hear it
opened and expounded, it moves in a farther degree: but more then these, to
have before our eyes a visible representation of the crucifieng of christ in
his last supper, does move us most of all. The institution of this Sacrament
he did in wisdom reserve, till the approaching of his death, that we might
not forget him when he is gone from us. So god the father, after the universal
flood drawning the whole world, for a remembrance of his mercy, in delivering
Noah and his family from the waters, and of his promise made, Gen 9, 14
never to destroy it so again: left to them and al posterity the (...) bow.
When he had justly smitten the first borne of the Egyptians, and graciously
saved the first borne of Israel: he commanded Moses Exo. 13, 1, 2
to sanctify to (...) all the first born, that first opens the womb, to
remember the day in which they came out of the land of Egypt. When he had
miraculously fed the Israelites with Manna from heaven, that men did eat
Angels food, Exodus 16, 32
he would have a golden pot full of it to be reserved in the Arc of
remembrance, for the better remembrance of so great a work. So likewise, being
delivered by the precious blood of christ from the floods of sin (...) have
gone over our heads, and eased of the heavy burden that pressed down our
hearts: we have received baptism to keep us in remembrance thereof, that we
are ciensed from the filthynes of sin. Again, being nourished with christ's body
crucyfied, and his blood shed for us, we are commanded to use this mystery, to
continue an holy remembrance of his death and passion to our endless comfort.

This end, to wit, to be to us a remembrance of Christ's sacrifice on the
cross, is taught by the Apostle, So often as ye shall eat of this bread and
drink of this cup, ye show the lords death till he come. In like manner, the
Evangelist Luk, of the bread he says, Do this in remembrance of me: and of the
cup, Do this Luke 22, 19.
as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me, by declaring his death.
And we declare the Lords death, when we publicly confess with our mouth and
believe with the heart, that our whole hope and affiance for life and
salvation, is surely set in the Lords death, that we may glorify him by our
confession, and exhort others by our example to glorify him, because his death
is our life, his passion is our salvation, his suffering is our rejoicing. We
our selves are the principal and proper causes that he was torn and
tormented: our sins wounded him, we our selves crucified him: we, even we
were the causes, for he was chastised for us, that by death he might deliver us
from death, and from Heb. 2, 14
him that had the power of death. Our evil motions, our vile thoughts, our
corrupt words, and our sinful works, did set on work Pontius Pilate, Herod,
Annas, Caiphas, Judas, the Gentiles and the Jews, who were but instruments, as
the cross, nails, the hammer, and spear: these were, as our servants and
workmen, in the evil action of his crucifieng. Wherefore, to speak the
truth, not Satan the tempter, not Judas the Traitor, not Caiphas the
highpriest, not Pilate the chief judge, not the Jews that conspired against
him, not the false witnesses that accused him, not the band of men that scorned
him, not the passengers that nodded their heads at him, not the soldier that
pierced him, not the executioners that railed and nailed him on the Cross, are
so much to be accused and reproved for his sufferings, as we, we I say our
selves and our own sins. Not that we can excuse those cursed instruments
that crucified the Lord of glory, who shall receive according to their works,
Zach. 12, X John xix, 37
when they shall see him whom they have pierced, but to teach us chifely to
accuse and condemn our selves. We bound him with cords, we beat him with
rods, we buffeted him with fistes, we crowned him with thorns, we reviled him
with our mouths, we railed at him with reproaches, we nodded at him with our
heads, we thrust him through with (...), we berraied him with a kiss, we
pierced his hands and feet with nails, we crucified him between two thieves,
we condemned him through false witnesses, we poured shame and contempt upon
his person, we judged him as plagued and smitten of God. For, inasmuch as our
f^lts and offenses procured these things to be done unto him, we were the doers
of them, and the dea'ers in them. And surely, then we are profitably grounded
in the doctrine of the Who they are that profit (...) by christ's pastio^
passion of Christ, when our haits cease to sin, and we are pricked with an
inward grief of those great and grievous transgressions, 1 John. 3, 6 Esaias 53,
5, 6
whereby, as with spears, we pierced the side and wounded the very soul of
the immaculate lamb of God, as Ioh, 3, Who so sins, neither has seen him,
nor known him. And the prophet (...). teaches, chap. 53. He was wounded for
our transgressions he was broken for our iniquities: the chastssement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes (...) are healed: the Lord haih laid
upon him the iniquity of us all. Seeing then, christ was slain for our sins,
let us kill sin in our selves; seeing he dyed for us, let us labor that sin
may be dead in us: seeing he was crucified for us and our salvation, let us
crucify our own Instes that they reign not in our mortal bodies: seeing his
heart was pierced with a spear, let us have our hearts thrust through, pierced,
and pricked, with unfeigned sorrow for all our iniquities. This is the right
use, the true end, and the sound comfort following and flowing from the death
of christ.

To conclude we must learn and hold for ever, that we have the beg nning and
chief cause in our selves, which did crucify christ and crush him with most
bitter sorrows: let us then be revenged of our sins, and do al despite we can
unto them: let us endite them, arraigne them, accuse them, condemn them and
nail them to his cross: let us kill the^, mortify them, and bury them in his
grave for ever. This is the first end of the supper, which is sanctified by the
breaking of the bread and pouring out of the wine, declaring unto us, that as
the body of our lord was broken, and by violent means afflicted, so his blood
gushed out and flowed plentifully out of his gaping and bleeding wounds. This
must be our meditation, whenever we come to the lords table.

Chap. 13. Of the second use of the lords supper.
THe second use of the lords supper is our spiritual union 1 cor. x, 16
and communion with christ. This the Apostle declares, The cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of christ? The bread
which we break, is it not the communion of the body of christ? Whereby he
means, that the faithful which come conscionably and worthily to the lords
table, are joined and united to whole Christ, by the bread Sacramentally, by
faith instrumentally, by the holy ghost spiritually, and by them all most
effectually. For, we take the bread into our hands, and likewise we take the
cup into our hands as christ commanded, saying, Mat. 26, 26
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, divide ye. Neither do we lay them apart, or hide
them aside, or reserve them in a box, or abstaiue from them: but when we have
taken them, we eat, we digest them, we are nourished by them, and they are
turned into our substance. So christ, being eaten of the Godly by faith, is
united to them by his spirit (as we have showed before) whereby they are made
one with christ and he one with them. And as meat plentifully prepared,
daintily dressed, and only seen upon the table, does not nourish the body, or
take away hunger: so, if the gospel be preached and the sacraments
administered, except we apply the promises of the gospel, and believe that
christ withal his gifts is ours, they prosit nothing toward our salvation.
Such therefore as lawfully and worthily come to the lords supper, as to a table
richly furnished and to a banquet liberally provided, must not only generally
believe that Christ suffered in the flesh and dyed for sinners, but Galat. 2, 20
particularly for themselus, yea communicates himself and al his gifts to
them abundantly, as certainly as themselves eat of the bread and drink of
the cup.

This union and communion is near, and wonderful great: and therefore the
apostle fitly calls it a mystery, even Ephesians 5, 32
a great mystery, speaking of christ and of the church. For, what union can be
greater, then that which is between the thing nourishing, and the thing'
nourished? We have nothing in Adam, but that which conueyeth death unto us: so
that is is needful to be joined to one which may give life to us, that as we
die in Adam, so we may live in Romans 5, 19
him. This union cannot by reason be expressed, or fully understood. As Christ,
in the days of his flesh, had a dubble kindred, one earthly and carnal
kindred, the other spiritual, that by faith received his word, and believed
in his name, of whom he said, Math. xii, 44
Behold my mother and my Brethren; for whosoever shall do my fathers will,
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, sister, and mother: so is it in
this vnio and felloship with him, one is outward and bodily, which al mankind
has with him, in that he is partaker of our flesh and blood, the other inward
and spiritual, whereby we are made partakers of him and of al his saving
graces to everlasting life. As Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, and united
our nature to him, taking upon him, Heb. 2, 16
not the Angels nature, but the seed of Abraham, every reprobate has this
union with him, in that he took upon him the shape of a man: but there is a
mystical and marvelous union, whereby he dwells in us by faith, whereby we
are truly coupled to him, made partakers of him, delivered from sin, and made
heirs of everlasting life, quickening and sustaining us, as food which
preserves the life of the body. If the arm joined to the body have no life,
no sense, no benefit of vital spirits, it is no part of the body, though it
be united to it: so the wicked living without faith, are as it were senseless,
they have no forgiveness of sins, no sanctification, no salvation, and
therefore are no true members of Christ. If he pour not life and grace into
them, they are not his members: if he kill not sin in them, they are not
united spirituallie unto him, The bodily union with him, shall profit nothing:
it is the spirit that gives life.

Seeing then the receiving of the bread and wine which Use. 1
turn into our substance, teaches the mystical union between Christ and his
members: we learn first from hence, that all the faithful and godly are truly
made partakers of Christ and his graces, as the members receive life from the
head, and the tree moisture from the root. For, even as the wife joined to her
husband in marriage, is thereby made partaker of his body and goods, has
interrest with him in the commodities of this life, Genesis 20, 16
and looks for norishment, food, fellowship, protection, and government from
him: so, being made one with christ, we are endued with his he auenly gifts and
blessings. This must be our comfort in all dangers and tentations, in all
trials and assaults, to consider that we are one with christ, we are not only
dear unto him, but nearely joined with him, as members to the head, as the wife
to the husband, and as the branches to the vine, and therefore can never be
separated from him in life or death.

Secondly, this straight uniting of the faithful to Christ, shows that the
ungodly have no part nor fellowship in use. 2
him and with his graces: though they be joined to a communion of the same
nature, and have many common gifts of knowledge, and understanding, yet Christ
never dwells in them with his saving graces and with his spirit of
sanctification, he possesses not their hearts, he works not in them a
particular persuasion of their reconciltation to God, neither an hungring
desire, above all things to be at unity and peace with him, neither a distaste
and dislike of sin, neither the comfortable spirit of grace and prayer: all
which are in some measure in all the saithful. Wherefore, although they may be
clothed with the flesh of Christ, they cannot be said to be covered with the
grace of Christ: although they be like unto him in regard of this natural
body: yet they are not endued with his heavenly spirit, they have many (...)
through him, but they want such as accompany salvation.

chap. 14. Of the third use of the Lords supper.
THe third use of the Lords supper is a spiritual communion and growth with
our The lords supper is the band of charity.
brethren, to be one body with them, flowing from the communion which we have
with Christ. For as the union between brethren and sisters of the same blood
and of the same flesh, springs from the near conjunction they have from
father and mothers as from a fountain: and as the unity and concord among
servants of the same society, arises by means of the same master: so the
faithful that have communion with christ, have likewise communion one with
another. This Paul testifies evidently, writing to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. x,
17
We that are many are one bread and one body, because we all are partakers of
one bread. This is to be understood of that communion and fellowshippe which
the members have one with another, who receive food and norishment from the
same table, thereby professing themselves to be of the self same family and
household. Besides, by the uniting together of many grains is made one bread:
of many clusters of Grapes one wine is pressed out: so, out of many members
grows up one body of the church, which is the body of christ. This makes
much to the reconciling, renueing, and maintayning of friendship, that we are
all partakers of one bread made of many corns, and (...) of the same cup of
wine made of many clusters, 1 cor. 12. 13
as the Apostle sets down, 1. cor. 11. We are all made to drink into one
spirit. Wherefore we are not only to look to our union with christ, but also
our joining our selves with them who are of the same mystical body, be they
never so many that receive with us this holy supper: in respect whereof, this
sacrament has bin called a communion.

Now, let us consider what use may be made hereof to Use. 1
our selves. Is this one end of the institution of christ's last supper, to lay
before us our communion one with another? then, what gifts soever we have
received from christ, we must employ them to the benefit and good of others.
If god have given us knowledge, we must use it io instruct the ignorant: if the
gift of zeal, we must apply it to kindle and stir up others to remember from
whence they are fallen: if faith and sanctification, we must bestow them to the
gaining and winning of others: if the outward things of this life, and this
worlds good, we must communicate them to others, according (...) their want and
out wealth, their poverty and our plenty. The candle has received light, not
for it self, but for others. The trees bring forth fruit, the clouds drop
down rain, the fountains send down water, the Sun shiaeth, the earth
flourishes, the Be gathers, the beast labors, to profit others: And
wherefore have we all received moisture from the root, light from the sun,
fruit from the tree, water from the fountain, even life from Christ, but to
impart it to others as freely as we received? This is taughtvs in many placs: 1
Pet. 4, 10 1 cor, 12, 7
Let every man as he has received the gift, minister the same one to another.
And in another place, The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to
profit withal: god has tempred the body together, least there should be any
division in the body, that the members might have the same careone for another.
So then, the gifts that we have received of understanding, wisdom, zeal,
exhortation, reprehension, and whatsoever gifts external, internal, or
eternal: let us consider that we are stewards not masters of them, and
therefore must render and give an account unto the author and giver of them,
when he shall say, (...). 16, 12
Give an account of thy stewardshippe, for thou may be no longer Steward.

Again is the Lords supper the bond of charity? and use. 2.
does it put us in mind of our communion with the saints and fellowship which
one has with another? then all such as receive the same doctrine, embrace the
same religion, and (...) at the same table, Aug. tract. 26 in Johan.
must be united in Christian love, gentleness, meeknes, and patience one toward
another, supporting one another, bearinge the burthan one of another, being
alike affected and disposed, guided by one spirit, nourished by the milk of
the same word, acknowledging one (...), professising one faith living in one
body, walking in one calling, looking for one kingedome worshipping one
Lord, meeting at one Supper, and washed with one Babtisme for our'
regeneration and sanctification, Ephesians. 4, 1 2, 3 Ruth, 1, 16, 17
according to the saying of the Apostle, Ephesians 4. Walk worthy of the vocation
whereunto ye are called, endeavoring to keeepe the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, there is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your vocation, There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one god, and
father of all, which is a boue all, and through all, and in you all. And in the
same Phil. 2, 1. 2. 3
epistle to the Philippians, If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy:
fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord and of one judgment, that nothing be done through contention. And Luke,
Act. 4. describing the Act. 4, 32
notes of the Church of Christ, says, The whole multitude of them that
believed were of one heart, and one soul, neither any of them said, that any
thing of that which he possessed was his own, but they had all things common.
Let us acknowledge our selves to be fellows of one household, and members of
one body: and evermore bring with us this fruit of love to the lords Supper,
otherwise we shall never be the Lords ghuests. If brethren that are the
children of the same father, malice and malign one another, will not the
father be angry? And if one fellow-seruantes brought up in one family, fall
together by the ears, will not their master be displeased and offended?
Seeing then, God has vouchsafed to call us his children, to admit us into
his house, to nourish us at his own table, and to preserve and reserve us to
his heaueuly kingdom: he will take from us all these privileges and (...):
if we be hateful and hating one another, and deal with us, not as with his
own children, but as with his utter enemies. Thus much of the third and last
end of the Lords Supper.

Chap. 15. Of examination before the Lords supper.
WHat the Supper of the Lord is, what are the parts and uses thereof, and what
an heavenly banquet it is for all worthy receivers, has hitherto been
sufficiently declared now it follows to set down Examination necessary
before we come to the Lords table.
the way and means how we may come (...). For the whole fruit of this Sacrament
stands in the right partaking thereof. The right manner stands in preparing
ourselves to come, and in examining ourselves before we come. No great thing
can be done well, without good care and endeavor. In all humane Cicer. de
offic. lib. 1
things of any importance, nothing is attempted or atchiued without some
preparation more or less going before, according to the nature of the matter.
Before men sit down to eat or drink their ordinary food, before they sleep,
before they wash, before they walk, before they work, some preparation goes
before. Before Ierem. 4, 4
the ground is tilled, it is prpared. Before the Exodus 19, 10
law was delivered, before the Saboth was sanctified, before the sacrifice was
offered, before the Passover was killed, before the word was received, before
prayers were uttered, the heart was in some sort prepared. One of the greatest
duties required of us, is to die well: whereunto all our life should be a
preparation, and every day should be a meditation of death, that we may not be
found unready and unprepared Math. 25, 13
when the bridegroom shall come. So the Supper of the Lord being an excellent
mystery and the food of our souls, whereby we receive Christ's body and blood:
there is required of every one, a trying, proving, and examining themselves,
least, seeking comfort by their coming, they bring upon themselves judgment
through want of preparing. This truth delivered, has the witness and consent
2 Chr. 35. 6
of many Scriptures for the confirmation thereof. The Prophet 2. Chron. 35.
says, Kill the passover, and sanctify your selves, and prepare your
Brethren, that they may do according to the word of the Lord by the hand of
Moses. And the holy man Job, when the days of the banketting of his children
were gone about, sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning,
and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all. Also the
wiseman (...). 4. Take heed to thy foot when thou enterest into the house of
God, and be more near to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools, for they
know not that they do evil. Likewise the prophet Jeremy, Lament. 3. Wherefore
is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin: let us search and
try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. To the same purpose the prophet
David says, Psalm. 4. Tremble and sin not, examine your own heart upon your
bed and be still: and Psalm. 119. I have considered my ways, and turned my
feet into thy testimonies. The Apostle Paul is very direct in this point, as
Gal. 6. 4. Let every man prove his own work: and then shall he have rejoicing
in himself only, and not in any other. Also 1 Cor 11. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup: where he
speaks of purpose of the Lords Supper. So then, it is a duty required of all
persons that come to the Lords Table, or any other exercise of religion, to
search their own hearts and consciences narrowly, how they be affected and
disposed touching the discharge of this duty.

And if we would farther consider the necessity of this examination: we fhould
find it stands upon many sufficient Reasons of this duty of Examination
reasons and causes as upon certain foundations that cannot be removed. Do we
not see men when they come into the presence of some honorable and Noble
person, Genesis 41, 14
to address themselves to do it with all renerence? Joseph being sent for, to
come before Pharaoh King of Egypt, shaued his head, and changed his raiment: and
pro, 23. When thou sit down with a ruler at meat, consider diligently
what is before thee. Therefore, when we sit at the Lords table to sup with
him, and are admitted to be his welcome ghuests: we ought much more to be
caresul to sanctify our souls with all solemnity. Consider with me a little
our own practice. We will not put our ordinary meats in a dish unwashed, nor
our common drinks into a cup vnclensed: and shall we put the signs of bread
and Wine which are chosen instruments to conueigh Christ unto us, into
vnsanctisied souls, unprepared hearts, and (...) consciences? Does not our
savior Christ reprove such hy pocrisie, when he says, Matthew. 16, 3
Ye can discern the face of the sky; and (...) you not discern the signs of
the times? And if that upper chamber, where the supper was first administered,
were trimmed and garnished: should not our hearts be prepared, into the which
it is received? Shall Christ himself offer to come into our houses: and shall
not we sanctify our hearts to entertain such a ghest? This were to great
carelessness and contempt.

Moreover, weigh with me the profit that comes to our selves to move us to
this examination. The comfort is great, the fruit is excellent, the benifit is
unspeakable to those that partake the mystery of the Supper worthily, they
receive christ, they receive remission of sins, they receive salvation, they
receive assurance of eternal life. For, if the woman diseased Math 9, 20
with an issue of blood, lo twelve year, coming behind Christ and touched
only the hemme of his garment, was made whole: then assuredly the spiritual
receiving of the body and blood of christ shall not bring less profit, if the
faith be equal, which notwithstanding is wholly lost without preparation.
Ponder with me also how by neglect of this trial of our selves, not only this
profit is lost, but the Sacrament it self is after a sort defiled. For,
howsoever it be in it self by the ordinance of God an holy and heavenly
banquet, yet to the ungodly, unregenerate, and unsanctified, it becomes unholy
and wholly earthly, Hag. 2, 14
as the prophet Haggai teaches, Chapter 2. If a polluted person touch an holy
thing, it shall be unclean. The person must be holy that will have sound
profit by the holy things of God: the man that is unholy, defiles every thing
he touches, the polluted Person polluteth all things. For as, to Tit. 1, i5
the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving
is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are corrupted: so the
profane Person defiles all things, and turns wholesome meat into noisome
poison. We must therefore use sanctified things with sanctfyed hearts: and for
spiritual meat we have spiritual vessels.

Furthermore, mark the great danger and punishment that is procured and
purchased by this want of preparation. For, the un worthy receiver is guilty 1
Cor. (...), 27
of the body and blood of Christ as the Apostle specifieth, 1 cor, xi.
Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again, He that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own judgment, because he
(...) not the lords body: for this cause many are sick and weak among you, and
many sleep. Where he teaches, that such as come unworthily, irreverently,
and otherwise then such mysteries should be handled, do despise and tread
under their feet Jesus Christ himself, provoke the Lords (...), and bring on
themselves swift damnation. Not that he is carnally and bodily present, but
because the reproache which is used in the signs, touches the body and
blood of Christ signified by them. Even as if a man should rent, disgrace,
deface, spit upon, tread and trample under his feet, and villanouslie abuse
the image, seal, and letters patents of a Prince, he should be adjudged Rens
Iae sae Maiestatis.
guilty of a grievous crime against the person of the Prince himself, not
which he receives but despiteth: so, such as come unthankfully and
unworthily to this supper, are guilty of his body, not which they have eaten,
but which they have refused and rejected being offered unto them, and therefore
are guilty of their own death, inasmuch as God with the signs offers his
own son.

Wherefore seeing the presence of God moves, seeing our own profit
persuades, seeing our own practice furthereth, seeing the defiling of the
Sacrament and the danger of unworthy receiving teaches, and lastly seeing our
own judgment in humane affairs (when the danger is not so great, nor the
loss so certain) cries out for this necessary preparation: it stands us
upon, before we enter into this holy work (whereunto of our selves we are
more unfit and unto ward, and which in it own nature is most profitable) to
set our selus before the Lord, who shall examine and judge the quick and the
dead: to search into our own ways and to keep a sessions in our own souls:
to look into our secret and hidden corruptions, how we have gone forward or
backward in golinesse: to try whether we have a knowledge, feeling, and
disliking of our sins, and whether we have any fear of Gods judgments, or
faith in his promises, or hope in his mercy: to judge our selves, that we may
not be judged of the Lord: to labor to find out our special sins, striving
against them by earnest prayer to God, and condemning them for ever in our
selves. If we would thus judge our selves, we should not be condemned with the
world. Let us be grieved for our natural blindness. Let us acknoledge confusion
of faces to be due unto us. Let us deeply imprint in our own hearts the horror
of our sins past and present. The more we perceive and discern our own
unworthiness, the greater shall be our fitnes to come to this Sacrament: and the
less we espy our own imperfections, the more we incuire the danger of Gods
judgments. So then, to touch us with true (...), and to break our stony hearts
in pieces with remembrance of our daily offenses, let us often meditate on the
death and passion of Christ, who was forsaken, scorned, buffeted, and crucified
for us: he was led as a lamb to the slaughter and shunned not the shame of the
Cross: then the powers of heaven and (...) were moved, Math. 27, 45
Judea was darkened, the earth quaked, the stones claue in sunder, the the
graves opened, the Sun was in the ful-moone eclipsed, the veil of the temple
was rent, the dead were raised, the these repented, the centurion glorified
God, and the whole order of nature was changed. All these things (...) set
before us the he inousnesse of our sins, and the greatness of gods wrath,
which could not be appeased, but by crucifieng of the body and by shedding of
the blood of Christ, which is represented to us, as in a glass, in this
Supper. Thus we have showed by testimonies and effectual reasons, that, as in
the passe-ouer they were commanded to choose them a lamb Exodus 12, 3
on the tenth day, but to kill him on the fourteenth, so that they had 4. days
liberty between the separating and the killing of him, for preparation and
sanctification of themselves: in like manner, in the supper, which is the same
to us that the passe-ouer was to the (...), the spirit of God charge this
duty upon us, that we prepare our hearts reverently thereunto.

Now, as we have seen the necessity of this examination: use. 1.
let us consider what uses are to be made thereof. Is it required of all
communicants that come to the Lords table, (...) to examine themselves? Then
from hence it follo weth, that all men are bound to know the word of God, and
to be skillful in the scripture, that thereby they (...) be able to try their
own hearts, and examine themselves by that rule. But if the rule be unknown,
the trial spoken off cannot be made, the examination commanded cannot be
practiced. Especially there is required of us the knowledge in the doctrine of
the law, not only to be able to rchearse the words, but to know the end and
mcaning of them, the special branches of them, what are the duties commanded,
what are the sins condemned: for by Romans 3, 20
the law comes the knowledge of sin, and the Apostle had not known sin,
Roman 7, 7
but by the law: for he had not known last, except the law had said, thou
shait not lust. As then, he that will try Gold from copper, must have his
touch stone: so he that will rightly examine his obedience, must familiarly be
acquainted with the Canon of the scriptures. This our Savior teaches Ioh. 5.
Search the scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternalllife, and they are
they which testisie of me.

(...) then we search them, they will give us light to search our (...). And
the Apostle requires the Colossians, John 5, 39
to have the word of God dwell plentifully in them in all wisdom. Wherefore,
he that said, examine your selves, meant we should also know the scriptures, and
especially the law of God, which must be the glass of our Colo 3, 16
lives to behold our offenses: and the very groundwork of this examination.
Iam 1, 23, 24


Again, we are charged to try out our ways, and examine use. 2
our selves? Then we learn from hence, to acknowledge a difference between
baptism and the lords supper. For baptism is due to the whole church, and
every member thereof, whether old or young, to all infants, who are the
children of faithful parents, that have given their names to Christ, and are
entered into the profession of the Gospel. And howsoever confession of faith
and fruits of repentance, are required of the elder sort, (as we have showed)
yet touching infants it is susficie^t if they be born in the church, of such as
are members of the church. But the Supper of the Lord belongs only to such as
are able to examine themselves, to try their own hearts, and to remember his
death, which things cannot agree with children. As we see in the passe-ouer,
not all the children of the faithful were admitted thereunto: but only such
as could enquire and require a reason thereof, Exodus, 12 26
and did desire to be instructed of their parents, and such as had learned to
make the law a frontlet before their eyes, and a sign upon their hands, that
so the doctrine of God might not depait out of their mouths. Besides, if we
consider the outward works in both the Sacraments aright, This overthrows
the opinion of Innocentius, Augustine, Musculus. and others, who teach it to be
(...) and needful that children be admitted to the Supper, Innocent. 1. epift.
ad patr. council. Mile. August. epist. 107 ad Vitalem. Muscul. loc. (...) de
Euchar.
we shall plainly see the truth of this diversity. For, in Baptism the action
of the minister is to wash the body with water, which requires not discretion
in him that is to be baptized, fo rasmuch as we can cleanse and wash the things
that are without reason, without understanding, without sense, and without
life. But in the sacrament of the supper, a reverent giving, an attentive
hearing, a certain understanding of that which is spoken, a wise receiving and
eating, and a careful considering of whom to take, and what to take is
required into the outward work: how much greater judgment is required, to know
that God the father gives the body and blood of his son to be received by
faith? Thus then, this examination makes a distinction between both the
sacraments of the new testament, and shows, that it is not necessary to the
salvation of infants, that they com to the Lords table.

Thirdly, seeing no man must presume to come thither without a serious
examination of himself: it Five sorts of persons barred from the lords supper
debarreth from the Lords supper five sorts of persons, to wit, children,
furious and mad men, ignorant persons, profane persons, and all sorts of
insidels. First of all, if there be a necessity of searching and trying our
selves, it excludes all infants and children in age, who understand not what
the holy spirit speaks in this Sacrament, what God the father offers, what
the Son performs, and what faith receives, they know not what it is to
eat christ spiritually, and to be nourished by him effectually. Secondly, all
foolish, furious, and mad men, being such as want the use of naturally gifts of
reason, wit, descretion and judgment, the defect whereof, whatsoever they are
in age and years, makes them as children in gifts, not being able to examine
themselves, are to be separated. Thirdlyly, howsoever many have years of
discretion, and the common use of natural gifts of understanding: yet, if they
neither have the knowledge of God, nor the knowledge of themselves, nor the
knowledge of the doctrine of the Sacraments, and other fundamental points of
religion, they are not to be admitted but refused.

Fourthly, if they have all these things, and want neither ripeness of age,
nor years of discretion, nor use of reason, nor knowledge of the doctrine
which is according to godliness: yet if they remain profane, ungodly,
unrepentant, stubborn, malicious, revenging, open contemners of God, of
godliness, and of his word, idolaters, adulterers, blasphemers, drunkards, and
such in whom appears no amendment of life, these and such like are not
interessed in this Sacrament.

Lastly, it excludes and shuts out all such as are without God in the
world, all Atheists, Insidels, Turks, Jews, and Heretics, all such as have
not yealded themselves to the Church of GOD, and have not made profession, of
their faith, and such as are worthily excommunicated from the Church by the
power of the keys: Whereby we see, that al infants and children that want
years, all furious and foolish persons that want the use of reason, all blind
and ignorant persons, that want the knowledge of God and of themselves, all
unrepentant persons that bring not with them faith and repentance, all infidels
and unbelievers with others that are out of the bosom of the church, are to
be kept back from this Supper, being such as either cannot or will not submit
themselves to this holy necessary duty of examination, thereby having no right
or title to come to his table. For such as have not the church to be their
mother, cannot be nourished with this meat of the church, to wit, the Supper
of the Lord.

Fourthly, if all persons are to prepare themselves to this Sacrament: then
none are willingly and wilfully to abstain use. 4
and refrain from coming unto it. For as such sin grievously, who present
themselves unworthily to this blessed communion: so do they greatly offend on
the other side, that ofset purpose absent themselves from this spiritual
banquet provided for them. God is dishonored both these ways, as well by
receiving irreverently, as by abstayning carelessly from this Sacrament. For he
lies under an heavy Ier. 48, 10
curse deservedly, that does any of the Lords works negligently. Even as the
patient, which being sick makes no account of the diet which the Physician
has prescribed, is no less blame worthy, then he that abuses it disorderly,
in as much as both sorts do it oftentimes to their danger and destruction: so
is he no less faulty, that makes that reckoning of the receipt which the
chief Physician of our souls the Lord Jesus has appointed, then he that
misuseth and misapplyeth the same, because both do it with great peril and
hazard to themselves. We know that such, as, being bidden Matthew. 22, 7
by the King to the wedding of his Son, made light of it and refused to come,
were destroyed as well as he that, came without his wedding garment. We know
when the word of God is preached, which is Romans 1, 16
the power of God to salvation to all that believe, such as absent themselves
from the hearing of it, perish justly, as well as they that come without faith
and repentance. We know when the passover was celebrated, such persons as were
negligent to observe and keep the same according to all that the Lord had
commanded Moses, were to be cut off from his people, Number. 9, 13
Because they brought not the offering of the Lord in his due season, they shall
be are their sin. In like manner such as neglect to come to this communion, and
abstain from it, for fear of communicating unworthily, deprive themselves of
great comfort. And this is the very cutthroat of al godliness and religion. For
why do they not, by like proportion of reason, refrain from invocation and
calling upon the name of god, for fear of praying amiss? And why may they not
absent themselves from hearing the word of God, fearing to hear amiss? So that
if this pretense were a lawful warrant to abstain from the Lords Supper for
fear of unworthy receiving, we might bid all godliness farewell, in as much as it
opens a gap for men to abstain from performing all duties of piety and
godliness. Wherefore, let not such persons flatter themselves with vain excuses
and lying words that cannot profit, neither daube with untempered mortar,
saying, we are unworthy, we cannot come: rather let them labor to shake off
their unworthiness, and to cast away Heb. 12, 1
euerything that presses down, and the sin that hangethso fast on, that so
they may be worthy receivers. Let them not contemn the commandment of christ
which says, take ye, eat ye, do this in remembrance of me. Christ has
commanded, we must obey: he says, come: shall we be so unthankful to say, we
will not come? He calls, shall we not answer? He bids his ghests, shall we
make excuses? He sends his messengers and prepares his feast, shall we not
provide and prepare to eat thereof? He offers himself unto us, shall we
contemn the blessed remembrance of his death and passion, even the price of
our redemption, and shut our selves from the communion which the faithful have
with him and one with another? So that we are to persuade our own hearts,
that God is provoked to anger, as well by negligence in abstaining, as by
unworthiness in receiving the Supper.

Chap. 16. Of the knowledge of God: the first part of examination.
AS we have waighed the necessity of preparing and examining our selves: so let
us consider the manner how it is to be performed. Such as will in an holy
manner prepare themselves Four points required in examination of our selves.
to celebrate the Lords Supper to the glory of God and comfort of their own
souls, must diligently acquaint themselves with these 4. points, with
knowledge, faith, repentance, and reconciliation to those whom they have
offended. It is required of all persons that come to this Sacrament, to know
the grounds of religion, and understand the doctrine of the sacraments.
Secondly, to believe in christ, and to look for salvation in him alone,
inasmuch as there is no other name under heaven by which we must be saved. So
then we must come with faith, which is the hand to apprehend christ. Thirdly,
to abhor and detest our sins, to hate them with an unfeigned hatred as our
deadly and most dangerous enemies, and to have godly sorrow for them which may
cause repentance not to be repented off. Lastly, to love our brethren truly
and sincerly, yea even our enemies. If we find not these things in our selves,
we must carefully use al holy means appointed for this purpose, to begin them
in us: otherwise our estate will prove to be fearful and dangerous. We must
with all sincerity, conscience, and zcale, use prayer, the word read and
preached, conference, meditation, and such like helps as may further them in
us. If we do find them in us, though feeble and in great want and weakness,
we are not to abstain from the sacrment, but to come thereunto to seek
strength of faith and increase of obedience. Wherefore, Mat. 11, 28
our savior calls such unto him, come to me all ye that are weary and sore
laden, and I will ease you: take my yoke on you, and ye shall find rest upon
your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. And Chap, 12. A
bruised Matt. 12, 20
reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he
bring forth judgment unto victory.

Touching the first, we are to observe, The 1. part of examination is knowledge
of gods word.
that such as will come aright to the lords Supper, must have the knowledge of
Gods word, which is the foundation and groundwork of faith. We must know what
to believe, and must learn the doctrine of salvation out of the Scripture. Our
Savior Christ, in that heavenly prayer which he made a little before his
passion, uses these words to his father, John 17, 3
This is eternal life to know thee to be the only very God and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ. We must know how miserable all men are of themselves, that
we are separated from God, the children of wrath by nature as well as others,
and the very firebrands of hell. They that want this knoledge, cannot judge
aright of the parts and uses of this Sacrament, nor desire this heavenly meat
which nourishes to eternal life. So then, knowledge must necessarily go
before faith: for it is the nature of faith to believe that which it knows,
and therefore where there is small knowledge, there is a little faith: and
where there is no knowledge, there can be no faith: according Romans 10, 17
to the doctrine of the Apostle Roman. 10. Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. The knowledge required of us when we approach to
this Sacrament, stands in these two What particular points are necessary to
be known of all that come to the communion.
points: first in the knowledge of God, Secondly in the knowledge of our
selves. In these two branches stands the first part of examinarion. And
these two points are so nearly joined and knit together, that no man can
throroughly know God, unless he know himself: and no man can have the perfect
knowledge of himself, except he know God in whom Act. 17, 28
he lives, moves, and has his being. Under these two heads, many particular
points are containd, necessary to be known of those that offer themselves to
be partakers of this sacrament. First, that there is only one God, that has
made himself known in three persons, John 5, 7
the Father, the son, and the Holy Ghost: Secondly, that God made man and all
other creatures good, and governs all things well: Thirdly, man did fall
through the entisement of the Devil, and his own wilful disobedience in
breaking the commandments of God: Fourthly there are ten commandments
divided into two tables: where of the four first commandments concern our
duties to God, the six last our duties toward our neighbor: Fifthly, we cannot
keep these commandments, nor any one of them, but we break them daily, in
motion, in thought, in word, and in deed: the breach where of deserves Deuteronomy
27, 26
the curse of God, that is, all miseries in this life, death in the end of
this life, and Hell fire after this life: Sixthly, there is no means or remedy
in ourselves or in any creature, but only in Jesus Christ the eternal son of
god, Luke 1, 35
who is god and man: God, that he might ouercom death: and man, that he might
die for our sins. He has pacified gods wrath, fulfild the righteousness of that
law, sanctified our nature, adopted us to be the children of god, and makes
our duties (though weak) acceptable to his father. Seventhly, all have not
deliverance by him, but only such as believe in Christ, 1 cor. 1, 30
whose obedience and righteousness is made ours by a lively faith, whereby we
are persuaded that through him our sins are forgiven, and we made the
children of God: Eighthly, faith is a gift of God applying Christ and al his
merits particularly to our selves, and teaching that he is a Savior unto us.
Ninthly, being saved by christ through faith, Luke 1, 74
we may not live as we list: this unspeakable mercy teaches us to deny all
ungodliness, and all worldly and sinfulllusts, to to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present evil world, and to walk in newnes of
life, Ephe. 6, 5
because no unrighteous person shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Tenthly this faith which brings forth a reformed life, is wrought in our
hearts by the Holy-ghoaste through the preaching of the word, being truly
expounded, and profitably applied with doctrine, confutation, exhortation,
correction, reformation, and consolation: and it is increased besides, by
reading, praying, and receiving of the sacraments. Eleuenthly touching prayer,
we have a perfect platform left us Matthew 6, 9
by Christ in the Gospel, which contains six petitions, the three first
concerning the glory of God, and the three last concerning the necessities of
our own bodies and souls, 12. the sacraments are another help to strengthen
and increase faith, which are outward signs and seals ordained of God, to
assure us that Christand all his saving graces are given unto us. These are two
in number. Baptism, the Sacrament of our regeneration and new birth, assures
us by the washing of water, that our sins are for given by the blood of Christ,
and we borne a new to god. The Lords supper assures us, that by bread and
wine given and received according to gods ordinance, Christ is given us to be
our spiritual norishment to everlasting life.

These grounds of religion must be known and understood, that we may learn
how wretched and miserable we are by nature, and what remedy god has ordained
for our deliverance. We shall never feel the sweetness of gods mercy, until we
find the greatness of our own misery. We cannot perceive how greatly we stand
in need of Christ, until we know our own woeful and wretched estate by reason
of sin. Such then as are ignorant in these necessary points of christian
religion, and especially in the doctrine of both the sacraments, can never come
aright unto them, can never show forth the Lords death, can never discern his
body, but blindly run on to the danger of their own souls. Wherefore it
stands all men upon, to desire the sincere milk of the word 1 Pet. 2, 1, 2
that they may grow thereby, to seek after knowledge, as for silver, and after
understanding as precious stones. A loathing stomach never wol digesteth the
meat that is put into it: and he that is full, despises the Honey comb. What is
the reason, that they remain blind in the matters of god and their own
salvation, and as bruit Beasts in understanding? Surely, because they desire
not the ways of god, they regard not his fear, they contemn knowledge, as
Esau did the blessing, and the Israelites did their Manna. For no man truly
desired the knowledge of god and of godliness un sainedly, but he had the means
offered unto him at one time or other. Cornelius, desiring to be thoroughly
instructed in the way of salvation, was directed by the Angel to send for
peter, Act. 11, 13
Who should speak words unto him, whereby he and his household should be (...).
Thus David, going the way of all flesh, instructs his son Solomon, 1 chr.
28, 9
Thou Solomon know thou the God of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect
heart and with a willing mind: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but
if thou for sake him, he will cast thee off for ever. This is it also which the
Prophet proclaimed. 2 chronicles, 15. O Asa and all (...) and Benjamin, hear ye me:
the Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if ye seek him, he will be
found ofyou: but ifye for sake him, he will for (...) you. Likewise, the
Evangelist teaches, that when Zacheus sought to see I esus, he showed himself
unto him, he entered into his house, and that which is more into his heart,
Luke xix, 3, etc.
and that day salvation was begun in him and (...) his family, being made the
chi'de of Abraham. Heerby is fulfild that which the Prophet speaks. Psalm. 145.
The Lord is near Psa. 145, 18, etc.
unto all that call upon him, even to all that call upon him in truth: he will
fulfill the desire of them, that fear him, he will also hear their cry, and will
save them Where he teaches, that if we truly desire knowledge, we shall
effectualy obtain it. God will not be wanting to us, if we be not wanting to our
selus. When the Eunuch came to Jerusalem, and exercised himself in the
scriptures in reading the prophet for increase of knowledge, as he sat in his
chariot: did not the lord direct Phillip to go to him, and join himself to
his chariot, by whom he was farther instructed and baptized? So shall it be
with all that hunger Act. 8, 28, 29
and thirst after the doctrine of godliness, they shall not be lest destitute,
but be filled with the knowledge thereof to their endless comfort. The hand of
God is not shortened, he is as ready to help us as ever he was, Matthew. 5, 6
according to the promise of Christ our Savior. Math. 5. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Heereunto te^deth
the general promise, deliuerd in the general words of him that is the author of
grace, Matthew. 7, 7, 8
Ask and ye snalreceiue, seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto
you: for whosoever asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. Here we have an excellent comfort and
encouragement, to consider that our holy endeavors shall not be in vain in the
Lord.

Chap. 17. Of faith in Christ, the second part of examination.
HItherto we have spoken of knowledge which is the first part of this
examination. Now a man may have knowledge, and yet want faith. Wherefore the The
2 part of examination.
next point which we are to try and prove, is our faith in christ. For every
man receives so much as he believes he receives, according as our Savior
speaks to the woman of Canaan, Math. 15, O woman, great is thy faith, be it
unto thee Mat. 15, 28
as thou desire. And the Apostle says, to the same effect, Hebr. 4, 2
Unto us was the Gospel preached as also unto them, but the word that they
heard, prositted them not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it. Al those are worthy receivers, that ground themselves on the free
favor of God in christ Jesus, believe themselves to be delivered by him from
eternal damnation, and desire daily to go forward in godliness. Heereunto
comes the exhortation of Paul, 2 Cor, 13, Prove your selves, 2 cor. 13, 5
whether ye be in the faith: examine your selves: know ye (...) your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be refused? This true faith
is the mouth of the soul, whereby we receive christ crucified to our salvation.
Wherefore, it is required of us, not only to have knowledge and vnderstandding
in the mystery of our redemption: but likewise a justifying faith, What a true
faith is
which is a wonderful gift of God, whereby the elect do apply Christ and the
saving promises of the Gospel to themselves particularly. We must know Gal. 1.
4
the purpose and ordinance of God, appointing and setting apart Jesus Christ to
be the person in The hands of faith what they are.
whom and by whom he has decreed and determined the salvation of all the elect.
Again, we must have a persuasion of Gods true meaning toward us, in offering
salvation through Christ, and that all sufficiency and ability is in him to
save us, whereupon we shall feel a sweet and comfortable resting upon him, in
whom God means to save us. These are the hands whereby we apply Christ to
our selves both by knowinge himself for our sins according to the will of God
even our father, and by relying on his al-sufficiency to perform that high
work of redemption, whereunto he was sealed and ordained.

This faith is not borne and bred with us, but is wrought in us by the
Holy Ghost, 2 These. 3. 2
who is therefore called the spirit of faith. Except he give it, no man can
have it: it is natural to us to presume on the one side, and to despair on the
other side: but to believe (which is seated in the midst) is supernatural.
To have a dead faith comes of our selves: but to have a lively faith,
proceeds from God, to whom we ascribe all praise and glory. Now the proper
office and function of this justifying faith stands in apprehending,
receiving, and laying hold upon Christ and all his benefits. Even as the hand
stretched forth, lays hold upon a thing, and pulls the same unto it: so
does says apply the saving promises of the Gospel to the soul, as the
Apostle teaches, Gal. 3. That the blessing of Abraham might come to the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3, 14
that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith. Where he
teaches, that we embrace and receive the precious promises of salvation and
forgiveness of our sins by faith, beleeuinge the same to belong unto our
selves. The scripture calls Christ a redeemer indefinitely? Job calls him
his redeemer Job. 19, 25
particularly, Job, 19. I know that my redeemer lives. The Scriptur sets
out the lord as the god of his church: Thomas upon a special feeling of Christ's
favor toward him, John. 20, 28
acknowledges him to be his Lord and his god. John. 20 Thou art my Lord and my
god. The Scripture propounds Christ as the Savior of his people: the blessed
virgin takes this as spoken to her self, Luke 1, 47
an accounts him her savior. Luke 1. My spirit rejoices in god my savior.
The Scriptur makes Christ the L. and protector of his church: Elizabeth makes
a special Luke 1, 43
application thereof, calling him her lord Luke 1, Whence comes this to me,
that the mother of my Lord should come unto me. It is an Article of our holy
and christian faith to believe the forgiveness of sins: this must every one
believe, this must every one hold, this must every one apply, Matthew. 9, 2
as christ did to the sick man of the Palsy, Matthew. 9. son be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.

It is the hardest thing in the world thus to believe, whether we respect
Christ or our selves. It is an easy matter for a man, when he neither knows
nor feels the burden of sin, to say he has faith, and believes in gods
mercy: but when Satan shall fifth him, when his own heart shall accuse him, when
sin shall he heavy upon his soul, when the unsupportable and insufferable
anger of God shall press his conscience to the nethermost hell, and the flame
thereof consume his bones and turn his moisture Psalm. 32, 4
into the drought of Summer: if then he can stand upright, and build himself
Math. 7, 24
upon the rock, when the floods come, when the winds blow and beat upon his
house, and when the ground shakes under his feet, this man with boldness and
confidence may truly say, and seal it up for an everlasting truth, My
sins are forgiven me. For if then he can comfort himself in his God, and
apply his gracious mercies to his own fainting heart, and cry out Job. 13, 15
Though the Lord would kill me, yet still I will trust in him: this is the
property of a sound faith, against which the strongest gates of hell shall not
prevail.

This appears evidently unto us in the example of Abraham, Roma 4, 17 etc.
who believed that of his old, weak, withered, and as it were dead body,
should spring children Genes. 15, 5
like the sand on the seashore, and like the stars of heaven for multitude,
and that he should have a seed in whom himself and all the nations of the
world should be blessed. If he had consulted with flesh and blood, what
discourses might a natural man allege to (...) the crediting of this promise?
yet he doubted not, he disputes not the matter, but believed that the weak
should be made strong, that the barren should be made fruitful and a joyful
mother of children, that the dead should be made alive to dwell with a family,
springing out of his own body, which was to reason as unlikely and impossible,
as for a dry and dead tree pulled up by the roots, to bud, bear, and bring
forth plentiful (...). So, what can be more difficult and hard then for us
to believe and be persuaded, that by the death of Christ, we shall have
everlasting life? by his shame and dishonor we shall have glory and praise?
that by his wounds and reproaches we shall have the curing and healing of our
(...)? that by his agonies and bloody sweat, we shall have peace and rest? by
his condemnation we shall have salvation? Is not this after a sort, in hell to
see heaven? in cursing, to see blessing? in humiliation, to see exaltation? in
death, to see life? in condemnation, to lay hold of salvation? in feeling of
sin, to believe the pardon of sins? lastly in out unrighteousness and misery,
to be both righteous and accepted to eternal life: and in the breach of the
law, to believe the fulfilling of the law?

This is indeed to have the saving faith Titus. 1, (...)
of Gods elect. And to say that this is an easy matter, or a small thing, is
plainly to betray and difcouer, that we never knew what true faith means.

For this faith, let every one of us labor, that we may Gal. 2, 20
specially and particularly apprehend the promises, as the Apostle declares.
Galatians 2, I am crucified with Christ, but I live; yet not I any more, but
christdiueth in me: and in that that I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith in the son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. And
again, 2 Timothy 4, 7
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth is (...) up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous judge, shall give unto me at that day.

Where we see a special application to himself of the benefits of Christ,
and therefore it is not sufficient to believe that Christ came into the world,
that he was crucified, died, was buried, rose again from the dead, and
ascended into heaven: for this is a general faith, this is the faith of the
reprobates, yea the Devils know it, and have as great a part and portion
therein as we, yet they tremble at the remembrance of their judgment to come,
as James shows, Iam. 2, 19
Thou beleeuest there is one god, thou do well: the devils also believe and
tremble. There is more required of us, then to believe the Histories and
doctrine of the scriptures to be true, and to make an outward profession of it,
to understand and assent unto the covenant of grace made by christ that it is
certain and shall be verified in the members of the church: we must, besides
this general and confused faith, apply and appropriate unto our selves the
promises of salvation: We must not only see them a far off, but feel them
in our hearts: We must believe, not only that christ is a savior, but that he
is our savior and our redeemer. Thus we must every one of us for his own part
make proper to himself all the riches and graces that are in chist Jesus,
because in giving himself to us, he gives al his benefits: in that he is God,
he makes us after a sort 2 Pet. 1, 4
partakers of the divine nature: being heir of al things, in heaven and earth,
and Lord of the world, he makes al things ours, whether 1 Cor. 3, 22
life or death, whether things present or things to come, recovering in him the
possession of those things which we lost in Adam: being the beloved son of
the father, he makes us acceptable and well pleasing unto him: leading
captivity captive and giving gifts Ephesians. 4, 8
to men, having Dominion over the Devil, sin, hell, the world, the flesh, and
all our enemies, he protecteth us that they cannot overthrow us, and has
Revel. 1, 6
made us kings and Priests to god even his father: in that he is happy and
immortal, he makes us partakers of his blessedness and immortality. When we
shall severally and particularly apply all the actions and benefits of Christ
our lord unto our selves, we may boldly come to the lords table, where we
shall fiude christ, and enjoy him to our endless comfort.

Neither are we to abstain and hang back from coming to the Supper, nor to
despair of our selves, nor to be to much cast down, when we feel sundry
defectes and wantes in our faith. For There are 2 degrees of true faith.
there is a weak and feeble faith, which is yet a true faith as well as the
strong faith. There are two degrees offaith profitable to be known, and
comfortable to be considered. The weak faith, what a weak faith is
is an earnest and unfeigned desire to be reconciled unto GOD in christ, which
willing desire in us GOD accepts as the deed it self: he accounts the
defire of faith as faith it self: the desire of reconciliation and
forgiveness of sins by the death of CHRIST, shall be available to work out
our atonement and redemption. The strong faith is a full persuasion and
assurance What a strong faith is.
of the mercyes of GOD, when the faithful can truly say with the Apostle.
Roma. 8, 38
Romans 8 38. 39. I am persuaded that neither life nor death, nor things present
nor things to come, neither Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, neither
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall separate us from the love of
GOD which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

This is the greatest measure and highest degree of faith: this is the top,
strength, and full ripeness of faith: heereunto we are to strive and
endeavor, and never to give rest unto our souls, until we be resouled and
settled in our consciences, that all our sins are assuredly pardoned, and we
accepted to everlasting life. This greatenesse of faith was in Abraham, Roma.
4, 20
who was not weak, but strengthened in faith, being fully persuaded He that had
promised was also able to do it. All that live in the bosom of the Church do
not attain to this full measure of a perfect faith: but even as it is in the
estate of the body, we are babes before we come to be men of ripe years, first
we be weak before we be strong, 1 cor 3, 1, 2
first we are fed with milk before we can digest strong meat. We see Mar. 4, 28
corn first is in the grass then in the blade, before it come to the stalk,
and to have ripe corn in the ear. There must be in all things a beginning,
before there can be a proceeding to perfection. The tree sends forth his
tender branches, and puts forth his leaves, before the fruit comes. So is
it with every christian Man and Woman, first they are babes in Christ, and have
certain seeds and beginnings of faith springing in them to eternal life:
afterward they grow from strength to strength, from grace to grace, from degree
to degree, Rom 1, 17
and from faith to faith, until they come to a full persuasion and assurance
without wavering, Psalm. 23, 6
which arises after many experiences of Gods' manifold mercies and favors in
the course of our lives, as we see Psalm. 23. Doubtless kindness and mercy
shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall remain a long season in
the house of the Lord. Wherefore, let us not be (...) ed and discouraged when
our faith is feeble, for a feeble faith will apply Christ as well as a strong
faith: it will draw Christ home to dwell in our hearts, Ephe. 3, 17
through whom we shall not perish, but have everlasting life. He that had but
a weak eye and a dim sight, to behold the brazen Serpent in the wilderness,
Number. 21, 8
was healed from the deadly stinging of the fiery Serpents, as well as he that
saw clearly and perfectly a far off. He that has but a Leprous and sickly
hand is able to hold that which is offered unto it, as well as a sound and
strong hand. So he that has a little faith in the Son of God, shall never
have his salvation denied, nor forgiveness of his sins kept from him, if
with an humble heart he pray to God to have them pardoned. The Apostles
believed, that Christ was the Savior of the world: yet they were ignorant Luke
24, 25
of his death and resurrection, which are the chief means of salvation, and
they are said to be men of little faith. So our savior, when the Luke. 17, 5,
6
Disciples had asked increase of their faith, declares that if our faith be in
quantity but as a grain of mustard-seede, it should be powerful and
effectual, seeing he will not Mark 2, 23
quench the smooking flax, nor break the bruised reed, but cherish the least
spark and measure of grace given unto us from above. This likewise was the
faith of that father, whose child was possessed with a dumb and deaf spirit,
when christ said to him, Math. 7, 7, 8
If thou can beleau, all things are possible to him that believes: straight
way he cried with tears, saying. Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief. Christ
does not reject him for his weakness of knowledge and faith, to teach that we
should not despair, or be dismayed, when we find wavering, wantes, distrust,
and imperfection in our selves: but rather confessing our frailty with that
father in this place, pray to be strengthened, and to have our faith increased.
For, whosoever unfeignedly desires any grace of God tending to salvation, shall
receive it: if he continue Revel. 21, 6 and.c
knocking at the gate of his mercy, it shall be opened, and his prayer shall be
granted, as Christ has promised, Phil. 1. 6
I wilgiue to him that is a thirst of the well of the water of life. Thus, if
we long after the graces wanting unto us, as the earth after a great drouth
for the comfortable shewers of refreshing rain, using the means appointed of
God to attain them, as, earnest prayer, reverent attending on the continual
hearing of his word, diligent receiung of the sacraments, being careful to
give honor and glory to him for his gifts we have already of his only mercy
obtained and enjoyed, we shall be satisfied and replenished: for then Revel.
21, 6 and.c
He that has (...) his good work in us, will perfect the same in our hearts
until the day of Jesus Christ. Thus much of faith, the sec. part of true
examination, which is the instrument whereby we lay hold upon Christ, and are
made lively members of him: withont which whosoever come to the Lords Supper,
depart away without fruit and comfort.

Chap. 18. Of Repentance, the third part of examination.
THe next thing in this trial to be considered is Repentance from dead works
required of all that come to the (...), table
repentance, which is, a renewing of the mind, a change of the heart, a
turning of the soul, and a reformation of our life and affections. As
knowledge is the beginning and as it were the forerunner of faith, like a
messenger going before his master to prepare for his coming: so repentance is
an especial fruit of faith, without which, whosoever draws near to the
Lords Table, prophaneth the Sacrament, and departs without comfort.

For, it is an altering of our lives and conuersations to God, joined with a
Godly sorrow and detestation of all sin, together with an unfeigned love and
desire of righteousness. This appears in the change of the whole man, of our
thoughts, affections, meditations, and delights: in all these the old man with
his deceitful lusts must be put off, and the new man must be put on, Ephe. 4, 24
which after God is created unto righteousness and true holiness. This duty
is taught in diverse places of the scripture. Herunto come the words of the
Prophet Esaiah, When Esaias 1, 12
ye come to appear before me, who required this at your hands, to tread in my
courts? Bring no mo oblations in vain: (...) is an abomination unto me: I
cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Sabbaths, nor solemn (...) (it is iniquity)
nor assemblies. And when ye shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine
eyes from you: and though ye make many prayers, I will not hear, for your
hands are full of blood Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your
works from before mine (...) to do euel, learn to do well, etc. And Chapter 66. He
that kills a bullock, Esaias 66, 3
is as if he (...) a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, is as if he cut off a
Dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he fered swines flesh: he
that burns incense, as if he blessed an idol: yea they have chosen their
own ways, and their soul delights (...) their abominations. Whereby the
prophet means, that god accepts no sacrifices without faith and repentance.
This also was figured and shaddowed out, by washing the garments and changing
the attire of such as came with Genesis 35, 2, 3
their oblations unto God, and prepared themselves to his service. This Jacob
commanded, when he reformed his household, and went up with them to Bethell the
house of God, Thus Moses prepared the people, before the law was delivered in
Mount Sinas. And heereunto the prophet David alludeth, Psalm. 26. I will wash
mine hands in innocence, O Lord, and compass thine alter: as if he should
say, I will endeavor to live most uprightly toward thee and toward men, and so
come and offer sacrifices at thine alter.

Wherefore, such as feel not themselves to have penytent hearts, to be
humbled and grieved for their sins, to sigh and groan under the burden of
them, to tremble at Gods judgments, cannot come aright to this holy Supper,
but eat and drink certain judgment to themselves. The broken and contrite
heart is the path way to heaven, 2 cor. 7, x, xi
and an unspeakable companion of repentance. This the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor.
7. Godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented off, but
worldly sorrow causes death: but behold, this thing, that ye have been Godly
sorry, what great care it has wrought in you: yea, what clearing of your
selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what fear: yea, what desire: yea, what
zeal: yea, what punishment.

Here be the Signs where by to examine our repentance.
notes and tokens whereby we may try our repentance, whether it be sincere or
not. It has these signs to discern it, a care to leave that sin into which
we are fallen, otherwise we have not repented, as Act. 2. they which had
crucified the Lord of life, and delivered him into the hands of sinners, were
pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter and to the other Act 2, 37, 38
Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? And Peter said unto them,
Amend your lives, and save your selves from this froward generation. The other
signs of repentance are a confession of our sins to God, and a condemning our
selves for them: an holy and inward anger against our selves for our
carelessness in looking to our own ways: a fear not so much of Gods
judgments, as least we fall into the same sins again, and so offend our
merciful father: a desire, ever after to please God with all our hearts: and
last of all a renewing and punishing of our own souls for our offenses
committed against him. Now to the end we may repent aright, and sit in
judgment of our selves, according to the form of gods justice: it shall be
needful for us In examining our selves, we must follow the order of the
commandments.
to examine our selves by the ten words of the law, and out of the same to
frame ten several enditements against our selves, whereby we shall find a great
defect of righteousness, a great spoil of obedience, a great access of
disobedience, and a great heap of all kind of corruptions. This then may serve
and suffice for the true examination of our selus. We must consider Command. 1
and confess that we have not loved and feared God, we have not believed and
depended upon him in all estates as we ought, but have oftentimes feared and
loved the creature above him, we have preferred a filthy pleasure before him:
we have doubted of his promises through unbelief, and relied upon an arm of
flesh and blood, We have been careless in the worship of God, we have not
prayed Command. 2
to him with steadfast assurance to be heard, we have not served him in spirit
and in truth as he requires of us, but hypocrisy has crept into our best
actions and meditations, we have more labored after the outward shows and
appearances of religion, then to express the power of Godliness: and have
more esteemed to seem to others to be true Christians then to be such
indeed. We have not reverenced the eternal Majesty of God as is meet
Command. 3
to do, who is infinite, invisible, unchangeable; we have not blessed and
praised his name with thanksgiving for all things, and at all times, as well
for adversity as prosperity: We have not heard, read, and meditated in his
word with such affection, reverence and zeal as is requisite: when occasion
has been offered to speak of the works of gods providence, we have not
acknowledged in them the greatness of his wisdom, power, and goodness as we
ought: nay rather the glorious and dredful name of god (which ought to be more
dear unto us then our own lives) has been blasphemed, dishonored, and abused
by us. Touching the sabbath, we must consider and confess Command. 4
how we have profaned it: we have been more careful to follow our worldly
works and affairs, then to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
having had more care of the body then of the soul: we have sent out our
servants to dispatch our business on that day, and have not suffered them to
attend on the (...) of the Lord for the salvation of their souls: and our
souls have neglected the ministry of the word of god, have defiled his
sanctuary, and have polluted that holy day with feasting, playing, sporting,
drinking, idelnes, and other vanities. We have not yealded reverence to
superiors for conscience sake, nor bin command. 5
afraid to offend them as god has commanded: we have not always spoken of
them and their government as we should: we have not had such a reverent
opinon and persuasion of our pastors and teachers as we ought, which have the
charge of our souls, and labor among us in the lord. Again we have not been
careful to teach and instruct such as are under us, as our Children, servants,
and whole famylie as we are bound, praying with them in our houses, exorting
them in all wisdom, conferring with them in all gentleness, and furthering
them in all the ways of Godliness. Touching the sixth Commandment, we have
not loved our Neighbors as our selves, procuring command. 6
their good as our own, we have broken out through debate, contention, chiding,
reuiling, brauling, quarrelling, and revenging: we have not rejoiced at the
good and prosperity of our brethren, but when Gods eye has been good toward
them in blessing them, we have repined and grudged at it. We have not possessed
the vessels of our bodies in holiness and honor, as the Temples of the
Holyeghost, command. 7
knowing we are bought with a price: we have not tamed and brought into
subjection this flesh as we should, Command. 7
to make it in all respects subject and obedient unto the spirit: we have
not made a covenant with our eyes, with our ears, with our tongues, to turn
them from all unclean sights, wanton words, and filthy communication, but have
suffered them to wander after unlawful lust and concupisence: neither have we
used such sobriety, abstinence, and temperancy, as has been fit to keep under
our affections, but riotousnes, excess in apparel, surfeiting, slouthfulnes,
idleness, pride, and fullness of bread (which were the sins of Sodom. Ezekiel.
16) are used in many places: as for drunkenness, it has taken away the hearts,
and even washed a way the brains of many. We must confess, that our
dealinges with our neighbors in buying, selling, bargaining, and contracting,
have not bin Command. 8
with such vprightnes, soundenes, justice, sincerity, and truth as God
requires: we have been given to oppreffion, covetousness and hard dealing one
toward another, and not considered that godliness is great gain, if a man be
contented with that he has, that if we have food and raiment we must be
content, and can carry nothing with us out of this world, we have not at all
times been given to mercy and compassion to ward the poor, for the maintenance
of them and their families, especially in times of famine, dearth, pestilence,
sickness, and other mortalities and necessities.

We must acknowledge, that we have not loved the Command 9
truth in the inward parts, neither maintained the credire and good name of
men as we ought, but have been addicted to lying, envying, backebiting,
flattering, or defaming one of another, and to hear others with comfort and
delight to do the like: we have not been courageous and constant to confess
and defend the truth against the enemies thereof, but have been ashamed to set
our selves against lies, errors, and slanders: we have kindled the coals of
contention by false surmises, carrying of tales, and publishing of infirmities
to the hurt and hinderance of our brethren.

Lastly, we must remember to shut up this confession, that our whole narure
is vile and wretched, the heart of Command. (...)
man is deceitful above all things and past finding out: we are sinful as an
evil tree which can bring forth nothing but evil fruit, our thoughts are
vain and corrupt, our first motions and immaginations are evil against the
law of God that says, Exodus xx, 1
Thou shall not lust, requiring a pure heart to ward our neighbors, holy
cogitations of the spirit, and a continual conflict against evil affections
and lusts of the flesh.

Thus must every one of us arraigne and endite our selus. Thus we must accuse
our selves, and condemn our own works. Thus we must search our own ways,
confessinge that if 1 Ioh. 3,
our own hearts accuse us, God is greater then our hearts and knows all
things. Then let us appeal to the throne of grace, let us desire salvation in
Christ for his mercies sake, let us cast al out comfort upon him, covering our
faces through shame of our sins that are past, humbling our selves through
grief of them that are present, and working out our salvation with a fear of
that which may come hereafter.

If thus we judge our selves, God will acquit us: if thus we condemn our
selves, God will justify us: if we accuse our selves, he will discharge us: if
we be displeased with our selves for our sins, God will be well pleased with
us, and cloth us with the righteousness of Christ. But if we stand upon our
own righteousness and worthiness, if we say we have need of nothing, if we
flatter and deceive our selus, comparing our selves with our selves or with
others, and not with the rule of Gods word: God will examine us, and sit in
judgment upon us. If he enter into Psalm. 130, 3
judgment with us, no flesh shall be justified in his sight: for if thou, O
Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? He will be
revenged of our sins, and (...) many plagues upon us: he will send sundry
diseases upon our bodies, and a troubled spirit upon our souls, he will add
one punishment to another, until we repent, as he teaches by many examples in
the scriptures. The Apostle 1 cor, says, he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks 1 Cor, 11. 29 30, 32.
judgment to himself. For this cause many are weak, and sick among you, and
many sleep: for if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. But when
we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, because we should not be condemned
with the world. So the Israelites, being myraculously fed by the Lords own
hand, lusted and became unthankful, and therefore while the meat was yet in
their mouths, Psa. 78. 30 31
The wrath of God fell down upon them, and sle vv the strongest of them and
smote down the chosen men of Israel. Judas, chosen to be one of the twelve,
John 13, 27
coming unworthily to the Passover, Satan entered further into him, wrought
in him his own confusion, and brought upon him swift damnation. The ghest in
the gospel, Mat. 22. 22, 13
that pressed unto the supper without his weddinge garment, was taken
speechless, bound hand and foot, and cast in to utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Let no man therefore put off, and defer his
repentance from day to day, least he draw upon himself final destruction of
soul and body, and find his heart exceedly hardened through continuance in
sin: but while 2 cor, 6. 2
the acceptable time is, let us both purpose and endeavor to forsake our evil
ways, our wicked works, and all known sins reveled unto us by the sacred
oracle of the Word of God.

And, because we have daily wants, and do commit daily and new sins through
infirmity of the flesh, Renewed faith, and renewed repentance required of us.
we must have renewed faith and renewed repentance, Luke 22. 32
because every new sin requires a new act of repentanee, and appealing to
Christ by faith. Then we are aright disposed to the lords table, when we are
lively touched with a sense and feeling of our corrupt dispositions and daily
failings in our faith and obedience. For the repentance of every faithful man
must be doble, first general, repenting of original and actual sins
generally, receiving power of God to change ourminds, wills, and affections,
Mat. 3. 1
whereof Ioh. bap tist says, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
This is given and granted unto us at that time, when first we receive to
believe, it makes an alteration in us, slayth the old man, quickneth the life
of the new man begins in weakness, continues in greater strength, and
grows more and more unto perfection. Secondly special, for special sins
and continual failings into which we fall, which we must practice to the end
of our days.

Now, as we said in the former chapter, that no man for the feeblenes of his
faith is to absent himself from this supper, so must we remember touching our
repentance, though it be in great weakness and frailty: yet if it be a sound and
sincere hatred of all sin not a for saking of some sins only, as Saul,
herod, and Iudus did, keeping other in themselves to their own confusion our
imperfections shall be covered, our wants shall be supplied, our weakness shall be
remitted by the death of Christ, who was anointed and sent to preach Luke, 4.
18
the gospel to the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to publish deliverance
to the captives, recovering of sight to the blind, and to set at liberty them
that are bruised. And hepronounceth such Math. 5. 3,
blessed as are poor in spirit, For theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore,
if thou feel in thy self great defectes of faith, of (...), of
sanctification, pray to God earnestly that he will vouchsafe to increase his
gifts, let us confess with David, 2 Samuel 12 13
we have find; let us weep with Pet. Luke 22. 62 and 7, 38.
and the sinful woman: let us acknowledge our unworthiness, and say with the
Centurion, Lord, Math, 8, 8
We are not worthy that thou should come under our roof, Let us cry out with
the Publican, Luke 8, xiii
O God, be merciful to me a sinner. This is the way to make us worthy: this is
the means to fit us to the Lords table: this is to be practiced of such as will
be his ghuests.

Chap. 19. Of reconciliation to our brethren: the last part of Examination.
HItherto, in examination of our selves, we hane showed what we are to do in
respect of GOD, the root whereof is knowledge, the body is faith, the fruit
is repentance. Now to conclude, we are to handle the last part, which is Love
toward their brethren is required of all that come to the table.
love toward men, and reconciliation of our selves to our neighbors, for
injuries, wrongs, and offenses done unto them, which are as poison to this
banquet. For, in vain we shall pretend knowledge, boast of faith, glory of
repentance, if we fail in duties toward our brethren. For, here is the
touchstone and trial of all the rest, even our obedience to the second table,
which concerns the duties of love toward our brethren. Hereunto comes
Math. 5, 23
the doctrine of Christ set down in the Evangelist Math. 5. If thou bring thy
gift to the alter, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go first be reconciled to thy
brother, then come and offer thy gift. Where he teaches, that he so
approproueth this duty, that he will have his own immediate service cease, and
give place for a time, till it be performed. So, in the Sermon which he made to
his Apostles, before he was betrayed to death, he did diligently beat upon
this point, saying, John 13, 35
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
This is my (...), that ye love one another, as I have loved you: greater love
then this has no man, that a man bestow his life for his friends: ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. This likewise the Colos. 3, 12
Apostle teaches, that we may know him to be the scoller of the same master,
Coloss. 3, As the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel unto another,
even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye: and above all these things, put on
love, which is the bound of perfectness. As every one has a comfortable
experience in his own heart of Gods mercy toward him in the pardon of his sins
which are many and great; so let him show mercy again, as he has received
mercy, and deal unto others kindly, as God has dealt graciously toward him.
Our savior Christ avouches this Math. 18. in the parable of the lender that
had many debtors: he called them to Matt. 18, 23
take an account of them, and forgiueth the debt having compassion on him that
was not able to pay: but when he was departed, and had found one of his
fellow-seruants which ought him an hundred pence, he laid hand on him, thratled
him, and cast him in prison till he should pay the debt. Then the Lord called
him and said, O evil servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou
prayedst me: Ought thou not also to have pity on thy fellow-seruant, even
as I had pity on thee? So his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the
tormenters, till he should pay all that was due to him. Then follows the
application of the whole, So likewise shall mine heavenly father do unto you,
except ye forgive from your hearts each one his brother their trespasses.

Now, the Lords supper was ordained of God for this end, that it might be a
band of love, and a chain to unite and join us together among our selves,
that if it were possible we should not break from him: as Paul teaches. 1
Cor. 10 We that are many, 1 corin. x. 17
are one bread, and one body, because we al are partakers of one bread.
Wherefore this Supper may fitly be called, a Sacrament of unity, and a seal of
our agreement one with another. Behold here, a chain consisting of many
linkes to knit us together, that we break not from God and our brethren. Do
we not al come to the table? Do we not all eat of the same bread? Do we not al
drink of the same cup? Is not the same loaf compact of many corns? Is not
the same Wine pressed out of many clusters? Do we not all join together in the
same receiving? Were we not baptized into the same baptism? What a shameful
thing is this, full of infamy and reproach, to see the branches of the same
vine, the sheep of the same shepherd, the children of the same father, the
Servants of the same master, the fellows of the same household, the heirs of
the same kingdom, the ghuests of the same banquet, the obtainers of the same
promise, the partakers of the same hope, the members of the same body, and the
professors of the same faith, to contend and strive one against another, to
delight in brauling, fighting, quarrelling, and to norish hatred, malice,
rancour, spite, envy, biting, and backbiting one of another. If Ephraim be set
against Esaias 9, 21
Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, if Brother be divided against brother,
if we bite one at another, let us take heed least we be consumed one of
another. The sons of God are renewed into the image ofGod, to resemble their
heavenly father in true holiness, and do all wear the same cognizance and
livery. For the Sacraments are the marks of Chapter sheep, whereby they are known
and discerned: so that all our discentions, divisions, railings, reuilings
disgracings and defacings one of another, tend to the reproach and dishonor of
our common father, and do give an heavy testimony against our souls with God
and his elect Angels. For how do we approach unto God? how do we come into his
presence? With what hearts do we pray before him and unto him? Are we not taught
Math. 6, 12
to ask forgiveness of our sins, as we forgive the trespasses done unto us? It
then we be malicious and envious, and carry the fresh remembrance of wrongs in
our hearts, to pursue them with revenge: do we not pray against our selves? Do
we not beseech God to pour out vengance upon us? Do we not open our mouths to
our own destruction? For when we use our tongues to say, Luke 11, 4
Lord, forgive us, for even we forgive: is it not as much as if we should pray,
forgive us not Lord, for we do not, we will not forgive others? Therefore,
after the form of prayer given to the Disciples, Christ adds, If ye do
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you: but
if ye do not forgive men their trepasses, no more will your father forgive you
your trespasses. And as he exhorts, that when they stand and appear before
the Altar, Mark. 11, 25
they must forgive: so when we appear at the Lords table, we must forgive, if
we have any thing against any man, that our father also which is in heaven may
forgive us our trespasses. Now, if we would be directed to know whether this
love be is us or not, we may try our own hearts by these 1 Cor. 13, 4
holy properties and blessed effects described by the Apostle, 1, cor, xiii,
Love (says he) suffers long, it is bountiful, love enuieth not, love does
not boast itself, it is not puffed up: it disdaineth not, it seeks not her
own things, it is not provoked to anger, it thinks not evil: it rejoices
not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: it suffers all things, it
believes al things, it hops al things, it endures al things.

Here we may see, what manner of love ought to be in us. Every one of us must
endeavor, that all the parts of this description may rightly agree to every one
of us, and truly be found in us toward all men, even our enemies, as we see
Jesus Christ has left us an example of his love, Luke 23, 35
when he prayed for his enemies, that crucified and cruelly entreated him,
father forgive them: for they know what they do and this did stephen to those
that stoned him, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. This is the way, let
us walk in it: this was their practice, let us follow it.

Thus we have showed the necessity of examination of ourselves before we come
to the Lords supper, and declared the parts wherein it stands, and the
manner how it is to be performed. If we come furnished with these things, with
saving knoledg, with justifying faith, with unfeigned repentance, with a loving
and longing reconciliation toward our brethren among whom we live, having as
much Rom 12, 18
as is possible, Peace with all men, yea even our enemies: let us not abstain
from the Lords table by reason of some frailties and infirmities in us: for
God covers them, 2 chr. 305 18
and will not bring them into remembrance, as we see 2. Chron, 30. A multitude
of people had not cleansed themselves, yet did eat the passover, but not as it
was written: wherefore Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good God be merciful
toward him that prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord god, the god of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary: and the Lord heard Hezekiah, and healed the people. Where we see,
that because their heart was upright and sincere, their wants and imperfections
were not imputed unto them. For God respects the truth of the inward parts,
and pard oneth their sins that thus prepare their hearts to seek him. So
then, The sacrament is not honored by abstaining from it
they were greatly deceived, that thought they honored the Sacrament by
abstaining from it: it is not honored, but dishonored: not hallowed, but
profaned: not regarded reverently, but reproched grievously by our wilful
abstinence, 1 cor. xi, 28
as the Apostle teaches, 1 cor, 11. let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of this bread and drink of this cup. He does not say, let him prove
himself and so let him abstain. For the Sacrament is abused, as well by
forbearing, having examined our selves, as by not examining our selves, and
receiving unworthily. And thus much of examination, and the manner to be
observed therein.

Chap. 20. The conclusion, containing an abridgement of the whole treatise.
THe effect of that which has been delivered hitherto in these Books, may thus
be gathred into a short sum and abridgement. We have The sum of the 1. book
declared that God, in all times and ages of the church from the first being of
our first parents, has to his word and promises anexed sacraments as seals of
assurance Genes. 2, 9 etc.
for the confirmation of them: thereby magnifieng his own mercy toward his
people, showing our weakness and unworthiness, and condemning such as oftentimes
desire to come to the Lords table, but esteem little of the preaching of the
word: whereas the word and Sacraments have one and the same author, they are
instruments of the same grace, their whole force and effect depends on God,
they require faith Hebru. 4, 2
to be mingled with them, and they profit not always at the very moment of
hearing and receiving. Notwithstanding some differences we find between them,
as namely in the greater necessity of the word, then of the Sacraments:
Infidels were never barred from hearing the word when they would become 1 cor.
14, 24
hearers thereof: and whereas the word affects one only of the senses, to
wit, the hearing, the Sacraments (...) offered to the eyes as well as to the
ears, and so in some sort become more effectual then the word.

Touching the word Sacrament, it is drawn from martial discipline, and
properly signifies the Soldiers oath, whereby he binds himself to his
Captain: which word being used by the old Latin interpreter, is now become
ordinary and common in the Church, which is not mentioned in so many sillables
in the Scriptures. And howsoever the word be often taken in a large and
general signification: yet as we take it in these books, What a sacrament is.
a Sacrament is a visible sign and seal ordained of God, whereby Christ and
all his saving graces by certain outward rites are signified, exhybited and
sealed up unto us. This description being (...), teaches us these points,
first that the force of the Sacraments depends not on the worthynesse or
unworthiness of the Minister, but upon the ordinance of God, Math, 23. 2. 3
so that an evil Minister may deliver the good things of God. And this was
the cause that Ioh. 4. 2,
Christ Jesus baptized none, but his Disciples baptized, that he might learn
not to esteem of the effect of the sacraments by the fitness or vnsitnesse of
the Mynisters.

Again, Dcut. 42,
none must add unto them, none must take ought from them, none must any way
abuse them contrary to the institution and ordinance of God. Lastly, we learn
from hence, that the Sacraments are not bare and naked signs of Christ absent
1 Cor, x, xvi
but sure seals of Gods promises, and of the righteousness of Christ who is
offered to all, but received only of the faithful: so that the presence of
ungodly men meeting us at the same Table, cannot hurt us in our worthy
receiving. In a In a Sacrament consider hisparts and his uses.
Sacrament we are to consider two things, his parts and his uses.

The parts of a sacrament, The parts are outward and and inward.
are partly outward and partly inward. The outward parts are The outward
parts of a (...) are (...), the (...), the (...), the sign the (...)
these four. First, the Mynister lawfully called, is necessarily required.
(...) then the Mynister (...) not administer them, or if pryuate persons will
administer them, Mat. 28, 19
they sin against God, the one for not perfourming the duties of his calling,
the other because he runs beyond the bounds of his calling. The second
outward part Esaias 6, 6, 7
is the word of institution, consisting of a Commandment and a promise: so
that it is required of us, to understand the words of insti^ution, to join
the word with the sacraments, and to discharge those from the number of
sacraments, which want the warrant of the word. The third outward part of a
Sacrament is Mark. 1, 5
the sign: for wheresoever there is a Sacrament, there must of necessity be
an outward element, so that neither must we make an Idol of the sign by
advancing it to high, nor clean abolish it as the Church of Rome does by their
doctrine of Transubstantiation. The last outward part is the Genesis 17. xii
receiver: so that the Sacraments without their lawful use are no sacraments
at all, so long as the signs are reserved and not applied.

The inward parts also are r four: first, God the father, offering and
applying Christ Jesus, as 1 Cor. 3, 7
surely as the Minyster does the outward sign which is a great comfort to such
as come to the Sacraments. The second inward part of a Sacrament is Tit. 3, 56
the holy spirit, working by the word: so that we can never hear the word,
or receive the Sacraments aright without the special direction and
inspiration of the spirit of GOD: neither must we hang upon extraordinary
revelations, which opens a wide door unto all disorders, inasmuch as the
spir^t is not separated from the word. The third inward part is Jesus 1 cor. x,
3
Christ, who is the truth and the life of all Sacraments: now if God the
father have given him unto us, Rom, 8, 32
how shall he not with him give us all things else? Let us therefore lay
hold upon him especially in all discomfits and troubles, when our faith is
assaulted by the enemies of our salvation.

The last inward part, is the faithful receiver: for except we Romans 14, 23
send out says to bring CHRIST home to dwell with us in our hearts, we shall
in vain look to receive profit by the Sacraments: so that the reprobate, who
are vessels of wrath, and the Children of perdytion, cannot receive Christ,
albeit they partake the signs of Christ. As for the elect, who are the Lords,
sealed up to the day of redemption, before their conversion and gathering into
the sheepefold of Christ, they also only receive the outward sign without
Christ, inasmuch as they are without faith: but after they are called with an
holy calling effectually, and have received to believe unfeignedly, they are
partakers both of the sign and of the thing signified. These are the outward
and inward parces. Now there Acts (...), 36
is a fit proportion and agreement between these parts, each very aptly
answering the other. For even as the minister by the word of institution,
offers and applies (...) the outward element to the body of the receiver: so
the father, by the spirit, offers and applies Jesus christ inuisibly to the
faithful receiver.

We showed before, that in a sacrament we are to observe two points, his
parts and his uses. Hitherto we have spoken of all the parts, both such as
are outward, and such as are inward. Now it remains to handle his uses. The
uses of a sacrament 3 cheef uses of a Sacram.
are chiefly three: first, Roma. 4, xi
to strengthen faith: secondly, Gen, 17, 1. xi
to scale the covenant between God and us: thirdly, Ephesians. 2, (...)
to be a badge of our profession, and as a banner displayed to witness our
warfare under our chief captain Christ (...).

If these be the true uses and ends of a sacrament, then we learn to take
notice of Mark. 9, 23
our own failinges and infirmities of faith; that GOD refuses none for
weakness and wavering of faith; Rom 8, xv
that there is an assurance of faith to be attained unto, in this life; that as
God evermore keeps his promise with his people, Number 23, 19
who is not as man that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should
deceive, so must we be careful to keep the articles of 1 John 3, 23
agreement between God and us, namely, to believe his word, to love our
brethren, to obey his will: lastly as our privileges are great, to bear the
badges of Christ our Lord, so it teaches that we are not our own, 1 cor, 6,
xix xx
but are bought at a great price, not with 1 pet. 1, 18, 19
corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but with the precious blood of Christ
as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled.

Hitherto of the nature of the Sacraments: now of the number of them, as we
understand the word for such as are seals of our communion with christ. The
sacraments The sacraments (...) the new testament are only two.
of the new testament are two, baptism, and the Lords supper, neither are
there any more left unto the Church. For Christ taught no more 1 Cor. x, i. 2
sacraments to the Apostles, the Apostles delivered no more to the churches, who
yet were faithful witnesses, and reueiled the whole counsel of God, Act, 20,
27
without concealing and keeping back of any doctrine which themselves had
received. Besides, these two Sacraments are altogether perfect and sufficient,
both to enter a Christian (...) the church, and to retain him continually in
the same. From this number of two sacraments we learn (...) to acknowledge
the great love of God toward us, who has eased us of the act. xv x.
heavy burden of infinite Ceremonies, prescribed in the law, and delivered us
Au. ust. de (...) ch (...). (...). 3, cap, 9.
a few sacraments in stead of many. Secondly, we see hereby the difference
between the old Testament and the New, and between the sacraments of the
old testament and the new: they had sundry significant signs and Ceremonies,
whose interpretation was not easily known unto them.

Thirdly, seeing God has given unto us two signs, and added two seals to his
word and writings, we ought to have the stronger faith in his mircyfull
promises. For, wherefore has he doubled the signs, but that we should
increase in faith, and as it were double our assurance of his graces? Lastly,
this number of two, overthrows the number of seven sacraments, maintained
in the church of Rome, which just number was Pet, lumb, lib, (...). 4, dict, 2.
first broched by Peter Lumbard, afterward ratysied in the Counsel of
Florence, and lastly established in the Counsel of Trent, and is now become
the common doctrine of that counterfect church.

For, besides baptism and the Lords supper, which we receive, they The number
of seven sacraments is false and forged
have instaled into the number of sacraments Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony,
Orders, and extreme Unction, contrary to the doctrine of the scriptures,
contrary to the nature of Sacraments, and contrary to the evidence of sundry
reasons. And firist of all, Confirmation no Sacrament
confirmation cannot be lifted up into the seat of the Sacraments, or sit
down in this Chair of honor, because it wants the institution of Christ,
it wants an outward sign, it has no word to warrant it, or promise of
blessing: for howsoever act, 8, 5, xiiii xv, xvi, xvii
the Apostles by imposition of hands gave the holy ghost, those miraculous
gifts are now withdrawn from the church of God. Lastly, they have advanced it
above baptism, they administer it in a strange tongue, and halow the greazy
oil to purify soul and body. Secondly, Penance is 1. 0 sacrament,
their popish penance, instituted by bodily chastisements to make satisfaction
for sin to God, is no sacrament of the new testament, nor any sacred thing
being thus understood. For we acknowledge no other satifaction i Ioh, i, 7
for sin, wherein God delights, and the conscience of man (...), but only
the death and obedience of christ. Besides, true repentance has been preached
and practiced from the beginning of the world, after that sin entered into the
world. Furthermore their penance has no visible sign as baptism and the
supper of the Lord have. Thirdly, matrimony is no Sacrament
matrimony, albeit it be a divine ordinance, honorable Heb, xiii 4,
among all estates, yet can be no Sacrament of the church of christ, because it
was instituted before gen, 2, xviii
the law, it is ratified among the infidels which are no members of the church,
it has no promise of grace and salvation joined to it, and albeit it be
honorable in all, i cor, 6. 7. 7, 37
yet it is not necessary in all. Lastly, the Roman church esteems it as an
unclean thing, a profanation of holy orders, a living in the flesh: so that as
with one hand they advance it to a great dignity, with the other hand they cast
it down with great disgrace and contempt, as unworthy of the high and holy
priesthood. Fourthly, orders come in the next Orders no sacrament
place, which are the offices and ministry of the church, but no sacrament, or
sacraments of the church. For then, according to the number of orders, we
should multiply the number of sacraments. Neither have they any outward element
and visible sign. Lastly, we are come to extreme unction, which we suffer not
to Extreme unction no sacrament
mask under the name of sacraments, but pull off the vizard thereof, because
the church had the use of anointing James 5, 14
so long as it retained the miraculous gift of healing. Besides, it has no
word ofinstitution to warrant the continual practice of it, until the second
coming of christ. Wherefore, seeing the word of God teaches the number of two
sacraments only, and the church of Rome instructs her children in the number
of 7. sacraments, neither more nor less: they must pardon us, if we harken
rather to the scriptures, then to their traditions, rather to God then to man,
rather to the truth then to the spirit of error.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Sacraments in general, of their parts, their
uses, their number: now we The sum of the 2 book
come to speak of them in particular, first of baptism, then of the Lords
supper. And howsoever baptism has sundry significations, yet as it signifies
that washing with water which serves to seal the covenant of the new
testament, what b ap.
it is the first sacrament, wherein by the outward washing of the body with
water once in the name of the father, of the son and of the holy ghost, the
inward clensing of the soul, by the blood of christ, is represented. This
descrption teaches, that such as are not yet baptized, Exodus xii, 48
are not to be admitted to the lords table: that albeit dipping be not
necessary to the being of baptism, yet washing with water Ephe. 5, 26
is of the essence of this sacrament: that such as are once baptized, are not
to be rebaptized, albeit they have been baptized by heretics: and that
whosoever is baptized, has made a solemn covenant to profess the Christian
religion. Now, q we are to consider in Baptism (as we did before generally
in a Sacrament) these two things, his parts, and his uses. The parts of
baptism are outward and inward.

The outward parts The outwa. parts of bapt are 4
are these four: The first outward part is the Minister, as the Messenger of
God. For baptism is a part of the Math. 28, 19
Minystry, and God has joined the ministry of the word and sacraments
together. Wherefore, the minister must be careful and not careless in the
execution of his osfice, who is to sanctify the Water, and to wash the party:
Moreover, the people are directed, to whom to resort, when they have children
to be baptized. Lastly, the Church of Rome profane baptism, when they appoint
mid-wiues and private persons to baptize children. The second outward part,
Math. 28, 19
is the word of institution, which is as the form of this sacrament. The third
part is the act. 8, 36
element of water, which is the matter whereof baptism consists. Whosoever
therefore baptiseth with any other liquorthen with water, as with blood, with
sand, with snow with milk, or such like matter, does frustrate Baptism, and
makes it an idell ceremony. Again, all Popish corruptions added and annexed
to this sacrament contrary to the simplicity of the gospel, as cream, crosses,
censors, tapers, spettle, salt, Bellar. de sa Bapt cap 26
and such like unsavory trumpery, are (...): having also a superstitious
opinion of holiness and worship joined with them. Also, if water be an outward
part, the want of washing with water cannot hinder the salvation of such as dye
without baptism. All perished not under the law, that died without Josh, 5, 5
circumcision: God is not more rigorous under the Gospel. This therefore is a
bloody and discomfortable doctrine, to be abandoned and abiured of all parents,
of all childeren, of all Christians. The fourth outward part of baptism is
the body that is washed. Now, such as are to be baptized, must be within the
Covenant: these are, act. 8, 36
either men and Women of riper years, or else the infantes of such, who have
interest in Baptism as well as their parents. This condemns the Romyshe
practice of baptizing bells: and serves to set forth the great love of God to
all believers, who vouchsafes to be their God and the god of their seed. Hence
likewise it appears, Infantes have interest in baptism as well as their
parents
that infants are to be baptized. For baptism succeeds in place of
circumcision, the Apostles baptized Col. 2. xi
whole houses, Christ calls infants and sucklings Act. 16. 15. 33
unto himself, and (...) that to such belongs the kingdom of Heaven: they
are Christ sheep and members of his body: Hence we learn, that the baptism
of infantes is no unwritten tradition, but a written and divine institution
taught in the Scriptures. Consider also hereby, the difference between
baptism and the Lords Supper, cor. 1, i4, 16 Mar. x. xiii, xiiii, xv.
and that all are conceived in original sin. Acknowledge also a difference
between them and the children os Infidels, and let parents be incoraged, Psalm,
51, 5
to bring up their children in the instruction and reformation of the Lord.

Hitherto of the outward parts: now follow Ephesians. 6, 4
the inward parts, which also are four in number. First, The inward parts of
bap. are four.
god the father represented by the Mi. whereby our faith is greatly strengthened.
For whenever the eye sees the minister (...) water on the body, faith
beholds god the father clensing the soul with the precious blood of his
son Christ. The second part is the spirit Math. 28. 19
of God, having relation to the word and promise of God: and therefore
whenever we come to hear the word or to receive the sacraments, we must
crave the assistance of the spirit to open our hearts, icor. xii. xii.
as he opened the heart of Lydia. If this in ward teacher be wanting, the ear
hears and the hand handles, but the heart is hardened. The third in ward part
of baptism Act xvi. xiiii.
is Christrepresented by the water. This serves greatly to confirm our faith,
to consider with our selves, when we behold with our bodily eyes the water
poured upon the body baptizd, act. 2. 38.
the blotting out of all our sins by the blood of Christ Jesus. i Pet. 3 xxi
The 4. inward part is the soul cleansed, P most lively and effectualy
represented by the body washed. For the washing of the body represents the
clensing of the soul. This teaches, that by nature we are corrupt and
abominable, Ephesians, 5 26, 27
so that God must work in us both the will and the deed. These are the four
in ward parts of baptism. The agreement between these outward and inward
parts The propovtion betwixt the outward and inward parts of bapc.
is very evident. For as the Minister, by the word of institution, applies
Water to the washing of the body: so the father, through the working of the
spirit, applies the blood of Christ, to the clensing of the soul.

Thus far of the parts of Baptism, both the outward and the inward parts:
now we come to the uses thereof, Three uses of Baptism
which are principally three. First, to show our placing and planting into the
blood of Christ, to remain in him for ever. This conjunction with Christ is
not bodily or natural, but mystical and marvelous in our eyes: for we are
made one with Christ, 1 cor 6: xvii
by the same spirit dwelling in Christ, and in all the members of Christ. So
then, the saints triumphing in heaven, and all the believers fighting upon earth
as soldiers in warfar, have one and the same spirit of christ dwelling in
them, and therefore are one with him. Secondly, to assure us of the remission of
our fins, that we may be able to stand in the presence of God, Gal 3: xvii
having put on the garments of Christ, as Jacob received the blessing clad in
the garments of his elder brother. This overthrows the doctrine or rather
doting of the church of Rome, which teaches that baptism abolisheth al sins
going before it, and leaves nothing that has the name or nature of sin. If
this were a truth of god not a dream of men, it is not only decent, but
greatly to be desired, to have baptism deferred until old age, nay unto the
hour of death, that so we may depart hence in peace with greater assurance of
Gods favor in the pardon of our sins. Thirdly, Mark 1: 4
to slay the old man, and to kill our natural corruption by the power of the
death and burial of christ: besides, to raise us up againeto holiness and newnes
of life by his resurection. Hence it is, that the Evangelists call it the
Sacrament of Repentance: admonishing every one of us to express the strength
and power of baptism, as the Prophets of tentimes exhort the lews to Deuteronomy x,
xvi
circumcise the forskin of their hearts, and to harden their necks no more. So
we ought not to content our selus to be baptized in body, but must labor to be
baptized in soul, by a daily proceeding in regeneration, by bringing forth the
fruits of sanctification, and applying Christ Jesus to our full justification.

Thus much of baptism, the honorable badge of our profession and dedication
to Christ that dyed upon the Cross, what it is, what are the (...) and uses
thereof. Now, we come to The sum of the 3. book
the Sacrament of the body and blood of CHRIST, e which is called by sundry
names in the new testament. Sometimes, it is called the 1 cor. 10, 16
Communion, teaching that we are one body coupled together in Christ, showing
that it is to be received of many together, and admonishing us of unity and
concord among our selves.

Sometimes, it is 1 cor, xi, xx
called the Lords Supper, hence we see, who is the author of it, no man, no
Angel, but the Lord Jesus, leaving it for a farewell token of his love toward
us. We must also come with an earnest desire hungring after Christ, that we may
be satisfied with his righteousness. Sometimes, it is called the acts 2, 42
breaking of bread: this shows, that the substance of breaderemayneth after
the words of consecration, that figurative speeches are used in the Sacrament,
and that this external rite of breaking the bread, used by Christ, practiced
by the Apostles, observed by the pastors of the church, ought not to be omitted
and ouerpassed. Sometimes, it is called the 1 cor x, 21
table of the Lord: this teaches, that christ and his Apostles, at the
celebration of it, used a table not an altar; that it is a Sacrament, not a
sacrifice, and that we ought to draw near unto it with all regard and
reverence. Lastly, it is called the new testament or Will of Christ. This title
teaches that there is a double covenant between God and man, 1 cor. xi, 25
the one old, the other new: the one of the law, the other of the Gospel: the
first of Works, the second of grace.

Again, it serves to condemn the cursed sacrilege of the church of Rome,
which adds and detracteth, alters and mangleth this sacrament at her own
pleasure, and mingleth it with the leaven of her own inventions. This is a
great comfort to all Gods children, to consider that all faithful christians
are the heirs of Christ, to whom he has promised salvation of their souls,
and forgiveness of their sins.

As we have seen the several names of this sacrament, which show the nature
there of unto us: so now we will set down What the Lo: supper is,
what the lords supper is. The supper of the lord is the second sacrament,
wherein by visible receiving of bread and wine, is represented our spiritual
communion with the body and blood of christ. Here God is present, and sits
as president at this table, he offers unto us his own son for our
justification, and therefore this supper must be reverently regarded, and
diligently frequented of us.

In this sacrament, In the (...): supper consider his parts and his uses
we are in like manner to consider, the parts and the uses thereof. The parts
are partly outward, and partly inward. The outward parts are The outvv.
parts are four
four: First, the Minister, who is to take the bread and Wine into his hands
1 cor. xi, 23
after the example of christ, to separate the bread and Wine, so taken, from
their common use to an holy, to break the bread, to pour out the Wine, and
deliver them both into the hands of all the people present.

So then, they are not consecrated to be priests of the new testament, but
preachers of the gospel, and ministers of the sacraments: and therefore private
persons may not take this supper to themselves or deliver it to others. The
second part is the word of institution, Luke 22, 19
this is my body, that is, this bread is Tertul. li, 4 cont (...) august. cont.
adimaut. c, 12
a sign of my body which shortly shall be crucified for you: this cup is the
new testament in my blood, that is, this wine in the cup is a true sign of my
blood presently to be shed to confirm the new covenant of God touching
forgiveness of sins and eternal life. These words are not properly, but
figuratively to be understood, being sacramental speeches,

Thus the Scripture speaks of Genesis 17, x
Circumcision and of the paschall Lamb. The third outward part are bread and
wine, fit signs to signify our spiritual nourishment by eating the body and
drinking the blod of Christ In Baptism we have one only sign, but in this
supper Mar. xiiii, 22
we have two, to note out our full and perfect nourishment by Christ. Nether did
christ deliver the deceivable shows of bread and wine, or cast a mist before
the eyes of his desciples to make them think it bread which was no bread, or
wine which was no wine: but he gave them true bread, and the true fruit of the
vine, 1 cor. x, xvi
as the apostle calls them, after the blessing, breaking, consecration.
Hereby falls to the ground the mystery of transubstantiation, the most
misshapen monster that ever lived or was devised. It brings in a false
Christ, and turns him into an idol: it makes Sacraments without signs: it
makes Christ to have an infinite body, who is like to us in all things Heb. 4,
15
sin only excepted: lastly, it confounds heaven and earth together.
Neither let any object that Christ has now a glorified body, sitting at the
right hand of his father, and therefore his body has a great privilege above
ours, to be in diverse places at the Object
same time. For first, when the holy supper was instituted, the body of Christ
was not glorified. Again, glorification Answer.
does not take away the nature of a true body, but takes away the infirmity
and weakness thereof. Take away space of place from a body, and it remains no
longer a true body, but the essence of it is abolished, Aug epist. 57 ad Darda^.
as Austine has well determined. Again, if Christ delivered both signs, the
people ought to receive under both kinds, so that they may be justly called
church-robbers, who have taken from the people the use of the cup, and Gal. 3,
xv
wretched depriuers of christ's testament, depriving the right heirs of their
inheritance, and engrossing into their hands the goods of others. They make it
of the essence of the Sacrament, to use (...) bread, and to mingle water with
wine, which christ never ordained or commanded: but that which is necessary,
they esteem as needless and superfluous, b thus transgressing the
commandment of God by their own traditions. The fourth outward part are the
communicantes, whose duty it is, Mat. 26, 26 (...)
to take the bread and wine into their hands, to eat the bread and to drink
the wine to the norishment of their bodies. He did not bid them to reserve the
outward signs, to hold them and adore them, or call the sacrament their Lord
and their God, he did not command them to offer the^ up to God the father as a
propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead, as is used in their unbloody or
rather most bloody Mass, which has caused so much innocent blood of the
blessed martyrs to be shed, Revel, 6, 9, x
who being killed for theword of god, and the testimony which they maintaind,
their souls under the altar cry day and night with a loud voice unto the L.
holy and true, to judge and avenge their blood on them that dwell on the earth.
Lastly, hereby are ouerthrown the private Masses of the church of Rome, which
now grow to be too common, 1 cor. 11. 20
and cannot stand with the communion of Christ, who delivered the signs of
bread and wine to all the disciples that were present, they did not stand by,
and gaze one upon another, but received the supper of the Lord (...).

The outward parts have bin hitherto handled, which being rightly performed,
What consecration is.
there follows consecration, which is, a separation of the outward signs
from their ordinary use to an holy and spiritual use, that whereas before
they served for the body, now they are made instruments of grace, and seals
of the righteousness by faith. The inward parts follow, the inward parts of this
Supper are 4,
which are four: First, god the father who appointed his son to perform the
gracious work of our redemption, and in the fulness of time sent him into the
world, Rom, 4: 25
who died for our sins, and rose again for our justification. Secondly, the
Holyghost, who assures us of the truth of gods promises. This shows, that he
is true Revel. i, 4:
god equal with the father and the son, proceeding from the father and the
son. This (...) such as suppose no partaking of the body and blood of christ,
except he be given us in a carnal and fleshy manner: whereas the spirit
works faith in our hearts, Hebr. xi, 1
which is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of
things which are not seen. The third inward part of the Lords Supper, Luke
22, 19
is the body and blood of Christ, delivered for us unto death. This conuinceth
such of a spirit of error, who make unbelievers and reprob. partakers of Chr.
body and blood: thus his body should be profaned, John 6, 54
and his saving graces separated from his person. But even as, where Satan
dwells and possesses the heart, there always reign the works of darkness
and damnation: so the gifts of Christ accompanying salvation, are inseperably
joined with the person of Christ. This also condemns the real presence and
carnal eating of Christ, which forgeth many Christ's, and reuiueth the Haeresie
of Eutiches: it crosses sundry Articles of the christian faith, and makes
faithful men like the unfaithful Barbarians, that devoured man's flesh and
drunk his blood. True it is, christ is truly present in the Sacrament,
howbeit not carnally, and corporally, but spiritually and mistically. He has
given himself to be the food of our souls, let us hunger and thirst after
him and lay hold on him to our salvation: for iIoh. 5, xii
he that has the son, has life: he that has not the son of God, has not
life. The last inward part is the faith full receiver, who stretches forth the
hand of faith, and so lays hold on Christ and all his saving graces. For no
man can communicate with his body, but the same is made partaker of his
benefits. Let us all prepare the true and lively faith Titus i, i
of Gods elect, and assure our selves that Hypocrites and unbelievers cannot
possibly be partakers of the body and blood of Christ. These are the four
inward parts also of the Lord supper. The similitude and relation The
proportion betwixt the outvvarde and inward parts of the Supper
of the outward and inward parts one to another stands in this manner, even
as the Minister, by the words of institution, offers and gives bread and
wine to the communicants, to feed the reupon bodily: so the father, by the
spirit, offers and exhibiteth the body and blood of christ Jesus, to the
souls of the faithful, to feed upon them spiritually. Thus much of all the
parts of the Lords supper: now follow the uses to be unfolded. The The vseso the
lords sup. are three
uses and profit which we reap by the Lords sup. are special three. First, to
show forth with praise and thanks giving, the death and the sufferings of chri.
who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, by whose stripes 1
Pet. 2, 24
we are healed: so that we have the chief cause in our selus, which did
crucify christ Secondly to teach our comunion which christ, being made flesh
Ephe. 5, XXX
of his flesh and bone of his bones. Hence we learn, that all the godly and be
leeuers are made partakers of christ and his graces. This is matter of great
comfort in our manifold trials and tentations, that we are joined to Chapter as
members to the head, Romans 8, 38
and therefore, neither life, nor death, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to com, nor hight, nor depth, nor any
other creatur shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
christ Jesus our L. But on the other side, the ungodly and unbelievers have no
part or Portion in chri. and his graces, they are as branches John XV, 6
cut off which wither, and men gather them to cast them into the fire and to
burn them. 3, to declare and testify our communion, fellowship, and 1 Cor. X.
17
agreement with our brethren, meeting together at the same table, and partaking
together of the same supper. Wherefore, seeing we have not only an union with
christ, but a comunion among our selus, we are the servants of the church, to
serve one another in all duties of love, to instruct them that are ignorant, to
raise them that are fallen, and to bind up the broken hearted, to reconcile our
selves one to ward another, and to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace. Hitherto we have handled the doctrine of the Lords supper, declaring
what it is, what are the parts and uses thereof; the preparation to this work
follows, 1 Cor xi, 28
consisting in the Examination of our selves, and trying our own hearts by the
touchstone of the law of god. This duty is very necessary to be performd of
us, Ierem. 17, 9
for the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and the secret corners of
it past finding out. We have to deal with god in this business. Great is the
profit which we reap and receive, if we come rightly and (...) prepared. Great
is the punishment procured, by want of this try all and examination. And the
Hag. 2: 14
Sacrament it self is defiled, by unworthy receiving. This preparation
principally stands in these 4. points: in the Ioh: xvii: 3
knowledge of god and of ourselves, especially of the whole doctrine of the
sacraments: in a 2 cor: xiii: 5
lively faith in Christ, seeing every one receives so much as he believes he
receives: in repentance Psa6. 26: 6:
from dead works: and lastly in Math, 5: 23,
reconciliation toward our brethren, having peace Rom xii: 18
with all men, and love toward our enemies.

Thus I have opened plainly, yet truly, the doctrine of the Sacraments,
delivered in the Scriptures, and taught in the reformed churches. I have
disclosed some part of the mystery of iniquity and discovered and laid open the
skirts of that great Idol of the Mass, the reproach of christians, the scorn
of the gentiles, the offense of the weak, and the occasion of ruin to many
that stumble thereat to their own confusion. The Lord god, high possessor of
heaven and earth, and preserver of his people that call upon him, put it into
the heart of all christian princes and rulers of the earth, to pull down this
abominable Idol, that has advanced itself against the kingdom of christ,
and to deface this filthy monster that has deceived many, who trusted in it.
The same Lord vouchsafe, to reveal his truth to the ignorant, to establish
them that are weak, and to confound all obstinate enemies to his truth, to
their prince, and to their country, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen

Amen.
FINIS.
A Corollary.
THe Apostle Paul (Christian Reader) prophesieng of these last times in which
Antichrist should be reueiled, 2 These, 2.
declares that his coming shall be by the effectual working of Satan withal
power, signs, lying wonders, and in all deceiuablenes of unrighteousness, that
so they might be damned which believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness. In this description the effectual working of this (...) is
set down, but it is in those which (...). For as God imparteth his 1 cor, 14,
25.
power to his ministers, and indueth them with his spirit to save such as
believe: so does Satan after an apish imitation give power to his instruments,
and breath his spirit upon them to condemn such (...) receive not the truth.
The manner and means of Antichrists prevailing in the children of The means
of Antichri. prevailing (...) the world
disobedience is double, to wit, by work and by word. His working is with
great power, which is seen by signs and lying wonders. Now, who it is in our
days that boasts of wonders, and I wot not what miracles? Who makes the
power of working signs and miracles Bellar, lib, 4 de notis Eccles, cap, 14
a note of the Church? Who glory that they can every day, nay every hour of
the day miraculously transubstantiate the bread and wine into the blood of
christ? who pretends that their real presence their Bellar, de imagine,
sanctor. li, 2, c, (...)
images, their private Bell, de euch lib, 4 cap. 21
Masses, and other like superstitions have been confirmed by miracles from
heaven? Is not this the church of Rome which has the Pope for her head, Bell,
de Pont Rom, l, 2c, 31
her spouse, and her foundation? And is he not discerned by this note among
other to be that very Antichrist described in scripture, prophesied to com in
the world, (...) now to the church, and felt of every christian? Wherefore, let
us carefully beware, (...) such signs and wonders carry away our eyes, and
steal away our hearts from the simplicity and sincerity of the Gospel.

The second means of his proceeding and prevailing is by word, to wit, by
deceiuablenes of unrighteousness. He is indeed an enemy to Christ, and to his
church: how beit not open, but secret: not showing himself as he is, but
disguised: not oppugning the truth with manifest violence as an open enemy, but
masked under the cloak of godliness, pretending the fairest friendship, but
intending the greatest Antichrist is a disguised enemy, playing the wolf in
sheeps clothing.
and deepest mischief against God and his truth. Who is it therefore that
propounds false doctrine to the people colored with the name of Christ and
show of Christian (...)? Who condemns marriage under the cloak of (...)?
(...) use of the creatures under the vizard of fasting? Lawful possessions
under the pretense of voluntary poverty? Who, under a false show of counterfeit
devotion, zeal, and (...), to bleare the eyes of the simple, and to carry away
the hearts of the unstable, has nourished (...), rebellions, and Machiauillian
practices against lawful princes, but he? I hese are the marks of Antichrist,
and these have been his cunning baits to allure men to his superstition, and
their own confusion.

Moreover, mark the order of their proceeding. First, they have gone about to
erect the kingdom of Babylon, and The subtle practices of the aduersar. to
restore their kingd. greatly decayed.
as it were to put life into the beast, by handling the questions of religion
between them and us, and to this purpose have published controversies,
dictates, Narrations, Lectures disputations, Demands, Motives, Principles,
Apologies, Chalenges, Demonstrations, and (...) of Popish doctrine But being
beaten from his bulwark, and out of all their sophistry by the sword of Gods
spirit, which is Ephesians. 6, 17
the word of god, they have sought to gain and get ground of us another way.
For whereas they saw (...) ouermatched in matters of doctrine, they endeavored to
excel or at least to equal us in life and conversation, and (...) partly at
home and partly abroad, they have penned sundry treatises of Directions,
Devotions, Reuclations, Imitations, Memorials, Meditations, and christian
exercises tending to reformation of manners, thereby thinking through
hypocrisy to win estimation among the simple, and to incite men to allow their
religion it self. But finding themselves in process of time far inferior unto
us, both in purity of doctrine and sincerity of life: they have last of al
invented another shift (wherein is less honor, and more dishonesty) to wit, by
setting down the debates, and disagreements that have been among our churches
and gathering an heap of testimonies out of our own wtiters, bitterly
inueighing one against another, thereby to raise up Prou. 6, 19
(...) to (...) the minds of many from us, and to work a deep dislike of our
religion.

Among other, there is a notable example of a crafty enemy both nameles and
shameless, who writing against a worthy knight in the commonwealth, and a
learned docter in the N D. alias Noddy.
church, entituleth himself, first the Warder, and now lately the warner
(though he show neither skill in the one, nor wisdom in the other) and
through their sides seeks to give a wound to the (...). This man, pretending
nothing Warn-word counter. 1. c. 4 page 46
against us but braulings, and (...) inuectiues ione against another, as well at
home as abroad, not being able to handle the controuerfies of religion, has
filled his Warn-word with continual allegations of authorities and speeches out
of our own writers, as Luther, zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Beza, and
diverse others, together with most bitter raylings, and calumniations of his
own invention against us: al which if they were taken out of his book, as evil
humors out of a body, it could not be esteemed worth so many counters, as now
it is k divided into encounters. There is nothing so hard as to do well: there
is nothing so easy as to speak evil. Let it therefore of al persons be called
for ever, not the Warn-word, but the Scorn-word, being a confuted mass of
slanders and evil The Warn-word is divided into two encuonters.
practices, to be scorned rather then confuted. And albeit it be the deep
subtility and wretched policy of our adversaries, to aledge Luther against
Zuingilus, and one of our writers against another, to the end that while they
strive about men's words and writings, matters of greatest substance may lie
buried in silence: yet they shall never bring us from the holy defense of gods
eternal truth, to skirmish with them about men's sayings. We will not leave the
great keys and questions of religion, and fall to dispute of matters of
inferior nature and condition: this were to wra^gle about nothing, and to fill
the world with frivolous and fruitles writings. Let them know, we are no more
bound to defend and iustyfie Luther and his followers in all their sayings,
then they will be bound to defend Bellarmine, Hofius, Harding, and other harsh
maintainers both of popish opinions, and their own private assertions. If they
will take upon them to allow whatsoever positions and propositions Caietan,
Durand, Canisius, Gregorius de Valentia, or any of their side, has published,
let them profess it and give out so much: otherwise they take pains in vain,
and offer us great injury, obiecting against us, words neither vtterd by us,
nor aproued of us. And howsoever we agree together better then the adversaries
wish or desire, as appears By the Harmony of the Harmony of Churches
Churches set forth to be read and understood of all, declaring to the world
how falsely we are charged with disunion and division, and showing the peace and
concord between the churches of Britain, France, Germany, Swizerland,
Denmark, and other places in matters of faith: yet I will not deny (the gifts
of God being diverse) some difference and dissension between us about the
sacrament of the Lords sup. which notwithstanding is not so great as has
been in former times, nor so bloody as the adversaries surmise, neither so
dangerous and gross as has been and is at this day in the church of Rome. No
age and generation has seen all Churches following all together one another
in all points, but some Eusebius. lib. 8 hystor. cap, 1,
difference has appeared in doctrine, or in discipline, or ceremonies, or
manners, or in all: yea Bishops have been against Bishops, Doctors against
Doctors, fathers against fathers, Saints against Saints, churches against
churches: yet were they not heerby rent one from another, but joined together
with hand and heart in the common faith. Cyprian dissented from Cornelius, and
Augustine from Jerome, as Lot did from Abraham. Was there not a violent and
troublesome contention between Theophilus of Alexandria, and Chrysostom of
Constantinople: between Cyrill and Theodoritus, as great as ever was between
Luther and Zuinglius? Yet were they Godly, learned, zealous, and excellent
pillars of the Church of God in their times.

Neither is the contention so great, or War so hot and bloody between the
reformed churches about the sacrament, as is imagined. For touching the matter
it self, there is no strife: the difference is only in certain
circumstances. First, we all acknowledge, that the holy signs have not a bare
signification but assure our consciences through the The agreement betwixt the
reformed churches about the Sa.
ordinance of God, that the things themselves are as truly and certainly
given of God to all the faithful that come to his supper, as the outward signs
are delivered by the minister of God. Again, we profess that the supper
consists of two parts, the earthly, external, and visible, which are bread
and wine: and besides, the heavenly, internal, and invisible, the true body and
blood of Jesus Christ, together with all his gifts, benefits, and treasures,
according to Iren. (...). haeves. lib. 4. 34.
the doctrine of Ireneus. Thirdly, we agree, that in the supper of the lord, we
are made partakers, not only of the virtue and operation of christ, but of the
very essence and substance of his true body and blood, which was given for us
to death upon the cross and was shed for us, so that we are most co^fortably
nourished with the same unto eternal life. Fourthly we believe, that the bread
and wine are not changed or transubstantiated into the flesh and blood of
christ, but remain true and natural bread and wine in substance as before: so
that the bread is called his body and the wine his blood, not only because his
body and blood are signified by these, and set before us, but because so often
as we eat and drink them worthily, christ himself gives us his body and
blood truly to everlasting life. Lastly, we al hold the use of the supper in
both kinds, and that without the right use of the outward signs it is no
sacrament, unless the bread be eaten and (...) wine drunk, and therefore we
condemn al (...) and adoration of the bread, al carrying it about and lifting
it up by the priest to the people, used in the Church of Rome. The
disagreements and diversities in opinion among us, are in certain adioynts and
in the manner of receiving: The disagreeme^t betwixt the reformed churches
about the sup.
for seeing we all reach and confess the true communication of the true body
and the true blood of our Lord Jesus christ, the controversy must needs stand
in the manner of communicating, and therefore the unity of the churches is not
thereby plucked (...). The difference stands in these particulars. First, one
part contendeth that these words of christ, this is my body, must be
understood literally and as the words found (which yet that side does not so
understand:) the other part holds that they are to be understood
sacramentally and figuratively, according to the declaration of christ, the
interpretation of Paul, and the infallible rules of our christian faith.
Secondly, one part will have the body and blood of christ essentially and bodily
in, with, and under the bread and wine, and so to be eaten, as that together
with the bread and wine they enter into the mouth and body of the receivers:
but the other part holds, that the body of christ which at the first supper
sat at table with his disciples; does not now continue with us upon the earth,
but abides in the heavens, and shall remain there, until he break the heavens,
and descend thence to judgment. Lastly, one part will have al communicants
that come to the lords table, and partake the outward signs, whether they come
worthily or unworthily, whether they be believers or insidels, whether godly or
ungodly, to eat the body and drink the blood of christ corporally and with the
mouth of the body, so as the believers do eat him to life and salvation, the
unbelievers to death and damnation: the other side holds that the vnbe
leeuers abuse the outward signs of bread and wine to their destruction, and
that only the faithful can eat the body and drink the blood of christ by a
true faith, and by the working of the holy ghost: whereby they are made flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone, being more nearly and firmly knit unto him,
then the members of our body are united to our head, and thereby drawing from
him life everlasting.

These are briefly the points of difference, faithfuly not partially,
particularly not confusedly, set down: in discussing the truth whereof,
howsoever great bitterness has (...) broken out between brethren, as likewise
did between Paul and Barnabas: yet setting the (...) of disputation aside,
they were worthy members of the church, zealous defenders of the faith, learned
teachers of the truth, earnest destroiers of heresy, and rare examples of
golines, notwithstanding the infirmities, imperfections, and intemperate style
of the one part. And howsoere this odious mak-bate War. word Encount. c. 14
N. D. boldly avouches page 46. that these men never met (...) to compound
their controversies, but they have always departed more disagreeing and more
enemies theu ever they were before their meeting: yet al men know, he does
either ignorantly or maliciously conceal the several points of their Acts of
agreement printed in Latin
union and agreement, concluded and subscribed at Marpurge anno 1529. cha. 15.
which was in this sort, credimns and (...) omnes, etc. we all believe and
profess concerning the supper of the Lord Jesus Christ that the use there of
in both kinds according to the inctitution of christ, is to be observed. And
that the mass is not any such work, whereby one man may obtain grace for
another whether he be dead or alive. Also that the sacrament of the altar is
the sacrament of the true body and blood of Jesus Christ. And that the
spiritual eating of the same his body and blood is very necessary for every
christian man. Moreover that the use of this sacrament, even as the word it
self, is instituted of almighty God, to stir up unto faith the weak
consciences of men by his holy spirit. And although it could not hither to be
altogether agreed among us whether the true body and blood of chapter be in the
bread and wine corporally: yet nevertheless both parties ought to declare
christian charity one toward the other, so far as conscience can bear. And
both parts shall diligently pray unto god, that he by his spirit may vouchsafe
to establish unto us, the true understanding of that matter, A men In this act,
which was subscribed with the hands of Luther, Melanthou, Brentius, (...),
Oecolampadius Bucer, and others, we see they profess christian charity, and
promise earnestly to pray unto God to reueile his truth unto them, bring them
to be of one heart in the truth, and confirm them to discern of things that
differ: so (...) the enemies of our church have cause, rather to envy our
agreement, then to in ueigh against our disagreement. It is not the custom of
the true church to delight in contention: it is the fashion of the church of
Rome, to command, to compel, to enforce, to press, to oppress, to ban, to
throw out cursings and to thunder out excommunations against those that dissent
from the^: but our churches, not withstanding this variance have not so
proceeded one against another as enemies, we curse not, but bless: we hate
not, but love: we parsecure not, but pray one for another: keeping the
grou^dwork of faith, (...) joining hearts and hands, we seek to repair the
ruin of Syon, and pull down the fortresses of the enemies thereof. Moreover,
albeit it were to be presumed in men of judgment and discretion, that such, as
have leisure with delight The dissentions of the papists among themselves
and pleasure to paint out the iars and quarrels abroad, either are or
doubtless should be in league and love at home: yet if we would enter into
the infinite dissentions, debates, divisions, contradictions, wranglings,
hart-burnings, grudgings, sects, and rentings into diverse partesamong the
Papists themselves (who indeed neither have unity in truth, nor unity in
falsehood) it should be harder to find an ending then a beginning. They could
never yet be reconciled. Their own school men are at deadly feud and defiance
one against another: Scotus is against Thomas: Ockam against Scotus: Petrus de
Alliaco against Ockam: the Nominales against the Reales: the Dominicans
against the Franciscans: Scotistes against Scotistes: Thomistes against
thomistes: Canonist against canonist: sect against sect: Order against Order:
cloister against cloister: priests against Jesuits, and Jesuits against
priests, repugnant one to another, and at civil and Domestical war among
themselves, proclaiming their own shame as with the blast of a trumpet: and
therefore having fought so many fields at home, they should not reproach us
with matter of dissension. We may reply unto them, as one sometimes fitly
answered phillip K. of Macedon entreating a peace among the Graecians, and
yet having his wife Olimpias and his son Alexander, known to live at mortal
dissension within his own doors, Go first, and conclude a peace in thine
own house at home. So should our adversaries remember, that the chief
procters and protectors of their new religion, have ever contentiously wrangled
with others and with themselves, and the contentions cannot yet be taken up I
dare confidently avouch and auerre, that in the greatest conu ouersies and in
the greatest number, if not in all (which are now multiplied to many hundred)
some one or other of their highest Popes, chiefest cardinals, reverent
Bishops, famous Doctors, learned schoolmen, holy fathers, and other aproued
writers Popish writers ioinvvith us in the greatest controversies
among them, are slatly and fully on our side, join with us hand in hand, and
give testimony directly to our doctrine, not in the smallest points, but in the
greatest: not in few, but in many: yea not the meanest among them, but as we
have said, the strongest pillars of their church are revolted to us, are come
into our camp, have pitched their tents with us, and some one or more of them
fight our battles in all our doctrins. This were easy to be showed
particularly touching the Apochryphall book, touching justification by
imputation, touching Images, touching prayers in a strange tongue, touching the
notes of the church, touching the sacraments and such like, among which many
have written since the late Trent-counsell. Thus while we are in peace, the
enemies possessed with a spirit of division, and stricken with giddines by the
just hand of god, wound one another, and the swords of the Midianites Judge. 7,
22
are drawn out against the Midianites. Therefore the truth rests among us, Our
Deuteronomy. 32, 31
enemies being judges.

But lest we might peradventure be thought to offer them wrong, whilst
insisting upon general terms we charg them Popish qvarrels one with another.
to be divided among themselves, and in their writings to gaul one another: I
will press them with particulars, and only stand upon the matter in hand, to
wit, the sacraments, the doctrine whereof I have plainly opened in these Books.
Whosoever shall read the writers of the Roman church touching the sacraments,
shall find almost so many minds as men among them, they furiously fight and
make daily combats against each other, moving sundry questions, which they
cannot with all their shifts remove or determine.

First of al, the schoolmen make a question, whether the body of Christ in the
Eucharist be eaten with the mouth of Quest wherein the school men are at variance
the body, and pass into the belly, or only by faith? Some of them hold he is
only eaten spiritually, and received by faith, as cardinal Tom. 2, tra. 2, cap
3
Cajetan a pillar of their church, a peer of the Court of Rome, the Popes
legate in Germany, and Luthers hott aduersarye holds this, Falsissimnm est
corpus christi corporaliter sumi, quoniam, etc, It is very false that Christian
Body is received bodily, for the divines teach that he is taken spiritually,
not by handling but by believing. And Bellarmine a man of the same note and of
the same coat, says, Dicemus christum efse, etc. Bell. de euch lib. 1, cap. 2
We will hold that christ is in the Eucharist truly, substantially, really, not
corporally: nay contrariwise it may be said to be there spiritually. Others
think, he is taken bodily into the mouth, but goes not into the belly. This
the gloss Gloss in can trious in ver. miscere.
holds in Gratian, quam cito species dentibus atteritur, tam cito in coelum
rapitur corpus christi: that is, So soon as the accidents of bread begin to be
chewed by the teeth, presently Christ's body is conveyed into heaven. But Durand
goes farther, and says, Durand. iniration dium. offic. lib, 4.
Corpus christ's de ore transit ad cor, and tum desinit corporis presentia,
remanente spirituali, that is: The body of Christ passes srom the mouth to the
heart, and then the bodily presence cease, and the spiritual remains.
Lastly, others say, it passes into the belly, and remains there as long as
any show of the bread abides. Lo, what they hold in this one question, and
they varry being constant in nothing but inconstancy. Some of them resist the
beginning of inconveniences that may ensue, and hold he never comes Bonauen.
in 4. sent, did. 13 art 2. quest. 2
into the mouth: some, that he comes into the mouth, but not into the
stomach: some, into the stomach, but not into the belly: and others sticking at
nothing, do hold he goes into the belly. And to fill up the measure of
iniquity, Antor pa 3 tit 13. c 6. sect 3 de defect (...).
Antoninus Arch. of Florence writes, that the body of Christ may he vomited
upward by the mouth, and purged downward by a draught: Igitur corpus christi
and sanguis tam diu manent in ventre, and stomacho, vel (...), etc. Therefore
(says he) the body and blood of christ remain in the belly and stomach, or
in vomit, and in whatsoever course of nature, so long as the shows of bred and
wine remain. And if they be vomited or purged before they be altered, (as
sometimes in those that are non corrupta emittuntur (...) in (...) bus sluxum
trobled with the flux) even there is the true body of christ. If this be true,
I would gladly learn of the profoundest doctor, and learned Jesuit, what is
to be done to the body of christ thus purged or vomited? whether it shall be
eaten again, or burned, or what they would have done with it? Robert Smith a
Martyr of blessed memory, reasoning with a Popish priest of the real presence,
compelled the Doctor by force of reason at length to confess, that c the body
of christ being eaten in the sacrament goes The saying of a Popish Doctor.
down into the belly, and so is cast into the dr aught, saying farther that
acts and mon. page 1691
it was no greater derogation to Christ, then to be spit upon. But wisely and
worthily did the Martyr reply, If the Jews, being his sworn enemies, did only
spit in his face, and we being his friends do cast him into the draught, which
of us deserve the greater damnation? Thus the Doctor was put to present
silence. O ye Cardinals and Bishops, O ye priests and Jesuits, are ye not
ashamed of this blasphemy, and of these blasphemers? Have not all your
Seminaries cause to blush at this vilany? Be hold (Christian reader) how the
lo. deals in Justice with such as give over the known truth, striking them
with blindness of heart and giddines of spirit, which is the just reward of
error and superstition. Leave therefore your gross and carnal presence: for
sake this barbarous and beastly divinity: renounce this sluttish and unsavory
dung, and return for shame to truth, to antiquity, to gravity, to sobriety,
and to the institution of christ.

Secondly, they handle this question, whether the Body of Christ be broken and
chewd with the teeth, or not? Some, De consecrat did. 2
hold not, c Non quando manducamus, etc, that is, when we eat, we do not make
parts of him. Again, other think, nothing is broken truly, Caietan tit. 2.
tr. 2, cap, 5
but in show, somewhat seems to be broken, but nothing is broken: so that we
have a myraculous breaking, where nothing is broken. Contrariwise, Pope
Nicholas in a counsel holden at Rome, caused Berengarius to recant in this
wife, de consecr. did, 2 can, ego (...)
credo corpus domini nostri Jesus Christi sensualiter et in veritate, manibus
sacerdotum tractari, et frangi, et fidelium dentibus atteri, that is, I believe
that the body of our Lord Jesus christ sensibly and in very deed is touched
with the hands of the Priests, broken, and ground with the teeth of the
faithful. This was the consent, judgment, and determination of that counsel,
and yet the rude gloss reproving the same gives warning to the Reader, Nisi
sane intelligas verba. etc. Except you wartly understand the words of
berengarius, you will fall into a greater heresy then ever he held. Lastly
notwithstanding this Synod, the received opinion in their schools is, Lumb,
lib, 4 sent did, 12.
that only the accidents of bred are broken and chewd. Thus they wander up and
down in discussing this second question, as men that are in a maze and cannot
find the end of their journey.

Thirdly, they dispute whether the substance of bread remain in the sacrament
or not? Scotus holds, that In 4. Sent. did. xi. que. 3
the substance of bread better resembles the body of christ, then only
accidents: seeing there is a fitter proportion between substance and
substance, then between a substance and an accident. So Occam secondeth this
opinion, saying, that Occam lib. 4, quest. 6
to hold that the substance of bread abides, is most probable, and least
subject to inconveniences, not repugnant to reason, nor to the authority of the
Bible. And Petrus de Alliaco, In 4. sent. quest. 6
Ille modus qui ponit substantiam panis remanore, etc. that opinion which
holds the substance of bread to remain, is contrary neither to reason, nor
to the authority of the scripture, nay it has better reason in it, and is more
easy to be understood.

And Durand the resolute doctor delivers, that, Durand. in lib. 4. sen. did
11.
It is rashness to say that the body of Christ by the divine power cannot be
in the sacrament in any other manner, then by turning of the bread into him.
Furthemore he affirms this, If it be granted that the substance of bread and
wine do remain, one dissioulty arises that two bodies are together, which may
be answered: but the contrary being holden, many follow, namely, how accidsnts
can nourish, how be corrupted, and how any thing can be engendered in them,
seeing there is nothing made but there is presupposed or thought to be a
matter, etc. Contrariwise commonly they hold, that the substance of bread is
turned into the body of Christ: but about the manner how it is changed, they
cannot agree. Some think the bread is consumed to nothing, and the body of
Christ brought in place of it. But Thomas their chief Schoolman holds, that
it is Thom. 3, quest, 75
not brought to nothing, whom Scotus crosses: and again Scotus is crossed and
coufuted by caietan. And in the counsel of Trent, it is made an Article of
faith, and all such cursed as heretics, which say, That the substance of bread
and wine does still continue: yet pope Innocentius in a counsel before, did
not curse those that held the contrary opinion, that the substances of bread
and wine do remain. Besides this, there is a great variety among the^, whether
the water mingled with the wine in the chalice be transubstantiated into the
blood of Christ. Some bring and wast it to nothing. Others hold it to be
transubstantiated into blood. Some say it is turned into the vital humor of
Christ. Al these are resolute gamsters: but Durand being fearful says, Quis
audeat desinire? That is, who should be so bold as to determine this question?
Thomas their Saint had rather hold a double transubstantiation, first of the
water into wine, and then of wine into the blood of Christ, and there upon
wisely and warily gives a caveat, that little water must be mingled with the
wine.

Fourthly, they are greatly trobled and perplexed, whether mice eating the
sacrament, do also eat the body of Christ? Bellarmine, Bell. de Enchar. li. 3,
ca. 1
seeing the iars of the Schoolmen, and the unsettled judgments of their
profoundest Doctors, has thought it best in his Jesuitical wisdom to pasie
it over, and say nothing: either because he was not resolved, or because he
would not lay open the shame, and discover the nakedness of his favorites. Peter
Lumbard master of the Sentences, and teacher no doubt of Catholic
conclusions among them, when he comes to this Question, stands in a
mammering, and cannot teach himself, saying, Sent. lib 4. did. 13
Quidigitur sumit mus? vel quid manducat? Deus nouit, that is, What is it
therefore that the mouse receives, or what does the mouse eat? God knows. As
if the should say, the question is too hard, for my part I confess plainly
mine own ignorance, I cannot tell. Notwithstanding, he takes heart and gives
his resolution thus, It may be said very well, that bruit beasts receive not
the body of christ. But the doctors of Paris have censured and corrected his
judgment, and say, Hic magister non tenetur, that is, Here in the Master is
not to be followed. And Harding ansvv. to art. 23, diuis. 1
holds it for an error, that a mouse may eat the body of Christ, and
calls the contrary doctrine a vtle asseueration. Now thomas of Aqume says
thus, Quidam dixerunt, that is some have said that as soon as the sacrament is
touched of a mouse or a Dog, the body and blood of christ does straight way
depart from it: but this is a derogation to the truth of this sacrament. And
yet this is that worthy doctor, to whom they say Christ appeared in a vision,
saying, O Thomas, thou have written well of me. So Johannes de Burgo says Ioh
de burg de (...) (...). cap. x
The mouse eating the sacrament, receives the body of Crist. (...) whom we
named before, though he will have Christ to take up his lodging as well in the
stomach as in the mouth of mau, yet he likes not, vt aut mus in ventre (...),
aut in cloacam discenderet, that is; Either that the body of Christ should go
into the belly of a mouse, or be cast forth into the draught, because the
ears of well disposed persons would abhor that, and if we should defend it,
the Haeretickes and Infidels would (...) at us, and laugh us to scorn. Again
he says evidently, The mouse cannot eat it, God forbid we should ever come
to that, Nevertheless Alexander as bold as blind Bayard, in despite of all
Heretics and Infidels aduentureth upon that opinion, Alex. de Hales part. 4,
qu. (...) 5, memb. (...)
If a hog or a Dog should eat the whole consecrated host, I see no cause
but the Lords body should go (...) into the body of that hog or dog. And that
we may see the blaspemous school divinity or (...) villainy of those (...) men,
hearken once more to Antoninus that beastly Bishop of Florence, anton. de
defect, (...) 3, part sum. 3
If a mouse or any other creature or beast happen to eat the sacrament
through negligence of keeping: let the keeper be enjoined penance 40. days:
and if it be possible let the mouse be taken and burnt, and let his ashes be
buried near the altar. Heereunto another adds, that (...) de Palude.
the Mouses entrals must be drawn out, and the portion of the sacrament that
there remains (if the priest be (...) to receive it) must (...) belaid up,
until it may naturally be consumed. But the host so found in the mouses
bowels, may in no wise be thrown into the water, as a certain priest sometimes
used a fly that he sound in the chalice after consecration. But if a man had
such a fervent zeal S. Hugh of Clunice.
(says he) that his stomach would serve him to eat the same without horror,
this were the best course of all, as God (...) did who is much commended for
swallowing and receiving the host which a leaper had vomited and cast up. And
heereunto, the goodly and ghostly Canons of the counsel holden at Colen under
the (...) Radulph, Conc, Col.
If there fall any small thing of the body or blood upon the pall of the
altar, let the stone be cut and burned, and the ashes put into the holy place,
or cast into the fish-poole. If any fall upon the stone, or upon the ground,
let the priest lick it up: if a Spider or fly be fallen into it, let them be
taken out warily, and burnt over the fish-poole: If a man shall vomit it up
again, let the pieces be gathered up and be given to a faithful man to take
and eat, and let the rest of the vomit be burnt, and set near unto the altar.
Can any religious heart repeat, or any christian ears abide this loathsome
divinity? We will therefore cease to stir this dunghill any farther, for the;
due reverence which we ought to bear to the glorious body of christ Jesus our
blessed savior.

But to return back to the former question, what shall we say that the beasts
eat? Bread it cannot be: for that they say is gone by consecration. Some, not
so gross as the former, hold, they eat the shows of bread. Others say, the
bread De consecr. did, 2 sect, Qui been.
returns again: and thus God must wnrke miracles to feed mise. So likewise
Innocentius, more subtiliy then soundly, says, The bread passes away
myraculously when the body comes; and the body passes and gets it self
away when the mouse draws (...), and the bread comes into his place again:
so that he holds, that it (...) to be a sacrament, so soon as any mouse or
beast touches it. But Guidmundus and Thomas Walden affirm, that Th, walden
tom 2. qui de Sacram, est cap, 46
when mise gnaw the Sacrament, there is deceptio visus, that is, an error in
our fight. We simply judge they be eating and nibling, but our sight is
deceived, the mise be otherwise occupied. And might they not as well say our
eiesight fails in thinking them to be mise or birds: whereas they may
peradventure be angels in their shapes? Other hold, some new matter is created
in place of christ's body: but I would gladly know, whether it be by virtue of
these words, this is my body.

And touching the Worms that are engendered in the (...), a (...) diversity is
among them. Some say they Diversity how (...) are ingendered in the Eucharist.
are engendered of the air, others of the substance of bread, and (...) of the
quality and shows thereof: and so we shall have substance made of accidents,
in despite of all (...) and reason. Thus they are carried hither and thither,
up and down, too and fro, to reconcile matters they know not how, and to
believe things they know not what. For how shall the people have a direction
and pathway what to follow, when their teachers are not settled and persuaded
what is the truth? Against al these confusions, uncertainties, contrarieties,
blasphemies, and crossing one another, we teach the people what to hold and
instruct them to make a diffe. between chapter body and the Difference betwixt
chri. body and the Sacrament.
sacrament of his body. The sacrament is corruptible, christ's body is glorious
and free from all corruption: the sacrament is beneath, christ's body is above:
the sacrament is on earth upon the table, the body is in heaven the Sacrament
feeds the body and outward man, the body of christ feeds the soul and
inward man: the sacrament is eaten as well of the wicked as of the godly, the
body is only eaten of the faithful: the sacrament may be eaten to death, but
the body of christ is ever eaten to salvation. Wherefore, howsoever beasts may
touch or eat the substance of the bread, which is the outward and corruptible
element of the sacrament: they cannot eat the body of christ which is in
heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father, which is received
only by a lively faith.

Fifthly, they argue the case, whether the show of bread be a sign of the
body without the blood, or whether it include the soul, humors, spirits,
and the blood it self? Scotus says In repor, d. x, quest. 3
Nonest certum, that is, It is uncertain, both may be defended, but neither
can be proved. Notwithstanding, opus 58, c. 13
Thomas of Aquin avouches, that the blood is in the body, and the body in the
blood by a connecting of them together, which they call concomit antia or
accompanying each other. So then whereas Christ said this is my body, they
understand him to say this is my body and my blood. Again, when Christ said
this is my blood, they make his meaning to be this is my blood and my body.
This is a new fancy, well agreeing and answering to their new doctrine,
whereby they are constrained to build up one idle conceit with another. This is
a very wonderful shiste, and a marvelous sigure, passing all figures, whereby
one thing is made two, and two are made one.

Lastly, to draw to an end (where almost no end is) they eagerly contend with
what words their consecration or rather coniuration is wrought. Some say,
christ consecrated when he blessed. Others denying this, dispute how many
words are precisely required to the form of consecration. Scotus shrowdeth
himself under his own ignorance, and flies to it as to a place of refuge,
saying, In repor, di 8 quest 2
It is a lawful ignorance not to know how many words are necessarily required
in the form of consecration, and therefore he which thinks he knows is
deceived: the Greeks use not the same form that we do, yet we deny not, but
that they consecrate. Thus he concludes the whole matter with an Ignoramus.
Unto these heads before remembered, we might also add many foolish, frivolous,
and ridiculous questions disputed among them, as whether in the sacrament
Foolish quest disputed by (...) the Papists.
the foot of Christ be confounded with his face, his hand with his head, and
whether one part be distinguished from another? Whether Bell, de euch lib 3 cap,
x
the host falling, the body of Christ falls: and whether it be moved to and
fro, as often as the host is moved? Whethe it be fittest for the host to be eaten
after a (...) has vomited it up, or a drunken man in his drunkenness? Whether
christ leave heaven to come into the place of bread? Whether in coming he
pass through the air? Whether he forsake the earth again so soon as the
shows of bread are touched with the teeth, or whether he go down into the
stomach? How long he stays in the stomach? Whether he tarry and wait his
attendance there till the form of bread be disgested, and whether he change
himself at such time into the foul or body of the communicant, or whether he
vanish into nothing, or else return to heaven? They make a quaere likewise,
when the sacrament begins to be God, how long it continues God, when it is
god, and when it is no god? When we may adore and how long we may adore it
without danger, and so safely cease and leave off? Whether the body of Christ
Tho. aquin, in 3 qu, 76 ar 30
have dimension of quantities, proportion of body, and distance of parts one
from another, as between eye and eye, ear and ear, head and foot, as it is
in other naturell bodies? Whether christ speak of the Eucharist, Ioh. 6.
Gabriel, Biell, Cusanus, Caietan, Lyra, and others deny it: but Sanders and
Bellarmine Bell. lib 1 de sac. euch. ca, 5
hold otherwise, and go about to confute the former. Again, whether the matter
of the Sacrament may be bread of any kind of grain and corn, or only of
wheaten bread? Some hold the sign of the Sacrament must only be made of
Wheat, as Scotus: some of Wheat or barley, as Albertus, and Thomas de
Argentina. Others hold consecration rightly to be made Gab. Biel. in lect, 37
in ca^. Cajetan in 3 par. Tho, qu. 73, art. 3
in any usual and common bread whatsoever it be, as Caietan. They cannot
agree likewise, whether the priest may be said to be the creator of his
creator? With a thousand such questions or rather fooleryes they blot Paper,
wast time, and weary the Reader, never known, nor heard off in ancient
Writers, no not 800. years after christ, which argues that they never dreamed
of any carnal presence.

But not to stand upon all the the contradictions among them (which were
without end, and without (...)) we The institution of Christ expounded
will come to the m words of institution: which albeit they be short and
easy, clear and evident in themselves, yet they have corrupted them with many
glozes, and crossed one another in their perverse interpretations. Christ says
of his last Supper, when he had taken, blessed, and broken the bread, This is
my body which is broken, or given for you, do this in remembrance of me. In
like manner he took the cup, saying, This cup is the new testament in my
blood, this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. As if he should
say, this bread is a sign or sacrament of my body, which is delivered to death
for you and for your salvation. Christ took nothing but bread: he brake that
which he took: he delivered that which he brake as the Apostle says 1 Cor, x,
16
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? So
touching the other part, when he says, This cup, he means, this Wine in the
cup is a sacrament of the new testament, of our reconciliation with God now to
be fulfilled, of our communion and participation of Christ with all his
benifits. This interpretation is agreeable to the circumstances of the text, to
the proportion of faith, and to the exposition of the ancient fathers, who call
the sacrament a representation, a remembrance, an image, a token, a sign, a
figure and such like. But because our adversaries can abide no figures, let us
hear what the Doctors of the Church teach, who thought it no heresy to
expound the words of Christ by a figure. Tertullian one of the most ancient
says, Tert, cont. Marcion li, 4
Christ receiving the bread, and the same being divided unto his Disciples,
made it his body, saying, This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body.
And Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Mat. hom 83
If Christ died not, whose token and sign is this sacrifice. Ambrose also has
these words, Am, de illis qui mit. mist cap 9
After consecration the body of christ is signisied. Add unto these the
testimony of Augustine,, Aug, in psalm 30, and epi, 23 ad Bon. and co^ adam cap
12
who taught the people thus, christ at his last supper commended and gave the
figure of his body and blood. And epist 23. ad Bonifac. The sacrament of the
body of christ is after a sort the body of christ. And in another place, The
Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when he gave a token of his body.
Lastly, the Gloss upon the Canons, dissenteth not heerin from the fathers, De
consecr, did 2.
Dicitur corpus christi, sed improprie, vt sit sensus. It is the body of
christ, but improperly: the meaning is, it is called Christ's body, that is,
it signifies christ's body. Gelasius says in the same manner, Gel as cont.
Eutich
There remains still in the sacra. the nature or substance of bread and wine.
To conclude, Augustine says else where, Aug. in ser, ad infant.
Quod videtis, panis est, that is, the thing that ye see, is bread. He does not
say, it seems bread and is none, or it is the show and form of bread, but he
speaks evidently, it is indeed bread.

Now our adversaries, that can abide no tokens, no figures, no signs, no
significations in the words of the supper, are notwithstanding driven to make
so diverse, so doubtful, so Popish expositions of chapter institution
many, so monstrous, so mad and senseles expositions of the word of
institution, as all the tropes, figures, metaphors, allusions, allegories, and
rhetoric in the world, will not serve them to salve up the branches of their
interpretations of these short and few words.

First, they find in the word, bread, a whole swarm of figures. They say the
Sacrament is called Bread, sometimes, because it was bread before: sometimes,
because an Infidel takes it to be bread: sometimes because the accidents and
shows of bread remain: sometimes, because the same accidents nourish the
body by a miracle, as if it were bread: sometimes, because it is that
spiritual bread How the papists understand the breking in the supper
which came from heaven: and lastly, because the bread sometimes returns
again after consecration. Again, these words lying together, he took, he
blessed, he brake, going before the words which Christ spoke, are strangely
expounded on this manner, he took the bread: he blessed, that is, he turned
and changed the bread: he brake, that is, the accidents or shows of bread: and
sometimes they understand, It seems to be broken: so that when the
Evangelists says he brake, they say the meaning is, he did not break but
seemed so to do.

Touching the next word This: the pronoune demonstratiue they say sometimes
points out the bread, as Bonauenture what the papists understand by the
pronovn this
delivers: sometimes they say it demonstrates not the bread but indiuidum
vagum, that is, neither bread, nor any certain determined thing else, but a
thing left at random, and at large in generality, but what thing particularly
they cannot tell. Sometimes, they say, it demonstrates nothing, as Ios, angl,
de mist, mis, c 17 Durand lib. 4
Josephus Angles: and Durand misseth not much of that mark, when he says that
by ( This) nothing is signified. Other say it demonstrateth the body, and so
they make christ to speak foolishly, This body is my body: and besides, by
this interpretation, it should be his body before the words of consecration.
Bellarmine, as he confesses the papists his good brethren agree not in the
sense of this word, so he inuenteth a new and strange exposition never hard off
before in the Church or out of the Church, in jest or in earnest, among the
learned or unlearned, that is, Bell, de euch lib 1 cap, 11
hoc edulium, that is, this food is my body, this drink is my blood, and yet
what food it was, and what drink it was, when that word was uttered, he
dares not to determine. Thomas of Aquine leaves it more at large, with whom (
This) is as much as Thom lib 4 sent di, 8 ar, 6
Hoc contentum, that is, that which is contained under these shows. Gregorius
de Valentia after his fashion says, Christ meant that which he took into his
hands: yet he holds, he meant not bread: so that by this reason without
reason, Christ took not bread into his hands. Scotus understands hoc ens,
that is, this general thing that has a being: but what it is when they should
declare, they stick fast in the mire of their own devises. Moreover, touching
the interpretation of the next word ( is:) they likewise muster an Army of many
figures. Sometimes they expound it, this shall be, as Occam. Sometimes they
understand thereby is made, as Bonouenture blundereth at al adventures. But
Bellarmine refelleth both these. Sometimes they mean, this shall be
transubstantiated and changed into the substance of his body. Furthermore, the
words following ( is given) they understand shall be given: is broken, they
expound shall be broken: do this in remembrance of me, they expound, sacrifice me
in remembrance of me. Thus they roue and wander up and down as men that have
lost the right way, and yet will be going rather then stand still.

Wherefore by these collections we see, that these words which stand in
construction and order together, he took, blessed, brake, and gave, they
expound on this manner, he took the A brief collection of popish
interpretations.
bread: he blessed it quite and clean away, and in place thereof put an other
substance: he brake the shows, appearances, and accidents of bread, and then
he gave them his body. Behold in these words of christ, how many shapes,
forms, figures, nay falsehoods they have invented, and so inuerted them? And
yet they say, they must be taken properly without any manner of figure. To
conclude this point, I wilgiue a short, but most sweet taste of the popish
divinity, taught in schools, in churches, in monasteries, in seminaries, and
in all their meetings, by their schoolmen, canonists, doctors, preachers, and
Bishops. When the Euange lists report, that christ having taken bread, brake
it, blessed, and gave it, saying, This is my body given for you do this in
remembrance of me: the meaning of Christ according to their interpretation must
be this, Christ after his last supper took bread into his hands, but blessed
it to nothing: he brake only certain shexes of bread, and gave them his
natural body, saying unto them, This which I have in my hands, whether it be
bread or not you cannot tell, surely food it is, but be it what it may be, it
is transubstantiated and turned into my body, and therefore take it and offer
it up an unbloody sacrifice for quick and dead, and so sacrifice me in
remembrance of me. Never were there such fond and fantastical figures heard
off in the Church of God: never was such vanity invented: never was there so
great confusion of tongues at the building of Babell: How much better were it
for them to forsake these fables and devises of their own, and to say
plainly, evidently, simply, directly, and distinctly with Scholiast Maximus.
the Greek Scoliast, Zumbola tauta, alla ouk aletheia, that is, these be
tokens, but not the truth it self. And with Tertullian, Tertul. con. Marcio^.
lib. 4
This is my body, that is, this is a figure of my body. The like we find in
Chrysostom in many places speaking as clearly, as when the Sun shines at
noone days, chrysostom, in epist, ad Caesar. Monach,
The bread before it be sanctified is called by us bread: but after that it is
sanctified by the grace of God it is thought worthy to be called by the name of
the body of our Lord, notwithstanding that the nature of bread do still abide
in it. And in an other place he says, Chrysostom in oper, imperf. homil, xi in
Iohannem.
If it be dangerous to convert sanctified vessels to private uses, there not
being in them the very body of Christ, but the mystery of his body, etc. These
things have so clear evidence of truth taught in those times that Bellarmine
has no way to answer but to invent this shift, that Bellar, de Sacr, Euchar
lib. 2, cap, 22
a certain Disciple of Berengarius did insert and interlace it. But who it
was, or when it was, or how it was disclosed and detected, he cannot tell, and
therefore it may justly be denied, seeing ofhim it cannot be confirmed. Besides,
this were an easy way to answer all allegations and authorities, to say they
are corrupted by heretics, if such counterfeit coin might go for good
payment. Thus far of this matter. Now if so great variety and dissension be
among them in this one controversy of the sacrament of the supper, to which we
might add infinite more: what an huge heap of differences should we find
among them, if we should run over all the controversies lying between us. Let
them therefore never object against us our divisions, or tell us of the motes
they espy in us: let them rather reconcile themselves one to another, and pull
out the beams out of their own eyes, or else for shame hold their peace:
doubtless among us they shall never find greater doubts and differences, then
have been among the children and churches of God. Now for our further direction
touching this point ofdissentionsin the church, lately and largely debated by
this enemy as the cheef object and subject of his Warn-word, and Four
profitable observations.
dilated through many chap. as welbecame a man of his leisure and learning: I
will insist a while upon this point, wherein observe with me these 4. things.
First, that unity is oftentimes out of the Church. Secondly, that dissension is
sometimes in the Church. Thirdly, that the Church of Rome has been and is at
this present full of contentions. Lastly, that this discourse of divisions in
our church may be taken up of the Turks, and used against christ and
christian religion, so that while they seek to give us a blow, they reach a
sword into the enemies hand to cut the hart-strings of their own cause. Unity
oftentimes out of the church.


Touching the first thing, all agreement among men, is no sufficient proof of
the goodness of the matter wherein they agree, inasmuch as all malefactors and
enemies of the gospel have a kind of agreement. There are agreements in
idolatry, in adultery, in robbery, in conspiracy, in murders, in mutinies, and
in all mannet of impieties, which are al odious to God, and hateful to men.
When all the earth was of one tongue and language, Gen, xi, 6
they all conspired in building the tower of Babel. They that worshipped the
Golden calfe, said Exodus, 32, 3
all with one consent, these are thy Gods o Israel, that brought thee out of
the land of Egypt. So the Apostles out of Psalm. 2. declare, Psalm. 2, 1, 2 cum
act. 4, 26
that the Jews and Romans, the state ciuell and Ecclesiastical confederated
together, did al consent and conspire against God and against his anointed.
There was an agreement Number. 16, xi
between Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their rebellious companies and
consorts, joined and combined together against Moses and Aaron. The ten tribes
agreed in worshipping the golden calves in Dan and Bethell. The Priests of
Baall consented King. 22, 13
together against Michaiah the true prophet ofGod.

All the people with Mat. 27. 22
one mind and with one mouth cried against christ, let him be crucified. And
John (...) that great Reave, 13, 16
and small, rich and poor, bond and free should agree in following and
worshipping Antichrist the enemy of Christ.

Secondly, as unity is oftentimes out of the church, so sometime q dissension
is in the church. The true members of the church have not always in outward
things, nor in matters of faith one mind and meaning. Abraham and Lot loving
God and beloved of God, Gene. 13, 7
dissented in the things of this life, Iosephes brethren hated him without a
cause, and persecuted him almost unto the death. The priests and Princes of the
people did dissent from the Prophettes of God. Moreover, in the household and
family of Christ, Luke 22, 24
ambition, envy, and dissension reigned and remained, as Luke xxii. there arose
a strife among them which should he the greatest. And Math. 20, 24. When the
other ten Math. 20, 24
heard of the ambitious desire of these sons of Zebede, they disdained at
the two brethren. So Paul withstood Peter to his face, Galat. 2, xi
because he was to be reproved, as Miriam and Aaron did to Moses who was not
to be reproved. Likewise, Luke, Act, xv, speaking of Pavle and (...), says,
acts 15, 39
they were so stirred, that they departed asunder one from another: which
albeit it fell out to the good of the church, to the gain of the gospel, and
to the glory of God (who is able to bring good out of evil, as he did light
out of darkness) yet it shows their weakness and wantes, especially of
barnabas, seeing the spirit of God assigns the reason whereon Paul grounded
himself touching his determination, but delivers not the reason of Barnabas
his resolution. Besides, we see Act, xi, they of the circumcision contended
against acts 11, 2
Peter, because he did eat with the uncircumcised. As touching the Corinthians
who were a true church, and sanctified in Jesus Christ, the apostle says, 1
Cor. 1, 11
It has bin declared to me of you by them that are of the house of Cloe, that
there are contentions among you: and chap, xi In this that I declare I praise
you not, that ye come together, not with profit but with hurt: for I hear that
there are dissentions among you, and I believe it to be true in some part, for
there must be even Haeresies among you, that they which are approved among you
may be known.

Thirdly the church of Rome is so far from the unity and agreement which they
boaste of, that contrariwise it has been and is full of contentions and bitter
controversies. If we would search the Histories of former times, we shall find
the contentions and quarrels between them to have bin infinite and innumerable.
Popes have bin against popes, nay Antipope against Antipope, when there were
two Popes, nay three Popes among them at once: which condemned, cursed, and
banned each other to the pit of Hell. Onuphrius a popish chronicler, Onuphr. in
Chro. Romans Pontif
reckons up thirty schisms among them, and those not of short dutance, but of
long continuance, so many as no church can boaste of besides. Their variety was
such about Formosus, that for some years every Pope cancelled and (...) his
predecessors acts, what one instituted, the other repealed: they condemned one
another, and followed their private factions and affections with such intestine
malice and barbarous cruelty, that Platina
Formosus was taken up after his death, being taken up was burned, being burned
his ashes were cast into the river. For Pope Stephen the sixth took up his
carcas Sigon. de regn. Ital. li. 6
out of the grave, brought it into judgment spoiled it (...) his robes, cut
off 3. fingers of it, and cast it into the stream tiber. Thus were the
pretended successors of Peter (...) about with giddines, es Krantzius speaks
of them Metrop. lib 2, cap. 22
and the head of the Romish and popish church was long without brain, though
not without brauling. This schism of two or three popes at onetime shall
witness, (...) all posterity, in all ages, to the end of the world, the
perpetual infamy of their deadly discordes, how far their church is from
that perfect unity they brag and boast of. What should I speak of their
infinite (...) and differences in cleaving to this saint and that saint, which
they have multiplied Ierem. 2. 28
according to the number of their Cities: likewise of their diverse Missales,
(...), and ceremonies used among them? of their sundry (...) of Monks and
Nuns, which they have so increased of late, whereas not many hundred year
ago, they mangled and mingled them with the leaven of their own inventions.
NOW, as there is no part of the word of god in common and continual use among
al christians more comfortable, then the doctrine of the sacraments: so no
point of religion is at this day more corrupted and depraved with the gesses,
glozes, errors, heresies, wrestings, wranglings, and idolatries of the church
of Rome, then the same. I have therefore unfolded and unmasked their false
doctrine touching the sacraments in general in the first book, which shows
whence the word is borrowed, what things are common to the word and
sacraments, as also what they have proper and peculiar: what a sacrament is:
by whom the sacraments ought to be administered; that they were ordained of
god, and commanded to be used and frequented of all persons in the church:
what are the signs and sacramental rites: what is the (...) part and
spiritual signification of them, together with the fit and full analogy and
agreement that is between them. I have also entreated of their force and
effect, of the ends and uses of them: of the difference between the sacraments
of the old testament and of the new: of the number of sacraments, and namely of
the 5 falsely named sacraments. Touching baptism in the second The sum of the
2. Book
book, how many ways the word is taken: what baptism is, who have authority
to baptize, who have right and interest to be baptized, wherefore it is not
repeated: that it comes in place of circumcision: how it a greeth with
circumcision, and (...) it differs from it: whether there be an absolute
necessity of baptism; whether the baptisin of John be one and the same with
the baptism of Christ: what sins are put away in baptism: what are the true
parts and right uses thereof: what is the duty of the minister in the
administration, and of the people in the celebration of it, and what foolish
ceremonies the church of Rome uses, of which trumpery the sacrament is to be
purged, that the simplicity of the institution may be retained.

Touching the Lords Supper, by which God witnesses that his covenant is most
certain toward us, the 3. book The sum of the 3. Book.
intimates what it is, why there is a dubble sign in the suppet, and one only
in baptisine: by what names it is called in the scripture: what is the duty of
such as come to the Popish corruptions in the Supper.
Lords table, and what are the parts and uses of it. Again, the words of
Christ's institution are truly and plainly expounded, and the right manner of
preparing our selus to this heavenly banquet is propounded. This truth is wholly
depraved, and the church utterly deprived of the comfortable use of this
Sacrament under Antichrist, where the corruptions (...) all mean and measure,
and where it is not only perverted, but quite abrogated and abolished. For they
have turned the Supper into Conc. Trid, sess 22, cap. 2
a sacrifice: they have poisoned the church with the error of the real
presence, with the monster of transubstantiation, with robbing the people of
the cup, with administering it in a strange tongue, with the magical
enchantment of consecration, with working miracles to feed Rats and Mise, with
disanulling a right use of the Communion by their private Masses, with
establishing a sacrament without eating and drinking, with the corrupt custom
of carrying about in processions, a cake to be worshipped and adored as God,
mounting it cerem. Rom eccle. lib. 1 sect, 2, 5, 12
on Horsebaeke and carrying it before the Pope with Lanterns and torches, in
(...) as the Persians Xeno. grop lib. 8
carried their god before the King of Persia. And as the church of Rome has
bin sundry ways detected of many superstitions and much silthinesse of
Idolatry, by appointing Images to be had in Churches for the instructions or
rather destruction of the people, which are teachers Quin. curti, de rep gest
Alex. lib 3
of lies and vanity) and by commanding Saints, Angels, relickes; and
consecrated things to be worshipped: so is this false church deeply defiled
with the sink and sin of Idolatry, in adoring and falling down before their
breaden God, prostrating and Jeremy. x, 8
prostituting themselves before a piece a bread. Behold here the God of the
papists. And if we should yield unto them their carnal presence, and their
miraculous transubstantiation, which is a monster of many heads: yet can they
never The pa. God
assure and secure themselves from committing gross and palpable Idolatry. 1.
because al their consecration stands upon the intention of the Ptiest, which
they cannot thoroughly understand: for 1 cor, 2, xi
Who can know the heart of man, save the spirit of man which is within him? as
the Apostle teaches. Besides, Innocentius holds, that it cease to be a
sacrament, so soon as any mouse, bird, beast, or vermin touches it. It his
rule of their holy father the pope hold as a firm foundation and sound
conclusion: I would know how they ca^ certainly know, whether any of them have
touched it, especially considering their doctrine of reservation, and keeping it
in vessels of the church many days. 3. sundry cases ordinarily concur, wherein
the priest according to their own canons and rules do not Tho. part 3 quest 8 3
Gerson cont Flor, Extran, de colobrat Missae.
consecrate at al, which things notwith standing are not within the knoledg of
the people, andtherfore how shall they assure their faith of consecration, and
warant their consciences against Idolatry? as for example, if he forget to
mingle water with wine: if there be more water then wine: if the bread be made
of any other then wheat flour: if the wine be sharp and sour: if of 7. loaus
mo or less he did think but of 6. if he have omitted but one word of
consecration; al these being beyond the compass of the peoples knoledg, must
needs be (...) to the conscience and leave me^ in dout of comitting Idolatry.
Lastly, many of the^ hold, that priests defiled with adultery, simony and such
like crims, cannot (as they speak) make the body of christ: whereunto Peter
Lumb. and the canons 1 qu. 1 can 5 quis. 1 qve. 1 can. qoicun
incline which say, Siquis episcopus perpecuniam ordinauer it, etc. If any
Bishop shall ordain a priest for money, he shall be degraded; and the priest so
ordaind shall be no better then a layman: for whosoever buy or sell orders, can
be no priests: how then shall they that are not themselus in the body of christ,
be able to deliver or receive the body of christ? Out of these canons I observe
three things. First, such as ly in mortal sin cannot consecrate. 2. such as buy
or sell orders, are no priests. Lastly, mark the miserable estate of the Roman
laity, who cannot assure themselus they have, any baptism, any Eucharist, any
penance, any matrimony, any absolution, any sa. any priests: seeing that as it
is certain thousands of them ly in deadly sin, buy and sell orders and were
appointed by Symoniacal bishops, so the people must always be uncertain, how
they obtaind their office of priesthood, whether it were rightly obtained, or
unlawfully Venalia (...) templa, sacer dotes, altaria, sacra coronae, ignis,
thura, preces, coelumest venale deusque Ma^tu. Calam lib. 3
purchased. Wherefore, Tho. Salisburiensis upon these uncertainties gives this
friendly counsel to worship upon condition, that every duty and things
required to the astion, be well and truly done. Seeing then, by (...) own
doctrine, delivered by their own doctors, the force of consecration hangs
upon a slender thread of the priests intention: seeing a beast touching the
host, the body of christ departs: seeing sundry cases fall out about the
matter of the bread, about the mingling of the cup, about the overplus of
water, about the omitting of a word, and such like not known at (...) of the
people: and lastly seeing a priest simoniacaly ordaind is no priest: It
follows by these propound principles of their popish divinity, defended by
their own prophets, that papists in their adoration and worshipping of the
sacrament may be Idolaters, and cannot secure themselves from committing
Idolatry. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, as that apo. teaches. But
they cannot directly know, whether the priest intended Romans 14, 23
consecration, and has performd his rules and directions requisite in
consecration, or whether a mouse has touched the host, or whether the priest
were ordaind for money: and therefore for any thing they can assure themselus to
the contrary, the substance of the bread still remains, and consequently they
fall down to a piece of bread, and commit detestable Idolatry in the grossest
kind, whereof the Gentiles would be ashamd. O misrable people led by such blind
guids! O miserable guides of such blind people! What a woeful condition is
this, that a man shall live all the days of his life in the bosom of their holy
mother the church, and yet her sons and daughters can never assure themselus to
have bin baptized (though they make the want thereof See Book. 2 cap. 5
a mark of reprobation) or ever to have received the Lords supper, or ever to
have bin (...), or absolved, seeing al hangs upon the priests intention;
observation, ordination. This is the lamen table condition of all those that
live under the heavy yoke and grievous bondage of superstition. There is no
peace, no comfort, no joy of heart in such a doubtful and doleful religion.
Wherefore, as the Holy ghost says, Revel, 18, 4
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.

Now, among all other abuses of the church of Rome, and prophanations of the
blessed sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, none is more notable and
notorious, then that great Idol of the Mass, being indeed a mass of many
abominations. And howsoever it be greatly liked of those that are enamored of
it (as the things that are not Theocrit. in Bvcol.
fair, yet seem fair to them that are in love) it is known to the true
church to be an heap of errors, a lump of confusions, a bottomless gulf of
all blasphemies, and an engine conc, Trid, (...). 22, cap 2 can 1, and 3.
that ouerturneth the foundation of religion. They make the Lords Supper to
be a sacrifice: not a sacrifice of praise and thansgiuing, but propitiatory to
be offered by a mass priest for the quick and the dead to save man: and not
only to save man, but sometimes their Pigs and their Swine from diseases. For
they have a mass commonly called the Mass of Saint Antony. Yea if a poor
woman's hen be sick, and ready to be lost, she may procure a Mass to be said
for it. And hereby, although no good redounde to The Mass of S. anthony.
the party, yet some gain shall return to the Priest, who, alan, desac, euch,
cap. 32
if he see no money, will say no Mass. And are not these more beastly and
unclean then swine, yea more mad then mad men, thus to abuse the holy
ordinance of Christ? and to turn that to their own profit which was
instituted for the peoples comfort? Do they not by this means make the death of
Christ of none effect, Gab. Biel
while they offer up a new that only sacrifice, which being once offered has
sanctified us for ever? and yet behold more abominations then these. The right
ends of the institution are basely esteemed, they make it of speclall force
against tempests, against sickness, against Wars: available to save cattle,
to cure the fever, to restore lost things: yea profitable for the dead, and
that Hebr, 7, 27
Ex opere operato, sine bono motu vtentis, that is, only being present at the
work done, though there be never a good motion brought thereunto by him that
is present. Thus they make the Mass devised by Antichrist, more precious then
the holy supper instituted by Christ.

Touching the word Mass, we must understand, that neither the name, nor thing
meant by the name by the Church of Rome is found in the Scripture, nor in any
(...) and approved Writer for four hundred years after Christ, to call the
Sacrament or sacrifice by that name. Tertullian, Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine,
Lactantius, knew it not, these Lataine fathers used it not. Again, the fathers
of the Greek Church, Chrysostom, Basil, Nazianzene, Gregory Nissene, and
other, were never acquainted with it, they pass by it as a stranger unto them.
But as there go many forged and (...) Writings under the names of the fathers:
so I deny not but the word Mass may be found in such base and bastard books,
as in Augustines Sermon. 91 and 237. and (...)
Sermons de tempore, and Ierom on Ierom. in prou. cap, 11
the Proverbs: which books were never made by them, but are of another style,
and of a later stamp. And howsoever some would derive it from the Deuteronomy, 16, 10
Haebrew word Missath, which signifies an oblation: yet it seems rather to
be all one Sueto^. in Ca lig. cap, 25, breui missam fecit
with Missio, which imports a sending away, and a licensing to depart: and
therefore Saint Cyprian says remissa peccatorum in stead of remssio. For this
was the order and custom of the Church in former times.

Nouices and such as were Catechume ni.
newly planted in the Church, being converted srom paganism to Christianity,
and from infidelity to the faith of Christ, and not yet baptized till they were
able 1 Pet, 3. 15
to give an answer to such as asked of them a reason of their profession, were
not suffered to come to the Lords table.

Likewise such as Cyprian. lib, 3, cpistol.
denying the faith by sinking and shrinking under the heat of persecution, or
committing some other heinous offense, were enjoined to make satisfaction to
the church whom they had grievously offended: no withstanding they might be
present at the public prayers the church, and at the preaching of the word,
yet might not be present at the administration of baptism, nor receive the
sacrament of the lords supper. Wherefore, after the prayers were finished, and
the sermon ended, the deaconsaid to such as were barred either by age or want of
susficient knowledge, or their own offense from the sacraments, Ite missa est,
that is, Go ye hence, ye may depart. Moreover, such as would not communicate
with their brethren, were willed to depart, and not Gregor. dialog, (...), 2
cap, 23
to trouble the rest of the church that stayed to communicate. Of this
dismissing and sending away al nouices, (...), and careless persons, which
either might not or (...) not communicate: and of this proclamation of the
deacon, the whole action of the holy communion in process of time was called
the Mass, that is, a dismissing of all such persons as were not to communicate.
But when through negligence of the people, or covetousness of the priests, this
order was altered: yet the name was retained, and now it is used for another
thing, to wit, for that solemn action What the Mass is.
whereby the sacrament is made a sacrifice, and offered up to god to take away
the sins of the quick and dead. And in this sense we have justly abolished both
the name, and the nature of the Mass, inasmuch as it has frustrated the death
of CHRIST, and taken from us the comfort of the Lords Supper. And albeit we
deny not, but the Lords Supper may truly be called a How this sacrament may be
called a sacrifice.
sacrifice, being a memorial of the real sacrifice of christ offered upon the
cross, being a thaks-giuing to god for the work of our redemption, being a
presenting and giving up our selves, our souls, and bodies to God a living,
holy, and acceptable sacrifice, and being joined with alms and relief to the
poor according to every man's ability, which is a testimony of our
thankfulness to God: yet as they understand it to be a real, external, bodily,
and unbloody sacrifice in the native and proper signification, and themselves
to be truly and propely priests (according to the order of Melchisedech) to
offer up the very body and blood of Christ to god the father for the sins of
the living and of the dead, we receive it not, but condemn it to the pit of
hell from whence it came. For Christ offered up himself Heb. 9. 15, 16 chapter x, x
but once. And if they be priests properly to offer him, they must likewise be
the murderers of him: forasmuch as when he was offered, he was killed.
Moreover, they make his al-susficient sacrifice to be imperfect, which
notwithstanding makes us perfect, and themselves to be after a sort mediators
between god and man, and so deprive themselus of the sweet mediation of
Christ. Thus much of the gainefull Merchandise of Masses used in the church of
Rome, and of the oblation or rather abomination thereof.

These and many other errors are discovered and opened in this Treatise which I
commend unto thee (good christian reader) desiring thy farther instruction in
the truth. I know it cannot but grieve thee to hear of contentions and
dissentions, especially in the matters of God, wherein we should al think and
speak one thing. Wherefore thou must remember, that it cannot be avoided but
offenses will com, but Luk, 19. 1
woe be to him by whom they come. The apostle says, There must be even 1 cor,
xi. 19
haeresies among you, that they which are among you may be known. For my part,
I have labored to do no more, then to quench the fire which other have
kindled, and to pluck up the weeds which other have planted. The success of
this work I commit to the Lord: the examination and fruit thereof to thee,
Read it with judgment. Try al things 1 Thessalonians. 5, 21
and hold fast that which is good. Lay al partialy aside, and weigh the
doctrine set before thee with the balance of the Sanctuary. The Lord of heaven
and earth bring us all to be of one mind and of one heart in the truth: and give
us the spirit of understanding, that we may be able to discern light from
darkness, and truth from error: and that we may not be carried away Heb. 13. 9
with every (...) of false doctrine, but that we may know what is the good and
acceptable will of God, and may grow unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus, to
whose merciful direction and protection I commend thee, Amen.

FINIS.
The Principles of Christian religion, set down in Questions and answers,
shortly for the remembrance, and plainly for the understanding of all persons,
requisite to be learned and known before they be admitted to the Lords Supper.
Q. What is true religion?

A. It is the knowledge of gods will, to the end we may serve him in holiness
and righteousness, Ioh, 17, 3, Ephesians 4, 23, 24.

Q. How many parts are there of religion?

A. Two: repentance, and faith. Mar, 1, 15, Act. 20, 20, 21

Q. What is repentance?

A Repentance is a turning from al sin unto righteousness, act, 3, 19, Ezekiel. 18,
21

Q How many things have we to consider in repentance?

A Two things: the parts of it, and the means whereby to attain it, Esa 1,
16, xvii, xx.

Q What are the parts of repentance?

A Two parts: first, a for faking of sin, with an hatred and sorrow for it,
Secondly, a betaking of ourselves unto righteousness, with a love and liking of
it, 2, Cor. 7, x, xi.

Q What are the means to come to repentance?

A Two means: first the knowledge of our sins by the law: Secondly, the
consideration of the punishments due to sin, Revel, 2, 5

Q How many commandments are there in the law?

A Ten: Exodus 34, 28, Deuteronomy. 4. xiii, and x, 4

Q (...) how many tables are the (...) divided?

A Into two tables, Mar, xii, 30, xxxi, Exodus, xxxi, xviii, 34, 1

Q What (...) the first table concern?

A Our duties toward God, contained in the 4, first commandments, Math xxii,
36, 37. 38

Q what is the (...) commaundemant?

A Thou shall have none other Gods but me, Deuteronomy, 5, 7 Exodus, 20, 3

Q what is the sum of this law?

A We must not account that as God, which by nature is no God: but have and
choose the true God only for our god, Mar. 12, 29

Q What is the second commandment?

A Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, Exodus, 20, 4

Q What is forbidden and commanded in this law?

A We must not worship the true god falsely: but worship god, as he has
appointed in his word, Ioh. 4, 24, Josh, 24, 15, Esa. 29, 13

Q What is the third commandment?

A Thou shall not take the name of the lord thy God in vain, Exodus xx. 7

Q What is forbidden and commanded in this law?

A We must not bereave god of the honor due to him: but use his titles, word
and works with all reverence, Math. 5, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37

Q What is the fourth commandment?

A Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, Exodus, xx, 8

Q What is commanded and forbidden in this law?

A We must (...) the sabbath with the works of the sabbath: and not (...) it
with our own works, Esa. 58, 13, Neh, 13, xv, xvi, etc.

Q What are the works of the (...)?

A (...) as are holy, and of present necessity. Luk, 14, 3, 4, 5, Act. xx, 7

Q (...) must keep the Sabbath?

A (...), thy son, thy daughter, thy man, thy maid, and thy stranger, Exodus xx, x

Q (...) of the first table: what does the second table concern?

A (...) duties toward our neighbors, in the six last commandments, Romans
13, 8, 9

Q Who is our neighbor?

A Our neighbor is every one of our own flesh, yea our enemies, Esa, 58, 7,
Luke x, 35, 36, 37, Math, 5, 44

Q What is the first commandment?

A Honor thy father and thy mother, Exodus, xx, 12

Q who is our father and mother?

A Al superiors set over us of god for our good, Rom, 13, 1, 2, Ephesians. 6, 1, 2. 3

Q what does the word honor (...)?

A It (...) reverence, obedience, and maintenance, whether they be worthy or
unworthy, that are our superiors, Math xxii, xxi

Q what is the first commandment?

A Thou shall not kill. Exodus xx, 13

Q what is forbidden and commanded in this law?

A We are charged not to hurt our own life, or our neighbors: but to preserve
and tender it as our own, 1 Ioh. 3, 15, Math, 5, xxii, xxiii. 24

Q what is the seventh commandment?

A Thou shall not commit a dultery. Exodus 20, 14

Q what is required in this law?

A we must keep our bodies and souls chaste from consenting to unclean lusts,
Math, 5, 8, 29 (...). Col. 3, 5

Q what is the eight commandment?

A Thou shall not steal, Exodus, 20, 15

Q what is forbidden and commanded in this law?

A we must not (...) or hurt our neighbors goods: but maintain and preserve
them, Ephesians, 4, 28, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6

Q what is the ninth commandment?

A Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor, Exodus, 20. 16

Q what is forbidden and commanded in this law?

A we must not diminish or hurt the good name of our neighbor: but (...) his
credit and estimation Exodus, 23, 1, Psalm, 15, 3

Q what is the tenth commandment?

A Thou shall not covet.

Q what is forbidden and commanded in this law?

A The first motions and lusts to sin before consent are forbidden: and love
out of a pure heart and a good conscience is required Romans 7, 7

Q (...) any man able to (...) these commandments?

A No man is able to (...) them, Rom, iii. xxiii, i Ioh, i, 8, Galath, iii

Q In what estate stand we by means of the breach of the law?

A We are the children of wrath and everlasting damnation, Gal, 3, x

Q What is the second part of religion?

A Faith, to believe whatsoever God has set down in his word, the sum whereof
is contained in the apostles creed, consisting of twelu articles

Q what is the first Article?

A I believe in God, the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

Q what is the second Article?

A And in Jesus Christ, his only son our Lord.

Q what is the third Article?

A which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary^.

Q what is the fourth Article?

A Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, he descended
into hell.

Q what is the (...) Article?

A He rose a gaiue the third day from the dead.

Q What is the (...) article?

A He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of god the father
almighty.

Q What is the seventh article?

A From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

Q What is the eight article?

A I believe in the Holi-ghost.

Q What is the ninth article?

A I believe the holy Catholic church, the communion of Saints.

Q What is the tenth article?

A I believe the forgiveness of sins.

Q what is the eleventh article?

A I believe the resurrection of the body.

Q what is the twelfth article?

A I believe the life everlasting.

Q what are the (...) points of this Creed?

A Two: concerning God, or concerning the church.

Q what consider you in God?

A The unity and the trinity. 1, John, 5, 7.

Q what believe you of the unity?

A I believe, that in substance, there is one only true and almighty God. 1
cor, 8. 4, Deuteronomy. 6, 4

Q what believe you of the Trinity?

A I believe that in one God, there are three distinct persons, the father, the
son, and the Holyghost, Math. 28, 19. and 3, 16. 17

Q what believe you of God the father?

A I believe that he is almighty, and therefore has made all creatures good,
and governs all things well. Genesis 1, 1, Nehem. 9. 6, act, 4. 24,

Q what believe you of the (...)?

A I believe that we being borne dead in finnes, he came into the world to be a
mediator between God and man. 1 Timothy, 2, 5

Q what mean you by a mediator?

A I believe, that he was sent to reconcile us to his father, and his father
unto us: and so to make peace between God and man. Esa: 9. 6, Ephesians, 2 16

Q What is required of a mediator?

A Two natures. John 1, 14, Heb. 5. 6

Q what are they?

A The divine nature, and the human nature. Heb, 2, 16

Q what believe you of (...) divine nature?

A I believe, that he only is the natural son of God, and therefore God,
and our Lord, Heb. 1, 3

Q what believe you of his humane nature?

A I believe two things: his entrance into the world, and the things that
followed the same, Luke, xxiiii, xxv. xxvi.

Q what have we to consider in his entrance into the world?

A Two things: his conception, and his birth.

Q what (...) you of his conception?

A I believe he was begotten by the myraculous power and working of the
Holi-ghost. Luke i, 35 Math i. xviii,

Q what (...) you of his birth?

A I believe that he took flesh and was borne of a virgin whose name was
Mary, Math. 1; xx. Esa, 7, xiiii

Q what be the things that followed his entrance and coming into the world.

A two: his fufferings and his glory. Luke xxiii. xxv. xxvi. 46,

Q what were his sufferings?

A Of two sorts: in body or soul,

Q what were his sufferings in body?

A I believe, that Pontius Pilate the judge giving sentence, his hands and feet
were nailed to a cross, and thereby dying, his body was buried in manner as
others were, and lay for a time under the dominion of death, John xix. xviii. 1
cor xv. 3, 4, Acts xiii. xxviii, 29, Psalm. xxii, xvi

Q what (...) you of his sufferings in soul?

A I believe, that he suffered in his soul, the fierce wrath of his father,
kindled for our sins, to deliver us from the curse of the law, Luke, xxii,
44, Gal, 3, xiii.

Q what things are to be considered touching his glory?

A Three things: either his glory which is past, or present, or to come, 1 Pet
3. xxi, xxii, act i. xi

Q what believe you touching his glory past?

A His resurrection, and his assention, act, 1, 2, 3

Q what believe you touching his resurrection?

A I believe, that although for a space his body lay dead in grave, yet after
three days he raised it up, and gave it life again, Math, 28, 6, 2 cor, 13,
4, Ioh, x, 17. xviii

Q what believe you of his ascending into heaven?

A I believe, that his body being united again to his soul, he was
personally taken up into the heavens, after that he had been conversant upon
the earth 40, days, acts. 1, 9

Q what is his glory present?

A He sits at the right hand of the father, Mark. 16, 19

Q what mean you thereby?

A I believe, that his father has advanced him into the highest honor, and
has committed unto him the government of all things in heaven and earth, Heb.
1, 3, Psalm. 110. 1

Q what is his glory to come?

A He shall come from heaven to judge the quick and the dead. Math. 25 31, Act,
1, xi,

Q what mean you thereby?

A I believe, that in the end of the world, all flesh shall appear before
him, both of those that have been dead from the beginning of the world, and of
those also that then shall be living: and that then as an upright judge he
shall throw the wicked into perpetual cursednesse, and advance the righteous
to everlasting blessedness. Math, 25, 32 33 1 These. 4. 16. 17. Revel, 20. 12,
xiii. x iii.

Q what believe you of the Holy Ghost?

A I believe that he is God, proceeding from the father and the son: and
(...) all the children of God. Rom, 8, xi.

Q what believe you of the Church?

A Two things: first, that there is one holy Catholic church, Secondly, that
there are (...) given unto it, Math, xvi, 18,

Q what meane'you by a chruch?

A The whole company of the faithful servants of God, which ever were from the
beginning, which also be now, and shall be to the end of the (...), of which
number I believe that I am one, John, 10. 16,

Q why do you call it holy?

A because none can be (...) to God, unless he be holy and separated from the
profane of the world, 2 cor, 6, xvi, xvii,

Q what mean you by calling it catholic?

A I believe that the church is not tied to one time or place: but spreads it
self throughall nations under heaven, whomesoeuer God shall call. act. x,
xxxiiii. Revel. 5. 9

Q what are the gifts given to the church?

A Two fold: first in this (...): secondly, after this life, Act, 2, 46, 47,

Q what be the gifts in this life?

A Two: the communion of saints: and forgiveness of sins, 1 John 1, 7

Q what means you by communion of Saints?

A I believe, that howsoever the faithful by distance of place are far
separated one from another; yet there is such a mutual compassion and
fellow-feeling each of others condition, that they are a like both grieved and
joyful at each others adversity and prosperity, Act. 4, 32 1 cor. x. i. 25,
26. Romans xii, xv. xvi,

Q what mean you by forgiveness of sins?

A I believe that Jesus christ has already suffered for my sins, and therefore
they shall be freely pardoned, and the punishment of them forgiven unto me, i.
John. 2. i. 2, Psalm. xxxii, 5

Q what be the gifts bestowed on the church after this life?

A Two: the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. i. cor. xv. 42. i.
These. 4, xvi. xvii.

Q what believe you of the resurrection of the flesh?

A I believe that the dead bodies of al such as have dyed from the beginning of
the world, shall in the end be raised again, and be united to their souls. i,
cor. xv, xxii. Li,

Q what believe you of everlasting life?

A I believe that after the body and soul be joined together again in one
person, the godly shall go into everlasting joy and felicity, and the ungodly
shall be cast into endless (...) and misery. Dan, xii, ii.

Q Is it sufficient to have that Faith, which believes these Articles to be
true?

A No: we must have a justifying faith to apply them to our selves, Phil. 3, 8:
9

Q what is that faith?

A Faith is a gift of God, whereby we apply to our selves particularly the
promises made to us in christ. Gal, 2, xx, act, xv, x, xi

Q what be the means whereby this faith is attained?

A They are two: the be getting, and the continual nourishing of it, Ephesians 4, xi.
xii, xiii,

Q what are the means, whereby faith is first begun and hegotten, in us?

A The word (...), Romans x, xiiii

Q How is this faith nourished in us and increased?

A By the same preaching of the word, by prayer, and by the sacraments, act, 242

Q what is prayer?

A Prayer is a calling upon God alone, in the name of his son Jesus christ Ioh,
(...), 23

Q How many kinds of prayer be there?

A Two: petition, and thanksgiving. Psalm, 50, 15, 1 Timothy, 2, 1, 2

Q Have we no rule prescribed, to direct our prayers by it?

A Yes: we have a form of prayer, which christ taught his disciples commonly
called the Lords prayer. Math, 6, 9 Luk, xi, 1, 2

Q What have we to consider in this prayer?

A Three things: the entrance, the petitions, and the conclusion of the prayer.

Q What is the entrance of the prayer?

A Our father which art in heaven.

Q What mean you when you say, our father?

A Hereby I believe, he tendreth us, as a loving father does tender his own
children: and therefore is most ready and willing to hear and to help us,
Math, 7, xi, Esa. 49, xv

Q What mean you by this, that he is said to be in heaven?

A I learn, that because he is in heaven, his power is almighty, and therefore
he is fully able to do us all good. Luk, 1, 37, Rom, 4, 21 Dan, 3, xvii.

Q What consider you in the petitions?

A Two things. First, they are set down Secondly, they are considered by
reason.

Q How many petitions are there set down?

A Six

Q How are these petitions divided?

A The three first concern gods glory: the three last petitions concern our
own selves.

Q What is the first petition?

A Hallowed be thy name. Psalm, 111, 1, Dan, 9, 7

Q What do we desire in this first petition?

A We pray, that the name of God may continually be used of us, in thought,
word, and deed, with all reverence, Psalm, 48, xi

Q What is the second petition?

A Thy kingdom come.

Q What do we desire in this second petition?

A We pray, that God throwing down the kingdom of sin and Satan, would reign
in us by his word and spirit, and hasten unto perfection his kingdom of glory.
Revel, xxii, 20

Q What is the third petition?

A Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven? Psalm. 40. 7. 8, Mar. 26, 42

Q What do we desire in this third petition?

A We pray, that the reueiled will of God may be done willingly, sincerely, and
readily by us men on earth, as the Angels and saints in heaven do it, Deuteronomy. 29.
29, Psalm, 103, 20.

Q What is the fourth petition?

A Give us this day our daily bread. Gen, 28. xx. 30. 8

Q What do we desire in this fourth petition?

A We pray, not only for a competent measure of all commodities serving both
for necessity and christian delight: but also thar God would bless them to our
several uses, Psalm. 127, 1 Leuit, xxvi, xxvi

Q What is the fifth petition?

A Forgive us our trespasses, Dan. 9: 5, 8. 9. x, xi

Q What do we desire God in this petition?

A we pray, that God would freely pardon our sinues committed against him, and
the punishments due unto them, giving us peace of conscience, and justifying us
in his Son. Psalm, 51, 1, 7, 8

Q Why are these words added, as we forgive them that trespass against us?

A For two causes. First, as a reason to persuade God to forgive us, seeing
even we, which have not a drop of his infinite mercy in us, are ready to
forgive such offenses as are committed against us. Luke, xi, 4

Secondly, to assure our own hearts of forgiveness at the hands of god, if we
from our hearts forgive our brethren. Math 5 7, I am, 2. xiii, mat. xviii. 32.
33. 35

Q What is the sirt and last petition?

A Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil. 2, Cor, 12. 7, 8, 9,
Math 26. 41

Q What do we desire in this last petition?

A we pray, not only to be deliuerd from the power of Satan, sin, and the
world: but also to be directed by the spirit of god in the ways of true
obedience. i. cor. x, xiii

Q How are these petitions strengthened and confirmed by reason?

A For thine is the king dome, and the power, and glory for ever.

Q What is the meaning of this strength of the reason?

A It contains a thanksgiving: wherein the government and ordering of al
things to gither with the power and glory of the same is ascribd wholly and
only unto the Lord, 1, chron, 29, xi,

Q what signifies this word, Amen, in the conclusion of the prayer?

A It signifies, So be it, Deuteronomy, 27, xv, xvi

Q what use is there of it?

A It shows both our fervent desire to obtain: and an assurance to our
hearts that we shall obtain that which we ask, 2. Cor. 1. 20.

Q what is a Sacrament?

A It is a visible sign and seal that Christ and all his benefits are given
unto us. Rom, 4, xi

Q what is to be considered in a Sacrament?

A Two things: his parts, and his uses, Math. 3, xi

Q what are the parts of a Sacrament?

A Two: the outward parts and the inward, Romans 4. xi. xii. Gen, 17, xi, 1 cor,
x, 1, 2, 3

Q How many are the outward parts?

A Four: the Minister, the word, the sign, and the receiver. Math. 26, 26, 27.

Q How many are the inward parts?

A Four: God the father, the spirit, Christ, and the faithful, Math. 3s15 16

Q what proportion is there between these parts?

A Even as the Minister by the word, offers and applies visibly the element
unto the body of the receiver: so the father by the spirit, offers and
applies Jesus Christ, inuisibly unto the faithful receiver. Act. 1, 36. 37

Q What be the uses of a Sacrament?

A Three: first, to norish faith, Romans 49. x, xi Secondly, to be a seal of the
covenant between god, and us, Gen, 17 Thirdly, to be a badge of our christian
profession. Ephesians: ii. xi. xii, xiii,

A How many Sacraments are there?

A Two: Baptism, and the Lords Supper, 1 cor. xii: xiii, and chap, x, 1, 2, 3.
4

Q what is baptism?

A Baptism is the first sacrament, wherein by the outward Washing of the body
with water once, in the name of the father, of the son, andof the holy ghost,
the inward clensing of the soul, by the blood of Christ, is represented, Math,
28, 29

Q What is to be considered in Baptism?

A Two things: his parts and his uses.

Q What are the parts of baptism?

A Outward and inward parts. Act, 2, 38

Q How many are the outward parts of baptism?

A Four: the Minister, the word of institution, the element of water, and the
body washed, Math. 28, 19

Q How many are the inward parts?

A Four: God the father, the holy spirit, Christ, and the soul cleansed, Math,
3. 15, 16, Mar, 16, 16

Q What is the proportion between these parts?

A Even as the minister, by the word of institution, applies the water to the
washing of the body: so the (...), through the working of the spirit, applies
the blood of Christ to the clensing of the soul, Luk, 3, 16, Ioh, 1, 33

Q What are the uses of baptism?

A Three: first to seal up the remission and forgiveness of sins, act,
xxii, 16

Secondly, to show our setting and engrafting into the body of christ. Gal. 3,
27

Thirdly, to teach us to die to sin, and rise again to right ousnes. Romans 6.
1, 2, 3, 4

Q What is the Lords Supper?

A The Lords supper is the second sacrament, wherein by visible receiving of
the bread and Wine, is represented our spiritual communion with the body and
blood of Christ, 1, Cor. 10. 16, 17

Q What things are to be be considered in the Lords Supper?

A Two things: his parts and his uses. Math, 26. xxvi. xxvii, xxviii

Q What are the parts of the lords Supper?

A Two: outward and inward, 1 Cor, x, xvi

Q How many are the outward parts?

A Four: the minister, the word of institution, bread and wine, and the
communicant, Luk, xxii, 19, xx

Q How many are the inward parts?

A Four: the father, the spirit, the body and blood of christ, and the
saithfull. i cor, xii, xiii, Ioh. 6 xxvii

Q What is the proportion between these parts?

A Even as the minister, by the word of institution, offers bread and wine
unto the communicants, to feed thereupou bodily and corporally: so the father,
by the spirit offers and gives the body and blood of christ unto the soul
of the faithful to feed upon them spiritually i cor, xi, xxiii, xxiiii, xxv,
xxvi, etc.

Q What be the uses of the Lords supper?

A three: first to show forth the death, and sufferinges of christ with all
thanks giving. i cor, xi, xxvi, Luke xxii, xix

Secondly, to teach us our communion and grows in Christ, 1 Cor, x, 16

Thirdly, to declare our communion and agreement with our brethren, 1 cor, x.
17, etc. ch, xii. 13.

Q How may we come aright to the lords table?

A By preparing and examining ourselves, i cor, xi, 28

Q What is the right manner of preparing our selves?

A First, we must have a knowledge of God, of man's fall, and his restoring
again into the covenant by Christ. Ioh, xvii, iii. Secondly, true faith in
christ, ii cor. xiii 5. Thirdly, repentance from al dead works daily renewed
for our daily sins. Psalm. xxvi, 6. Lastly, reconciliation to our brethren yea
even our enemies, Math, 5, 23, xxiiii.

Now to him that is able to keep you that ye fall not, and to present you
faultlesse, before the presence of his glory with you: to God, only wise, our
savior, be glory, and Majesty, and Dominion and power, both now and for ever,
Amen. Jude verse 24, 25,

Gentle Reader, I am to desire thee to amend these escapes with thy pen,
either altering the sense or hindering the understanding. The rest I remit to
thy favorable construction and correction.

page 6. line 13. read is here full. P. 18. l, 17. and not make. p. 19, l.
xxi, unfitly, p: 37. l, 3. that they are no. p. 83. l. 36. a connterfect word
is fit enough for a counterfect sacrament. p, 88, l, 7. and not accepted, p.
(...), l, 33, dele which is good, p: 136. l, xv, and evil workers speed, p, 148
l, 6, by the practice and xiijj but reach eth not, p, 155, l, 32, to baptism,
P, 163, lin, (...), they were admitted. P, 165. l. 1 access, p, 170, l, xxi,
are not able, p, 179. l, 22, an assurance. P, 201, l, 1, escape unpunished, and
xxii, as an, and 13, thus much. P, 209l, 4, naming the, P, 238, l, 29: and 31,
change. P, 240, l, 29, yet was he. 250: l. iii, inhumane, P, 253, l, 4. all
the. P. 228, l, 24, in the cup. P, 285, l. 22. out of the holy use. p: 290 l.
4. consecration.


