By the King.
An Abstract of the several Heads and Branches of His Majesty's Commission of
grace, for the securing, settling, and confirming to His Subjects their
defective Titles, Estates and Possessions; By which His Majesty's Commissioners
have power to Compound.
FOr all Mannours, Lands, Tenements, Wastes, Commons, Tithes, arising as well
without any Parishes, as within Parishes, Liberties, Privileges, and other
Hereditaments, in the said Commission mentioned, held under color of any
defective, void, or insufficient Grant, or Letters Patents of Concealements,
procured out of the Crown, or otherwise merely intruded upon, and usurped
without any Grant thereof at all from his Majesty, or any of his Predecessors.

All Mannours, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises insufficiently granted
out of the Crown Intaile, whereof the estate tail is not spent, or which
have, or ought to have descended upon the Kings Person, or any of his
Progenitors, and are insufficiently granted out of the Crown, or being
formerly granted Intaile, the estate tail is spent and determined, and ought
to reuert unto the Crown.

All Messuages and Cottages built, and Enclosures made, upon the common High
ways, Streets, Passages, Wastes and Commons.

All Lands formerly recovered, or deserted from the Sea, or now surrounded with
the Sea, and which hereafter may, or shall be recovered, or deserted from the
Sea.

Diverse Pastures and Grounds adjacent to his Majesty's Forests and Parkes, and
yet are no parcel of the said Forests or Parkes, but purchased or used by his
Majesty for the use of his Dear, which said Forests and Parkes being
disafforrested, and disparked, and the Dear destroyed, the premises are
carried away, without any grant thereof from the Crown.

All Mannours, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises, which ought to be in
charge, and are not, but some Fee-Farme Rent answered, as if there were no more
due unto His Majesty, whereas, in truth, the Land it self belongs unto the
Crown, or such Lands, and other the premises, where both the Lands and Rents
stand in charge, and the Rent answered, and yet the parties so enjoying the
said Lands, never had any Grant thereof from the Crown, or such Lands, and
other the premises where the Lands stand in charge, as Lands, and yet the
Rents stand not in charge, nor have been answered unto the Crown by them that
pretend Interest in the said Lands.

The Commissioners to sell any of the premises (which are not settled by the
aforesaid Act) in Fee-Simple, Fee-Farme, Fee-Taile for term of life, lives, or
years, (as the Case shall require) unto the present Possessors of the
Inheritance: But upon their refusal, or wilful neglect of this His Majesty's
intended grace, the said Commissioners to sell any of the aforesaid premises
to such others as shall be Suitors for the same: And for the Surrounded
Grounds, and such like, where there is no present Possessors, to such as will
compound for the same.

And where the Tenure appears upon Record, the former Tenure is to be
reserved; But where no Tenure appears, there the Tenure is to be in Soccage.

And Robert Typper, of Grays Inn, his Majesty's Servant, is to attend the said
Commissioners in the execution and prosecution of the said Commission.

God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO M.DC.XXVIII.


