royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
By the King.
A Proclamation touching the currencie of certain French Coin.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY by His Royal Proclamation bearing
date the fourth day of September now last past (for the reasons therein
mentioned) did publish and declare, that such French Moneys as His Majesty had
then lately received, for part of the Portion of His dear Consort the Queen,
should be current in Specie, as He received it from His good brother the French
King, at the rate of nineteen pence halfepeny the Cardecue, being the self
same value, at which it is current in the Country of France, because at that
time those French Moneys could not conveniently be new coined at his Majesty's
Mint: Nevertheless, for avoiding of such inconvenience as might ensue to his
highness, and his loving Subjects, by bringing in and uttering of light Coin,
his Majesty did thereby straightly forbid the importing into this Realm, or any
other of his Majesty's Dominions, any of the said Coin called Cardecues, upon
pain of Confiscation thereof.

Now his Majesty finding that which He then foresaw and feared, that under
color of the Cardecues then received by his Majesty, and made Current for his
Majesty's present use, other like Moneys which were light would be imported
into this Realm, to his Majesty's prejudice, and prejudice of His loving
Subjects who should receive the same; By the advice of His Privy Counsel,
does now hereby publish and declare His Royal pleasure. That none of those
Moneys called Cardecues shall be at all Current within this Realm, or any
other of his Majesty's Dominions, but that the said former Proclamation, dated
the fourth day of September last, shall be from henceforth utterly revoked
and made void.

Given at His Majesty's Court at White Hall, the 24. day of July, in the second
yeee of his Highness Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. God save
the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. 1626.


