At White Hall the four and twentieth of October 1627.
Present Lo: Keeper. Lo: Treasurer. Lo: President. Lo: Steward. Lo:
Chamberlain. E: of Suffolk. E: of Exeter. E: of Dorset. E: of Bridgewater. E:
of Totnes. E: of Kellie. Lo: Visc. Conwey. Bishop of Bath and Wells. M.
Treasurer. M. of the Wards. M. Secr. Coke. M. Chancellor of the Exchequer. M. of
the Rolls. M. Chancelour of the Duchy.

THeir Lordship this day taking into serious consideration, as well the Letters
Patents from His Majesty to Matthew de Questor, for the constituting of him
Postmaster, for the conueying of all Letters and Dispatches from hence into
foreign Parts without the Kings Dominions; as likewise well weighing that the
due ordering and governing of the same, was very considerable, in relation to
His Majesty's Service and reason of State, especially as the condition of
affairs now stand, both at home and abroad; and knowing well that most of the
Foreign Posts were heretofore well settled, by the labor and industry of the
said de Questor, did think fit and order, that he being a person well
approved of for his experience, fidelity, and industry, for diverse years
together in the discharge of the said employment, should be continued and
quietly established in the execution of the same, according to his said Letters
Patents. And upon reuiew now taken of their Order, of the two and twentieth of
November 1626. wherein liberty was given, as well to all other Companies of
Merchants, as to the Merchants Adventurers, to send their Letters and
Dispatches by Messengers of their own choosing;

Their Lordships upon weighty reason of State, do hereby revoke and annull
the said Order, and do give liberty only to the Company of the Merchants
Adventurers (and not to any other Companies of Merchants) to convey their own
Letters and Dispatches only by a Messenger of their own choosing into
Foreign Parts, viz. to the City of Hamborgh and Town of Delph, where the
Staples of Cloth are now settled, or to such other place or places whither the
same shall hereafter happen to be removed: Which Messenger is likewise to
enter into sufficient Bond with good sureties, to His Majesty's use, to be
taken by the Clarke of the Council attendant, not to carry or convey any other
Letters, but those only which concern the said Company of Merchant
Adventurers.

And that the said Messenger shall not keep any public Office, or hang up any
Tables, or wear any Badge which are the Characters and Marks of a public
Postmaster, and which are to be allowed only to the said Matthew de Questor,
as being Postmaster General for foreigne Dispatches, by approbation of the
State, and Letters Patents from His Majesty, as aforesaid.

And it is further hereby thought fit, and ordered, that all other Companies
of Merchants, and every of them, shall send their Letters and Dispatches by the
said Matthew de Questor only, as heretofore they have been accustomed; Hereof
as well the said Merchants Adventurers, and all other Companies of Merchants,
and every of them, are to take knowledge, and to conform themselves, as they
will answer the contrary at their perils.

Provided nevertheless, according to the aforesaid Order of the two and
twentieth of November last, that the said Company of Merchant Adventurers, do
acquaint His Majesty's Secretaries of State, from time to time, what person
they shall make choice of to be their Messenger, that in case they shall find
just cause to except against the choice made by the said Company, that then the
Company should proceed to the election of such other as may be without
exception. And provided also, that in times of War, and danger to the State,
the said Company of Merchant Adventurers, and all other Companies of Merchants,
do acquaint the Secretaries of State, from time to time (if they shall require
it) with their said Letters and Dispatches into foreine parts.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1627.


