At Whitehall the eleventh of March, 1628.
Lord Keeper. Lord President. Lord Privy Seal. Lord High Chamberlain. Earl
Marshall. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Carlisle.
Earl of Banbury. Lord Vi. Dorchester. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Bishop of
Winton. Master Secretary Coke.


WHereas his MAJESTY'S Army (lately discharged at Portsmouth) has continued
since the first raising thereof by the space of forty two months; In which
time, diverse great payments have been made to the Officers thereof, in full
satisfaction of their actual Service abroad, and with a great overplus to the
most, as appears by sundry accounts lately certified to the Board, in answer
to certain Petitions thereto exhibited; And yet nevertheless, there is
claimed some arreares of Pay by many, which they demand for the time of their
Soldiers being Billeted in the Country: His MAJESTY, out of His Princely
desire and care to give all the said Officers full content in their reasonable
demands, has this day, with the Advice of His Counsel, Ordered, That all the
Accounts of moneys paid, or imprested in part of pay, to any of the Officers of
his Highness said Army, either by John Bear, Esquire, Sir Thomas Love,
Knight, and Captain John Mason, Treasurers and Pay masters for the Army, or
the deputy Lieutenants, and Collectors of the Loanes in and about the
Countries wherein the said Soldiers were billetted: Also the Accounts of Sir
George Chudleigh, and Sir James Bag, Knights, with the Accounts of such
moneys as were paid to the said Officers in Ireland after their return from
Cadiz, or privately issued to any particular persons to and for the use of any
of the said Officers out of his Highness Receipt of the Exchequer, or other
Offices. Moreover, all sums paid unto any of the said Officers by the late
Duke of Buckingham, or any of his Ministers, or that have been paid by any
others not here nominated for that purpose, shall before the last day of June
next, be delivered up to the hands of the two Auditors of the Impressed, to be
by them examined and cast up, as well for the dead as for the living, that so
such remainder of Pay as shall be found justly due upon the foot of every
man's Account fairly to be drawn up, and signed by the Auditor, may be paid
unto themselves, their Executors or Assigns, at such convenient times as shall
be then appointed by the Lords of his MAJESTY'S Privy Counsel; there being
no possible means of setting down days of payment of moneys before the sum
be known, at which time, the days of payment shall be expressly and punctually
set down. And it is further ordered, that all such as have given credit to
any of the said Officers since the time of their employments in these His
MAJESTY'S late Services, for Meat, Drink, Apparel, Lodging, or Moneys, shall
have full power by virtue of any the Bills Bonds, or assignements of any the
said Officers authorizing them in that behalf, to receive satisfaction, out of
their said remainder of Pay, so far as what shall be found to be due unto them
will extend. And in the mean time both Officers their Creditors are prohibited
to trouble his MAJESTY, or the Lords of his Highness Counsel, or any other,
with any further Suits and Petitions, by reason of the premises; but to attend
and expect the finishing of the said Accounts, and the time to be prefixed for
payment.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO M.DC.XXVIII.


