royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the King.
A Proclamation about the dissoluing of the Parliament.
WHereas We, for the general good of Our Kingdom, caused Our High Court of
Parliament to assemble and meet, by Prorogation the twentieth day of January
last past, sithence which time the same has been continued: And although in
this time, by the maleuolent dispositions of some ill affected persons of the
House of Commons, We have had sundry just causes of offense and dislike of
their proceedings; yet We resolved with patience to try the uttermost, which
We the rather did, for that We found in that house a great number of sober and
grave persons, well affected to Religion and government, and desirous to
preserve Unity and Peace in all parts of Our Kingdom. And therefore, having
on the five and twentieth day of February last, by the uniform advice of Our
Privy Counsel, caused both Houses to be adiourned until this present day,
hoping in the mean time, that a better and more right understanding might be
begotten between Us and the members of that House, whereby this Parliament
might have a happy end and issue.

And for the same intent, We did again this day command the like Adiournment
to be made, until the tenth day of this month: It has so happened by the
disobedient and seditions carriage of those said ill affected persons of the
House of Commons, That We, and Our Regal authority and commandment, have
been so highly contemned, as Our Kingly Office cannot bear, nor any former
age can parallel. And therefore it is Our full, and absolute resolution, to
dissolve the same Parliament; whereof We thought good, to give notice unto all
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and to the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
of this present Parliament, and to all others whom it may concern, that they
may depart about their needful affairs, without attending any longer here.
Nevertheless, We will that they, and all others should take notice, that We
do, and ever will distinguish between those, who have showed good affection
to Religion and Government, and those that have given themselves over to
Faction, and to morke disturbance to the peace, and good order of Our Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, This second day of March, in the fourth
year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent MAJESTY. M.DC.XXVIII.


