HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for a general and public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for
his great mercy in staying his hand, and asswaging the late fearful
Visitation of the Plague.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, upon the fearful increase, and
spreading of the late Infection of the Plague, in the Imperial City of this
Kingdom, and places adjacent, and from thence in the more remote places of the
Land, out of his most Religious consideration of the immediate hand of God
therein, did command, that all his people throughout this whole Realm, should
by fasting and prayer humble themselves unto Almighty God, and by their true
repentance and humiliation seek to divert his wrath, and fearful Visitation.
And his Majesty himself in His own Person did give a memorable example
thereof to all his people, Which Religious duty, being accordingly observed,
and for diverse months continued, it has pleased God of his abundant mercy
and goodness to stay his hand, and beyond the policy and hopes of man, to
withdraw his Rod, and almost wholly to remove the same.

Now the Kings Majesty, with all possible Thanks, acknowledging the gracious
mercy of the Divine Majesty, toward Himself and His people, and
acknowledging also, that they are not worthy of future favors, who are not
truly thankful for benefits already received, Has thought fit, that, by His
Royal authority, there should be a general and public Thanksgiving to God
throughout this whole Kingdom, for so great and gracious a deliverance. And
therefore He does hereby command, and publish His Royal pleasure to be, That
upon Sunday, the nine and twentieth of this present month of January, in, and
throughout the Cities of London and Westminster, and places adjacent; And upon
the nineteenth day of February next, in all other places of this Realm, there
shall be celebrated a public Thanksgiving to God for this so great mercy.

The manner and form whereof, shall be directed by a small Book, which shall
to that purpose be composed by the Reverend Bishops, by His Majesty's express
direction, and by them shall be sent and dispersed through their several
Diocese; Whereof His Majesty's pleasure is, that all His loving Subjects shall
take notice, and religiously, with that devotion which appertains to so pious
a Work, shall solemnize the same.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the two and twentieth day of January, in the
first year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXV.


