THE NEW COVENANT, OR A Treatise of the Sacraments.

Whereby the last Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, through the
shedding of his Pure and Precious Blood, is ratified and applied unto the
Conscience of every true Believer.

Divided into three Books 1. Of the Sacraments in General. 2. Of Baptism. 3.
Of the Lords Supper.


Very Necessary and Profitable for these Times: wherein we may behold THE
Truth it self plainly proved, Doctrine of the Reformed Churches clearly
maintained, Errors of the Church of Rome soundly convinced, Right manner of the
Receiving of the^ comfortably declared And sundry doubts and difficult
Questions decided.


By William Attersoll, Minister of Gods word at Isfield in Sussex.

For by one Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, whether we be Bond or Free; and have been all made to Drink into
one Spirit. 1 Cor. 12, 13. The second Edition, Newly Corrected and Enlarged.

Printed at London by W. Iaggard, and are to be sold by Nicholas Bourne, at
his Shop at the entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1614.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Sir JOHN SHVRLEY Knight, all health and happiness
from Christ Jesus our Savior.
Right Worshipful:
THE former Edition of this Treatise touching the Sacraments, some eight years
since published, was not only by your self lovingly received, but by diverse
godly Christians beyond my expectation favorably and friendly accepted. And
being at length content to yield to a new Impression, it has fared with me in
perusing this work, as with him that goes about to repair an old house. For
albeit he purpose with himself to pull down a little, or to make a slender
addition and alteration in the building, yet when once he begins to stir
and meddle with the old frame, one piece draws down another, and the
augmenting of one part, I know not how, in a pleasing manner procures the
adding and annexing of another. In like manner, when I determined to review and
peruse this book, mine intent was no more then here and there to insert a
little, as time, reading, conference, and better judgment have given occasion
to see farther: but being entered into the matter, and one change causing
another, the work is risen to this volume, like a flood that swells by the
access and coming in of other waters, that it may rather seem to be the
making of a new, then the amending of an old. I have endeavored here to set
before the eyes of all that will vouchsafe to read these lines, the nature and
use of the Sacraments, which were instituted of almighty God to admonish us by
their mystical signification, both of his goodness and of our weakness, being
as signs and seals to assure us of Christ and of his righteousness, and all
his merits.

There are diverse sorts of signs mentioned in the holy Scriptures, which may
be fitly sorted into four ranks. Some are natural, Mat. 16, 2, 3
as the clouds be a sign of rain; the rednes of the sky in the evening, of
fair weather; the lowering of the sky in the morning, of foul weather. Some
are civil, as a sword carried before a Magistrate is a sign of his authority,
Romans 13, 4.
as the Consuls of Rome had their rods and axe born by their officers. Some
are miraculous, as we see in Gedeons fleece, Judge. 6, 36. Mat. 24, 29
which was wet when the earth was dry, and dry when the earth was wet: such
shall be in the Sun and Moon, and in the stars, in the end of the world,
as the Lord declares. Other are religious signs which appertain to piety and
godliness and an heavenly life: of which some are tokens of things past, Exodus
16, 33 Heb 9, 4. Leuit. 8, 7
as the reserving of Manna: some of things present, as the garments of the
Priests and Levites, and their often clensings and purifications.

Some be signs of things to come, as the sacrifices and oblations. But the
Sacraments of the new Covenant and last Testament of CHRIST sealed by his
precious blood (which we have here described) serve as monuments and
memorials of all these, even to note out unto us blessings past, and present,
and to come. For they signify the death and passion of Christ which is already
past: likewise the promise of grace and forgiveness, which are present to the
minds of all right receivers. Lastly, holiness of life, mortification of
sin, repentance from dead works, and the fruits of faith, hereafter more
and more to be perfected and performed, as also the resurrection of the body
and eternal life, which are to be accomplished in the world to come.

Especially I have been careful The corruptions of the Roman Church unmasked.
to unmask the corruptions of the Church of Rome, if I may call that
unmasking, which is in it self so palpable and apparent, that whosoever has
the sight of the eye may quickly espy them, or the use of reason may easily
discover them; wherein we have the full consent of the former and purer
Churches. If we will a little consider the truth of this point, and compare the
doctrine of the reformed Churches with the pollutions and prophanations of the
Romish Synogogue, we shall plainly perceive, that light and darkness are not
more different and repugnant, then these are the one to the other. Indeed they
oftentimes appeal to the sentence of the Fathers, as if their faith were the
ancient faith, and their doctrine had the approbation of elder times, howbeit
all this foppery serves but for a flourish, to varnish their rotten posts
with deceitful colors; forasmuch as they are content the Fathers shall be
expositers of the Scriptures, but it is with this caveat and condition, that
themselves will be Interpreters of the Fathers.

Wherefore I will 3 points discussed.
propound as it were in a Table 3. points to be handled: First, their
contrarieties and oppositions standing against the truth. Secondly, their
contentions and contradictions remaining among themselves. Lastly, I will
answer their objection that think the matter is not so clear on our side as
we pretend, who contemn Transubstantiation and the real presence, and
maintain the spiritual eating against the carnal and Capernaiticall.

First, touching their corruptions Comparion between the Lords supper and the
Mass.
and contrarieties, they are so notable and notorious to all the world, that
they can no longer hide them and conceal them, as we may gather by comparing
the institution of Christ, with the traditions and abominations of Antichrist.
Christ delivered his last Supper, as he sat at the Table with his Disciples,
where they did all eat as at a banquet: but Antichrist has turned and
transformed this Supper into the abominable Idol of the Mass, which has no
show or appearance of any feast at all, where the Priest plaieth this Pageant
alone, he sits not at the Table, but stands at the Altar, turns away
his face from the people, being belike ashamed that they should see his fraud
and legier-demaine. Christ took bread Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14, 22. Luke 22, 19. 1
Cor. 11, 24
as the Evangelists note, such no doubt as was appointed to be eaten with the
Paschall Lamb, and not of purpose prepared apart for the Supper: but in the
papacy they use thin wafers, not fit to nourish, nor scarce deserving the name
of bread, howbeit shaped after the fashion of money, and stamped with the Image
of a Crucifixe, thereby to call to remembrance that the Lord was betrayed of
Judas for thirty pence, and that he was crucified for us upon the Cross.
Christ gave thanks to his Father for the benefit of our redemption, and blessed
the bread and sanctified it to be the figure and remembrance of his body given
for us: but Bellarmine Bellar. lib. 4, cap. 13. de Eucharist.
understands it that he turned the substance of the bread into the substance
of his body; so that this consecration is no other with them the^ the monster
of transubstantiation, whereof there is not one word or syllable in the word of
God. Christ brake the bread, not only that he might distribute it and divide
it among them, but to the end he might represent the breaking, that is, the
crucifying of his body: but among the papists the bread is not broken, but
every one has a little wafer: and in the Mass the Priest breaks the host,
but he does not distribute it or deliver it among those that are present.
Christ gave the bread to the Disciples: whereas they give it not to the people,
but offer it up to God the Father, imagining that they offer up his Son for the
sins of the quick and the dead, and for the souls departed and detained in
Purgatory, and they lift up the bread and show it to the beholders to be
worshipped of the^: al which tend to the dishonor of God, to weaken the
comfort of the people, and to crucify him again, who by the only sacrifice
of his death, has purged away the sins of all that believe, and purchased unto
them the favor of God his Father. Christ willed his Disciples to take the
bread into their hand, (...).
as the word properly signifies; for as he took it into his hands, so he
commands them to do: but these do not deliver the bread into the
Communicants hands, but put it into their mouths, as if forsooth the hands were
more profane and polluted then the mouth, or the mouth more holy then the
hands: which notwithstanding they may not eat and swallow, but must hold it on
their tongue until it melt and dissolve by the heat of the mouth: which
argues intolerable stupidity and superstition. Lastly, Christ also took the
cup, and bad them all drink of the wine, the fruit of the vine, which before
had eaten of the bread: but the Papists who have Papists why so called.
submitted themselves to the service of the Pope, and thence drawn their
names, say, that he commanded them to drink his own blood under the form of
wine, and yet withal they keep the Bellar. lib. 4. cap. 25. de Euchar.
people of God from drinking of the cup, as if he had not shed his blood for
them. Thus we see that in the institution we have no mention at all of real
presence or Transubstantiation, or elevation, or adoration, or reservation, or
Mass, or oblation, or Purgatory, or propitiatory and unbloody sacrifice: in
all which stands the life and substance of the popish Eucharist, so that
there is nothing almost expressed by the Evangelists in the celebration of the
Supper, but they either by their false expositions have wrested, or by their
sacrilegious detractions have mingled, or by their presumptuous alterations
have corrupted, or by their superstitious additions have shamefully and
horribly depraved.

The second point Contentions and contra^ieties among the Papists.
is touching their contentions and contrarieties, which are plentifully found
among them: for as they could never agree with the truth, so they cannot yet
accord with themselves, and if their tongues be divided one against another, no
marvel if they speak against us. First, they make and move a question,
whether the body of Christ be eaten with the mouth of the body and pass into
the belly, or only by faith. Some of them hold, Antonin part 3, ca. 6, sect. 3
de defect. Miss.
he is taken bodily into the mouth, but goes not into the belly. Others that
he passes into the belly, and remains there so long as the Species of bread
abides. And others go farther, that the body of Christ may be vomited upward
by the mouth, and purged downward by the draught. Secondly, they dispute
whether the body of Christ be broken and chewed with the teeth or not? Pope
Nicholas in a council holden at Rome caused Berengarius to recant in this
wise, De Consecra^. did. 2, ca. Ego. Bereng.
I believe that the body of our Lord Jesus Christ sensibly and in very deed is
touched with the hands of the Priests, broken and ground with the teeth of the
faithful. Others think that nothing is broken truly, but only in show:
others, that the accidents of bread are broken and chewed, digested and
euacuated, and that they are accidents by which we are nourished and
strengthened.

Thirdly, they are much troubled and perplexed, whether Myce eating the
Sacrament, do also eat the body of Christ? Peter Lumbard master of the
sentences Sent. lib. 4. did. 13.
stands in a brown study, and rests in a muse and mammering, and cannot
teach himself, saying, What is it that the Mouse receives? God knows.
Nevertheless, in the end he gives his resolution thus: It may well be said that
brute beasts do not receive the body of Christ. But the Doctors of Paris
have censured him and corrected his judgment, and say, Hic magister non
tenetur, Here the master is not to be followed: so that now it is the common
and received opinion, that the Mouse eating the Sacrament, eats and receives
the body of Christ. Thus they make the Supper of Christ instituted for Myce and
vermin, and hold that beasts may have as great benefit by carnal eating, as
the believers. They cannot agree among themselves, whether the substance of
bread be turned into the body of Christ, or whether the bread be consumed to
nothing, and then the body of Christ brought in place of it? Whether the water
mingled with wine in the Challice be transubstantiated into the blood of
Christ? or be consumed to nothing? or be turned into the vital humors of
Christ or not? whether the worms engendered in the Eucharist come from the
substance of the bread, or from the accidents, or from the air? Lastly, there
is great diversity between them, with what words their consecration is wrought,
and how many words are directly and precisely required to the form thereof,
touching the which they are not as yet agreed.

It were no hard matter to make an whole volume of such differences, howbeit I
will leave them in their own devises, and come to the third point; which is,
to answer those that plead the cause of Baal, and are bold to speak what
they dare for the whore of Babell: who albeit they live among us, and would be
thought to be of us: yet they are neither affrayd nor ashamed to affirm
Against such as would not have it disputed and determined, how Christ is
present.
that the controversy of the Supper is not so manifest as we teach, nor the
words of Christ so easy as we affirm, nor the judgment of the Fathers so
clear as we pretend, nor the manner of eating so necessary to be holden as we
define: that we are to believe that Christ is present, but how he is present we
should not dispute, whether it be carnally, or whether it be spiritually.
Indeed we fear not to teach that there is no transelementation or
transubstantiation, that is, no real turning of the bread into the body, and
the wine into the blood of Christ: but when he said, This is my body, he
intends not to change one substance into another, but means, This bread is
a sign or Sacrament of my body, which is delivered to death for us and for our
salvation. And when he says This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, he
understands that the wine in the Cup is a Sacrament of the new Testament, of
our reconciliation to God, and of our communion and participation of Christ
with all his benefits; and therefore we doubt not to call this Sacrament, a
representation, a remembrance, an image, a token, a type, an antitype, a sign,
a figure, and such like. Now that it may appear that the words of institution
are truly expounded, and have the constant consent and full approbation of al
antiquity, The ancient Fathers teach the same touching the Supper that we do.
let us produce our witnesses, and see what the Fathers of the grayest heads
before us have declared and delivered. But before we come to fight hand to hand
with these adversaries, and to discharge the volly of shot which we have in
store, it shall not be amiss to set down certain inducements, as it were
certain preparatiues to lead us to believe, that the Doctors of the Church
are no less ours in this cause and controversy, then Calvin and Beza, and
the later writers. For first, we shall never read in all the monuments of former
times any mention of adoration or elevation of the host, or that the manner was
to lick up the drops of the Challice, or to sweep the place where a drop was
fallen, or to burn the worms which have corrupted or consumed it, or to seek
out the host when it is vomited up, and to commend those that will swallow it
again. Secondly, Jerome teaches that after the communion they had a common
banquet in the Church, whereat they did eat up all that Ierom. upon 1 Cor. 11.
remained after the administration of the Supper. If then it were the manner of
many Churches to eat the residue at their love feasts and ordinary bankets,
doubtless they did not think it was Christ himself which was eaten therein.
Thirdly, the custom was in some places to burn the remainder of the Hesych.
lib. 2. in Leuit. ca. 8.
Eucharist, and therefore it could not be that they should believe that the
bread was the very body of Christ, forasmuch as it had been horrible impiety
and a most detestable profanation to burn it, as a Gregory 7. an Atheist and
Necroma^cer.
certain Pope in his rage and fury cast the Eucharist into the fire, because
it did not answer to his questions when he consulted with it: or else
peradventure the body of Christ (seeing the flame of fire coming toward it)
fled up into heaven for fear of being consumed by it. Fourthly, another
teaches that in other Churches the custom was to give the parts that were not
spent and used, to little children Niceph lib. 17. cap. 25.
frequenting the School, who are barred from partaking of the Supper by the
Apostle, because they are not able 1 Cor. 11.28
to examine themselves, and therefore they were not of opinion with the Church
of Rome. Fifthly, the Mass it self used at this day, and the prayers used in
it do speak for the truth against their Idolatrous practice. Heereunto comes
their sursum corda, when they exhort to lift up the heart on high to God, and
the prayers craving of God that their oblation may be acceptable, which is the
figure and sign of the body and blood of our Lord: whereas if the Church had
believed that they did eat Christ with their mouths, they might have stayed
their eyes beneath, gazing and gaping upon that which the Priest held in his
hands, and needed not to have lifted up their hearts to Christ Jesus, which
sits at the right hand of his Father in the highest heavens. Sixthly, they
teach uniformly, that a body cannot be but in one place, and that if we take
space of place from them, we destroy the being of a body: and thereupon one
says, Virgil. lib. 1. Contr. Eutich.
The flesh of Christ was not in heaven, when it was upon the earth: and now
because it is in heaven, it is not on earth. And Augustine in his 57, Epistle
to Dardanus has these words, The humane nature of Christ is destroyed, if
there be not given unto him, after the manner of other bodies, a certain
space wherein he may be contained. The popish purgers and correcters could not
suffer the weight of this sentence, and therefore have Printed at Paris, Anno.
1571.
raced it out of some of their late editions; and yet Bellarmine does allege
it and object it against himself: howbeit (it is likely) he did not remember
himself, but had forgotten to consult with his good companions, who blot out
that which they cannot answer. These six considerations are as certain
inducements to sharpe^ our taste, to break the Ice, and so to prepare the way:
now let us set down the several testimonies themselves, and see how they
depose for us. Tertullian one of the most ancient faith, Tertul cont. Marci.
lib. 4.
Christ receiving the bread; and the same being divided unto his Disciples made
it to be his body, saying, This is my body, that is to say, a sign of my
body. Theodoret says, (...), etc. that is, the mystical signs depart not
from their nature, no not after consecration: for they remain in their former
substance, figure, and form. Can any thing be spoken more plainly? Doubtless
Theodoret was in this point a Lutheran or a Caluinist, and one of those whom
the bastard Catholics call heretics. Augustine is a man of great authority
in the Church, and therefore a sufficient witness beyond all exception: he
says for us, Aug. cont. Adamant^. ^2.
The Lord made no doubt or difficulty to say, this is my body, when he gave a
sign of his body, declaring thereby, that by these words (My body) he
understood the sign of his body, expounding the former by the latter. It is
also very weighty and worthy to be considered, Epist. 23.
which he writes in his Epistle to Boniface, If the Sacrament had not a
resemblance of the things whereof they are Sacraments, they should not be
Sacraments at all: but because of this most commonly they take the name of the
things themselves: so then as the Sacrament of Christ's body is after a sort the
body of Christ, and the Sacrament of Christ's blood is after a sort the blood of
Christ, so the Sacrament of faith is faith. If he had verily believed that it
is really the body of Christ, he would never have said this Sacrament is after
a certain fashion the body of Christ, as every man would laugh us to scorn,
if we should say that Paul was after a sort a man, or Peter was after a sort a
man, who were men truly and indeed. And in another place he says, Tract. 50,
in Johan.
We have ever Jesus Christ according to the presence of his Majesty, but
according to the presence of his flesh, he has truly sa de to his Disciples,
Me shall ye not have always, Mat. 26, 11. Origin also is plain for us
writing upon Mat. 15, Mat. 16, 11
where he says, Orig hom. in Mat. 15.
This meat which is sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, as touching
his matter, goes down into the belly, and is voyded into the draught. Let us
come to Chrysostom, who above all the rest is vehement in his amplifications
and excessive in the hight of his eloquence, being desirous to draw the people
to a reverence of this Sacrament, and to redress the abuses thereof crept in,
of which he complains in all places of his works; yet when he speaks
properly, he teaches as others teach, and writes as others write, as when he
says, Chrysostom. hom 83, in Math.
If Christ be not dead, whereof is this Sacrament a sign and token? And
likewise in that place, When our Lord gave the Sacrament, he gave w ne. And if
he gave wine, then by consequent he gave bread also: which overthrows such
as Dureus in Wh^t.
say he took bread, but gave it not; he took wine, but gave it not. If these
places be not plain and pregnant enough, hear yet much plainer. He
demands, Hom. 24, in 1 Cor.
What is this bread? He answers himself, The body of Christ: now least any
should imagine some change of substance, and the maintainers of
Transubstantiation begin to lift up their ears, he adds immediately, And
what are they made which partake thereof? He answers, The body of Christ,
(...). And in the same place he tells us, We must mount on high like Eagles,
if we will come near to that body. And in the imperfect work upon Matthew, (if
that work be Chrysostomes) C^^^^ost. oper. in^^^^^r. Mat. hom. 11.
If it be so dangerous a thing to transfer to private uses those sanctisied
vessels, in which the true body of Christ was not, but the mystery of his body:
how much more the vessels of our bodies, which God has prepared for his
habitation? But of all other testimonies none is more evident then an Epistle
of his written to Caesarius in the time of his banishment, which albeit it be
not printed among his works, Pet. Martyr. loc. class. 4. c. 10. s^ct. 31.
yet is avouched to be extant in the Library at Florence: Before the bread be
sanctified we call it bread, but when the grace of God has sanctified it, it
is surely freed from the name of bread, and is thought worthy to be called the
body of our Lord, though the nature of bread remain in it. True it is, Bellar.
de Euchar. lib. 2, cap. 22.
Bellarmine denies that ever he wrote any such thing: howbeit Gregory of
Valence admits the words, and confesses the place, and yet goes about to
shift it off and to weaken this witness, as if it were not written by that
godly and golden Father, Greg. de Valen. lib. de transub.
but by one John of Constantinople. Thus he would delude and deceive his
Reader, forasmuch as that John was no other then John Chrysostom, and John
Chrysostom was Bishop of Constantinople. Their own gloss makes this
exposition, De Cons. did. 2.
Vocatur corpus Christi, id est, significat corpus Christi, It is called the
body of Christ, that is, it signifies his body. Add to these, the witness of
Maximus the Greek In eccles. Hierar.
Scholiast, who opposes the signs to the truth, (...), these things are
signs, but not the truth. I will shut up all these authorities and allegations
with the words of Gelasius Bishop of Rome, Gelas. in his book of two Natures.
Surely the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ (which we receive) are
divine things, for that also by them we are made partakers of the divine
nature: and yet nevertheless the substance and nature of the bread and wine do
not cease to remain. Can any speak more clearly and evidently then these do?
Or have any of our own writers written more plainly and distinctly against
popish Transubstantiation? How then are they deceived that think we wrest the
words of Institution? Or that we impose upon the people more to be believed
then can be collected and concluded out of the Scripture? or that we teach and
receive more as authentical out of Calvin and Beza, and other later authors,
then the ancient Fathers ever delivered? I will briefly answer an objection,
which these produce out of Cyprian in his Tract of the Lords Supper, Cyprian.
de coen. dom.
This bread is changed, not in shape, but in nature, and by omnipotency of God
is made flesh. To which I reply 4. things. First, Cyprian, but it is a
counterfeit, Censur. patru^. authore Rob. Coco. pa. 75
as is s^^ficiently and substantially proved, even by the confession of the
Papists themselves. And whosoever will vouchsafe to read the book it self,
may easily discern by the style as it were by the smell, that it came out of
some Covent or Cloister, it is in many places so barbarous. Thirdly, if the
word Nature should be taken for Substance in this place, it must expressly
contradict sundry testimonies of those writers which we have alleged before,
who deny that the nature of bread is changed, that is, the substance. Lastly,
this Author is so far from saying that the bread is converted into the flesh
of Christ, that he says the contrary, to wit, that this bread is converted
into our flesh and our blood, and serves for our life and the increasing of
our bodies.

Thus we see that the ancient Fathers held the same faith that we hold, and
differ not in judgment from the reformed Churches, nor the reformed Churches
from them, as we shall show (God willing) more at large in another place. And
thus I have run over these three points which I purposed and proposed to
handle in the beginning, all which are more at large to be seen in the
Treatise following. This I offer the second time to your Worships
consideration, as a witness of my love, and a testimony of the savors I have
received. My meaning was and yet is, that it should first come unto your view,
and from you and for your sake to the use of the Church of God, even of as many
as can make any use of these my simple labors. I have prosecuted these points
at large, but I cease from troubling you any further, commending you to his
good hand who Ioh. 13 1
loves them to the end whom once he loves, Romans 11, 29
whose gifts and graces are without repentance: and so wishing all good from
the Almighty Revel. 5, 13.
that sits upon the Throne, and from the Lamb which lives for evermore,
both to your self, to your good Lady, to your hopeful Children, and to your
whole family, I end and rest.

Your worships ever in the Lord, William Attersoll.

The Praeface to the Reader.
IT is well said, Aul. Gel. noct. Attic lib. 18. cap. 6.
that the very title of a book has a certain pleasant allurement to draw men
to the reading thereof. The argument of this Tretise is of the Sacraments, a
comfortable portion of the Scriptures, and a necessary part of the Catechism.
There is no knowledge comparable to the knowledge of Gods word: there is no
parcel of Gods word more wholesome and heavenly then the Sacraments. There is no
Sacrament more excellent and effectual then the Supper of the Lord, which is a
medicine to them that are sick, a preservative to them that are whole, a
cordial to them that are weak, and a precious treasure to them that are in
wants: being an instrument to convey unto us the benefit of Christ's Passion,
and the assurance of our own salvation. Nevertheless, there is no ordinance
of God more neglected of us, nor less regarded among us. We cannot be ignorant
that it was instituted by the Lord of life to give us life, and in remembrance
of his death to take from us the fear of death, and therefore in the words of
institution he said to his Disciples, This is my body which was given for you:
Math 26, 26.
this is my blood which was shed for you, to the end we might behold him lively
described before our eyes. I have desired and endeavored not only to teach this
truth to the most simple, and to inform the consciences of those that are
ignorant, but also to bring to light such doubtful and difficult points as may
any way trouble the unlearned.

Here then the discreet Reader shall meet with fit matter both to satisfy
sundry not well advised among our selves, and find sufficient armor to
overthrow the open and common adversaries. Touching the errors crept in among
us as it were into the bosom of the Church, as well in practice as in
judgment, I have aimed especially at two things; both to reform some, and to
inform others. To reform such as thinks they are left at liberty to receive
when they list, and whether they list: and to inform such as call in question
the lawfulness of kneeling at the Communion, according to the order
established and commanded; the one sort erring in action, the other being
deceived in opinion. First, for the better discovering and preventing of their
spiritual danger, I have labored to set before the faces of all drowsy
professors, Against negligent comers to the Communion.
their slacknes and sluggishnes in coming to the Table of the Lord, and
answered such objections as they usually allege in their own defense, for
as much as there is no sluggard but he is wise in his own eyes. Was Christ made
man for us, subject to our infirmities, beaten with stripes, crowned with
thorns, and pierced with nails, that we should despise the blessed Sacrament
that resembles and represents all these unto us, which is as a looking
glass wherein we may behold him crucified and hanging upon the cross?
Chrysostom hom. 60. ad pop. An. (...)
He is a shepherd that feeds his Sheep with his own blood, and nourishes
them with his own substance. If an earthly Prince should call us as his guess
to sit down at his Table, would any be so foolish or so froward as to refuse
to come? Behold, the King of Heaven and earth inuiteth us to his heavenly
banquet, and therefore we ought not to stop our ears, or to withdraw our
selves to perdition.

True it is, all men almost come thick and threefold at Easter, or else they
should not think themselves to be good subjects; then they offer themselves
without difference and distinction: howbeit at other times they make no
conscience of their ordinary absence and almost continual negligence. Such as
come not at other times, it is to be feared they come not in knowledge at that
time. For if they come at Easter in conscience of Gods commandment more then
for fear of the Princes law, and with a feeling of their own wants, rather
then for form and fashion sake, they would fit themselves for this work at
all times of the year, so often as the Sacrament is delivered. Indeed none
ought to present themselves being unprepared, and presume to handle the outward
signs of the body and blood of Christ coming in impiety and impenitency, Mat.
22, 11.
like to the guess in the Gospel that came without his wedding garment:
notwithstanding when we have made our selves ready, we must not abstain and
absent our selves from it at our own pleasure; for then we make our selves
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor, 11, 27.
and unworthy of any mercy to be reaped and received. We may not be weary in
well doing, Gal, 6, 9.
but must be forward in the religious exercises of our faith, taking all
opportunity to perform this commandment, of coming often to his Table. 1 Cor,
11, 26.
This is one sin among others that draws down heavy judgments upon us and
our souls, 1 Cor, 11, 30.
for this cause many are weak and sickely among us, and many sleep: yea, it
prepares the way for farther vengeance except we repent of our evil ways,
and amend our former negligence by greater diligence. It is not enough that we
submit our selves to the hearing of the word, unless withal we join a care
and remembrance of this duty, knowing that they are cursed that go about the
matters of God negligently, Ier, 48, 10. Revel, 3, 16.
and that all luke warm professors shall be spewed out of his mouth, and
such as have left their first love, shall have the light of the candle taken
from them, and the candlestick removed out of his place.

Touching the information of such as err in opinion, there are many of our
good brethren and sisters that abstain from the Communion, because they may not
sit at the celebration thereof, and so condemn the reverent gesture of
kneeling commanded in our Church, as utterly unlawful and unwarranted: The
lawfulnes of kneeling at the Communion showed.
to yield unto whom some satisfaction (if it may be) I have made a long
degression in the third Book, if that may be called a digression which sets
down the duties of the Communicants, and gives them direction what they ought
to do, and what they ought not to do. I am not ignorant that some in the
earnestness of their spirit, and forwardness to go before others, have
written much against kneeling, with the applause of many, and will by no means
yield thus much, that it be in it self an indifferent gesture, but make it as
bad and as gross a thing, as to kneel before a crucifixe, which is flat
Idolatry; as though we did destroy the nature of a Sacrament, and make the
supper to be no Spuper at all, What is objected against kneeling.
because we use not that gesture at the receiving of it which is used at a
supper or banquet. A very weak reason without substance or show of any value,
and yet it is much urged and often pressed both in word and writing. But let us
set down the force of the reason in form, and so bring it as if it were
before the tribunal Seat of judgment, where it shall receive an honorable
trial. For thus they conclude, If this Sacrament be a Supper or a banquet, then
the gesture of kneeling is unlawful, and ought not to be used at it.

But this Sacrament is a Supper or a banquet:

Therefore the gesture of kneeling is unlawful, and ought not to be used at it.

The force of this reason and as it were the life of it (if it have any)
stands upon this, that such gesture is necessary to be used at this Sacrament
as is accustomed at a Supper or at a banquet, and no other: because then we
shall make a banquet to be no banquet, The first answer.
To this I reply diversely. First I say the reason destroys it self, as a man
that thrusts his sword into his own body and bowels, Judges 9, 22.
like the Midianites that slew one another. For this makes the gesture to be
altogether uncertain, and a variable ceremony not belonging to the substance
of the Supper, inasmuch as one gesture is used commonly at bankets, and another
at suppers at bankets standing: at suppers, sitting. So then, if the former
reason be worth any thing and have any strength at all in it, then upon their
own groundwork this reason following is fully as good and as strong in any
Court of Conscience wheresoever: If this Sacrament be a banquet, then the
gesture of sitting is unlawful and is not to he used at it, because such
gesture is necessary to be used as is usual at bankets: but this Sacrament is
a banquet; therefore sitting is unlawful and not to be used at it. If their
reason be good, the^ this also is as good, being taken word forword out of the
former. Again, in contrary manner we may reason thus: If this Sacrament be a
Supper, then standing at it is unlawful: because such gesture only is to be
used as is ordinary at Suppers: But this Sacrament is a supper: Therefore
standing at it is unlawful. Thus we see how this reason is at enmity and
defiance with the truth and with it self; and whiles it goes about to destroy
kneeling, it overthrows both sitting and standing, for sitting conuinceth
standing, and standing condemns sitting. Secondly, The second answer.
the foundation of the former reason stands upon a Metaphor or borrowed
speech, and therefore there can no sound and certain conclusion be drawn and
diducted from it, especially to take it in a proper sense, and to set the whole
weight of the work as it were a pillar of the house upon it. For it is called
a banquet or a supper by way of an allusion, which, Sadeel contr. Tu^rian.
sophis.
both must have ground out of the Scripture, and may not be farther applied
then it has warrant from thence. It is well known that this second sacrament
of the new Testament is called a supper in regard of the time when it was
instituted: and the Supper of the Lord, because it is celebrated in the Church
in remembrance of the Lord Jesus, that ordained it by his word, ratified it by
his death, and delivered it with his own hands: whereas these men suppose it is
called a banquet because we ought to use such a gesture as is common at bankets,
and a supper because we ought to use such a gesture as is usual at suppers
which not being intended by him is a very weak supposition, collection, and
conclusion. Thirdly, The third answer.
this argument being well waighed, will minister weapons unto us, to cut in
sunder the sinews, and as it were the heart strings of it, inasmuch as it
shows that what gesture soever is used at the one or the other, stands more
upon custom then upon conscience; and more upon the example of men then the
commandment of God. For what is the reason that in Court and country, in town
and city, they stand at bankets? And what is the reason that most commonly
they sit, and somewhere lie along at suppers and dinners? Is it any other then
use and custom of places, and persons. Dare any say that it is unlawful to
eat a banquet kneeling, or to take our supper kneeling? Are we not left at
liberty with what gesture we will eat and drink? Or may we not use what order
we please in these things?

If then it be in it self as lawful to kneel when we receive our ordinary
meats and drinks even in the action thereof, as to sit, or to stand, or to
lie along: how is it that many dislike that gesture at the Sacrament, even for
this reason, because it is a banquet and a Supper? From whence I reason in this
form and manner from their own ground, If this Sacrament be a Supper or a
banquet, then the gesture of kneeling is not unlawful, but may freely be used
at the taking of it.

But this Sacrament is a supper or a banquet:

Therefore the gesture of kneeling is not unlawful, but may freely be used at
the taking of it.

The strength of this reason stands upon such feet as themselves have shaped
unto it, to wit, that such gesture is necessary to be used at this Sacrament,
as is usual at a supper or a banquet. If then it be left free for us to use
what gesture we please, sitting, or lying, or standing, or walking, or
groueling, or bending, how can they hold with any color, kneeling to be
unlawful at the Communion? The 4. answer
Lastly, we cannot but confess that kneeling in prayer is the fittest gesture
to express the humility of our minds, and the majesty of God, and the
excellency of the mysteries we do partake, and our obedience to the Magistrate.
Tertul. de orat. cap. 12.
Tertullian that lived in the beginning of the second Ce^tury holds assidere
irreuerens, that it is an vnreuerent thing to sit at prayer. But the Supper of
the Lord is administered and received among us with a notable and effectual
prayer which the Minister pronounces, and the Communicant hears. and the
people walk: as with us the Minister walks, and the people remove not. Now
as in the preaching of the word, the Minister that conceiueth the prayer
stands, that he may be the better heard and understood of the people whose
voice he is to God, and they kneel joining with him: so it is in the Lords
Supper, the Minister stands, because otherwise he cannot pass from place to
place nor dispatch that holy work with any quick expedition.

Secondly, albeit the Minister only do by lively voice utter the prayer, yet
it appears by the testimony of the ancient, that the receiver was also to
join with the Minister, and to say Amen, Eusebius. ecclesiast. histor. lib. 6.
ca. 43. and in english 42.
as we may read in the Ecclesiastical history of Eusebius, relating the
Epistle of Cornelius Bishop of Rome touching Nouatus, who being puffed up with
pride, left those without, hope of salvation that through infirmity of the
flesh fell in time of persecutions. And afterward in that history he reports,
that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria wrote unto Xystus Bishop of Rome touching a
certain man, who hearing the interrogatories and answers used in baptism,
came unto him weeping and wailing, and falling prostrate before his feet, he
confessed plainly that the baptism wherewithal he had been baptized of the
Heretics had no agreement with that which was in use in that Church, and
thereupon desired to be baptized according to the same manner. What answer
the Bishop made and how he satisfied him, Eusebius declares in these words,
Ecclesi. histor. li. 7, ca. 9. after the Greek, but the 8. in english.
He prayed that he might receive this most sincere purification, the which
thing I durst not do, but told him that the daily Communion many times
ministered might suffice him, when he had heard thanksgiving sounded in the
Church, and he himself had sung thereunto Amen: when he had been present at
the Lords Table, and had stretched forth his hand to receive that holy food,
and had communicated, and of a long time had been partaker of the body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Albeit therefore the baptism which he had
received were full of sundry impieties and blasphemies, and far unlike that
used in the true Church, and that he were so sore perplexed in mind and
troubled in conscience, that he durst not presume to lift up his eyes to God,
because he had been baptized with such profane words and ceremonies, yet
he advised him to comfort himself with his often partaking the holy
Communion, in as much as he had stretched forth his hand to receive it, and had
answered Amen at the taking of it. I will add one testimony more out of
Cyrill, Cyril. catech pa. 2^5 gra. Id est (...) Id est (...).
(...), that is, bending the hand, receive the body of Christ, saying Amen. And
more expressly a little after, (...). that is, After thou have been partaker
of the body of Christ, draw near also to the Cup of his blood, (to wit, in the
form of wine) prostrating thy self and worshipping (God) saying Amen, De
Sacram lib. 4. cap. 6. Observations out of Cyrils testimony.
whiles thou be^dest thy hand to take it, etc. The l^ke might be said out of
Ambrose, that as the minister did pray for them, so they also were not idle,
but prayed for themselves. These Testimonies are very full to note out the
usual custom of these times, out of which I observe these 4. particulars;
first that the bread was not wo^t to be put and popt into their mouths, but the
people took it in their hands: and so likewise of the cup. Secondly, that
they received the cup of the Lord as well as the bread, and were not used to
have dry Communions, as the Church of Rome diateth her Disciples. Thirdly, that
the people d^d consent to the prayer of the minister, and did say Amen. Lastly,
that they used to bow down and worship God with all reverence, to whom they
prayed in the action of receiving, answering Amen. The two former points serve
to convince the practice of the Papists, that thrust the bread into the mouths
of the co^municants and deprive them utterly of the cup: and the two latter,
such of our brethren among v^ as urge the necessity of sitting and condemn the
gesture of kneeling as an impiety, for as much as we see the people in those
t^mes did both bow their hands to take it, Application of the former
testimonies.
and prostrate their bod^es to receive it with prayer. And I would gladly be
informed and resolved by these, when the minister prays that the body of
Christ may be an effectual instrument sanctified of God for the preservation
of their bodies and souls, whether they do not in their hearts and souls
join with him, earnestly craving and desiring this blessing. If they do not,
it argues against themselves little reverence in receiving, and small
conscience in coming to this Sacrament, to be no more moved then stones, and
to sit as senceles as their seats when prayer is made not to consent unto it;
whereof notwithstanding I do not nor dare not e^ther to accuse them or to
suspect them. If they do, is it not fitter or at least as fit to pray kneeling
as sitting? For if it be requisite that the min^ster should kneel at the
delivering of it as they pretend: it is much more reasonable that the people
kneel in the receiving of it.

And albeit the former manner of answering Amen, noted by the ancient and
observed by the people, be not prescribed in our Liturgy as a law and
commandment: yet I doubt not but it is both intended by the Church, and
practiced of every good Christ^an as a duty. For when the minister says
according to the form of administration used among us, The body of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul to
everlasting life, etc. who is it endued with any true fear of God and faith in
Christ that does not join with him in heart, and secretly and seriously
answer Amen? If then we subscribe to that prayer in our souls and to our
selves, although we do not answer to him with an audible voice, how should it
not be rather want of reverence in us to sit, then fear of Idolatry in us to
kneel? And it were not hard to produce the example of some that have formerly
used to fit who having a tender conscience have bin troubled that they sat and
did not use the gesture of kneeling judging of themselves, that they did not
receive it in that reverent manner which they ought.

If any say, wonder as it, Why there is so little mention in antiquity, of
sitting, standing, or kneeling at the Communion.
and ask the question how it comes to pass that there is so little mention
of kneeling, or sitting, or standing, in all Antiquity: I answer, with that
honorable Lord of Plessis, in another cause, though for substance not far
different, The Apostles and Ancients have not pressed (any thing) but that
which was of the ordinance (and appointment) of God, leaving all the rest
indifferent, to the arbitrament and determination of such as governed the
Churches: who have authority to take order in such things as are lawful, and
yet are neither commanded nor forbidden in the word.

I will lay before the eyes of those that are contrary minded two points to be
considered, Many standing against the Ceremonies, do yield to kneeling.
and then I will end this Controversy. First, it cannot be denied, which
experience teaches, that diverse even among those that have stood against the
Ceremonies, and yet do stand against them, do nevertheless nothing dissent in
opinion from the order prescribed in the Church, but conform themselves in
practice to the same, and have been authors and perswaders of conformity unto
others, as might easily be proved by sundry witnesses: so that these two
causes must be severed and divided.

Secondly, it will be very hard, if not impossible, to allege the testimony of
any learned man before our times, No writers until (...) times hold it
unlawful to kneel.
so far as I, or others of greater reading can remember, that held it
absolutely wicked or unlawful to kneel at the taking of the Sacrament, and
therefore there is just cause that others inferior unto them should suspect
their own judgment.

If then the most, or at the least many, even among those that yield not to
some other Ceremonies of the Church, do notwithstanding kneel at the Crmmunion
with all reverence, and all the learned troop of classical writers account
this kneeling to be lawful and indifferent in it self, why should we be so
wedded to our own opinions, as to fasten an imposition of impiety and idolatry
upon it as we do, as if all were wicked persons and idolaters that submit
themselves unto it? This point I have briefly touched in this place, Book 3,
ca 6.
but handled more at large in the Book it self, whereunto I refer the
Reader for farther and fuller satisfaction: where I have produced as godly and
sauoury writings as (I think) are any in our age, to the end that if we be led
by the judgment of men (who set a byas upon our judgment) we may also have
many that are as sufficient to ouerwaigh and ouersway the others.
Nevertheless, I begin (not without some cause) to suspect before hand, that I
am like to incur the displeasure of such as are contrary minded, whom I have
no thought or purpose to offend, but rather to win to that which I am
persuaded is the truth. And albeit I have protested sufficiently touching my
soundness and sincerity in this behalf, Page 434.
yet I fear offense will be taken, where none is either given or intended, and
therefore if any shall unchristianly and uncharitably censure me, I w^ll
comfort my self in the cleerenes of mine own conscience, so that if mine
adversary should write a book against me, Job. 31, 35, 36
surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto me. 1
Cor. 4, 3.
I have learned to say with the Apostle, With me it is a very small thing that
I should be judged of you or man's judgment: yea, I judge not m^ne own self.
I cannot forget the words of just Job, when he was scoffed and scorned of his
friends, he appealed from them to the sentence of the Almighty, chap. 16. Ioh.
16, 19,
Behold my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high. It is noted of
Alcibiades, when one lifted up his staff to strike him if he would not hold
his peace, that trusting in the justice of his cause and the strength of the
truth, he answered, (...), that is, Plutar.
Smite so that thou will hear. So it shall be no great grief unto me to be
taunted by the tongue, or traduced by the pen, if I may either strengthen any
that waver, or recover any that wander, or confirm any that stand, it is
enough, I have my desire and a good recompense for my pains. Now I proceed to
buckle with the common adversary both of them and us, I mean the popish sort,
who as they have notoriously corrupted the maine points of religion, so none
more horribly then the Sacraments, Sundry novelties taught in the Church of
Rome.
and by no means more then by the blasphemous Mass, and the Idolatrous
service belonging to that Idol. I have oftentimes marvelled with what face or
forehead they can ask of us, where our Church was before Martin Luther or John
Wickliffe? as if it were unknown or unheard of in the former times? whereas
themselves are not able to declare or demonstrate where the Roman Church
remained, maintaining those opinions which that present Church holds. They
teach that which was never taught for six hundred, and some things which were
never known for a thousand years after Christ. Answer to those that ask
where our Church was before Luther. Mark. 1, 27.
The true Church of GOD has always been taxed with this imputation and
accusation of nouelty, as appears by the words of the Jews to Christ the
master, and of the Philosophers to Paul the Scholar. They say to Christ, what
new doctrine is this? Mark 1, 27. We know that God spoke unto Moses, as for
this fellow, we know not from whence he is, Ioh. 9, 29. Ioh. 9, 29.
So the Epicures and Stoikes took Paul and brought him to Areopagus the
highest Court in Athens, saying, May we know what this new doctrine, whereof
thou speak is? Act. 17, 19. Indeed in the hottest times of persecution,
Revel. 12.6.
the woman fled into the wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God,
that they should find her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days.
But what an absurd thing and how injurious dealing is this, to persecute us
with fire and faggot, and to drive us as poor banished men from place to
place, and from corner to corner, and then to ask where our Church is, and to
complain against it that it is invisible! Nevertheless, that great Dragon and
old Serpent which deceives the whole world, Ver. 8, 9.
and all his instruments shall not prevail, because to the woman were given two
wings of a great Eagle that she might fly into the wilderness to her place,
where she was nourished for a time, Ver. 14.
and times, and half a time, so that the gates of hell shall not be able to
overcome it and to prevail against it.

And albeit the Church be unknown to the world and oftentimes to the
particular parts themselves, as it was in the days of Eliah, 1 King 19, 14
Romans 11, 3. 2 Timothy 2, 19. Galath. 1.9.
who complains that he was left alone: yet it is not hid from God, who
knows who are his, and described fully in the Scriptures which cannot deceive
us. If we or an Angel from heaven should teach otherwise, let him be
accursed. It was our Church that shined with glorious miracles, confirming the
faith which we profess: that was dyed with the blood of so many Martyrs
confessing the truth which we embrace.

It was our Church which convinced the Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians,
Pelagia^s, Manichees and such like heretics. The general Councels celebrated
in former times at Nice, Popish op^nions not heard of, for 600. years after
Christ.
at Constantinople, at Ephesus and at Chalcedon, stand on our side. But where
was the Popish Conuenticle which now boasts it self to be the only Church,
for six hundred years after Christ, which were the purest times? Had they any
Church any where that worshipped images, that decked them, and then ducked
down unto them? that held that the old vulgar Translation of the Bible is
authentical? that no interpretation of Scripture is to be allowed against that
sense which the Church of Rome holds? that the Virgin Mary was exempted from
original sin? that the Scriptures are imperfect, and no sufficient rule of
faith? that the holy Scriptures and the traditions of the Church are to be
reverenced with equal affection? that the Bishop of Rome is judge of all
controversies of Religion? Had they any Church upon the face of the earth that
believed that the Pope was ever called a God, and the spouse of the Church?
that held that venial sins are cleansed and done away with holy water? that
the Pope is above a general Council? that the Pope may dispense by his
omnipotency w^thin the degrees of affinity and consanguinity forbidden in the
Law? that by dispensing the merits of Saints by indulgences he is able to
deliver Souls at his pleasure from the pains of Purgatory? that the Pope
defining out of his Chair cannot err? Were all these or any of th^se preached
or professed in the true Church of God, which are now broached and believed in
the Church of Rome? But to pass over these as impertinent to this present
Treatise, New doctrins of Popery touching the Supper.
and to speak only to the matter in question concerning the Sacraments, what
Church did believe the real presence, or Transubstantiation, or private
Masses? or received in one kind, or held that there are seven Sacramenss,
neither more nor less: or believed accidents without their subject; or called
the Sacrament his Lord and God? or administered it in a strange tongue? or
lifted it up over his head, or worshipped it as his Maker and Creator? All
these are now made articles of faith, and principles of religion, such as
without them a man cannot be saved: yet which of them were embraced for six
hundred years (I might add more) after Christ? These were never heard off,
never dreamed off, which are now the chiefest dreams of the Romish Prelates.
And no marvel. For seeing they have in a manner banished and buried the
remembrance of CHRIST, it may not seem strange that they have abolished his
Supper instituted in memory of his death and passion. Christ our Savior
sits in heaven at the right hand of his Father, and makes continual
intercession for us, Sadeel de spiri. manduc. cap. 1
and we must feed upon him spiritually, which is not a feigned or forged
presence bred in our own idle fancy, and consisting of our private opinion;
neither does it signify and import that which is only invisible and not
offered to the object of the eye, or that we go about to turn and transform
the body and blood of Christ into a spirit: but we call it spiritual eating
and feeding upon him spiritually, The reasons why we are said to eat Christ
spiritually.
for three causes. First, because the eating of Christ's flesh and drinking of
his blood is brought to pass by the work of the holy Spirit: for it may well
be said to be received in that manner, seeing it is effected by that means.

Secondly, because this mystery is wrought by the instrument of faith which we
send up to the Throne of God, as the Eagle which mounteth up to heaven:
inasmuch as it is opposed to the fleshly eating of him, wherein the Papists are
like to the Capernaites, Ioh. 6. that dreamed of a carnal and corporal eating
and drinking, Ioh. 6, 63.
which profits nothing, and helps no man, and brings no good.

Thirdly, because this most excellent and precious food belongs to our
spiritual and eternal life, seeing we receive the signs not to nourish our
bodies, but to feed our souls.

The sum and effect of this Book.
These things the judicious Reader shall find largely discussed in this
Treatise, which I have therefore called The New Covenant, because it lays
open the doctrine of the Sacraments, which serve to confirm and strengthen us
in that Covenant and compact which the eternal God has in great mercy and
compassion made with mortal and miserable men, accepting them into grace and
favor, promising to them remission of their sins and salvation of their souls.

The sum and effect of this Book.
These things the judicious Reader shall find largely discussed in this
Treatise, which I have therefore called The New Covenant, because it lays
open the doctrine of the Sacraments, which serve to confirm and strengthen us
in that Covenant and compact which the eternal God has in great mercy and
compassion made with mortal and miserable men, accepting them into grace and
favor, promising to them remission of their sins and salvation of their souls.

These my rude (though renewed) labors, I willingly submit to the wise censure
of my learned Brethren, remembering that the spirits of the Prophets are subject
unto the Prophets. If I have any where erred through humane infirmity, 1 Cor.
14, 32
or mistaken the matter any way, which I go about to prove or persuade, I
desire them heartily by some means to give me friendly notice thereof, which
I shall receive as precious balm or as an excellent oil that shall not break
my head. Psalm. 141, 5
The Lord God almighty, from whom every good giving and every perfect giving
proceeds, establish us in the New Covenant, and make us careful to keep the
conditions thereof, to the increase of our knowledge, to the growth of our
faith, to the furtherance of our obedience, to the comfort of our souls, and
to the glory of his great name, Amen, Amen.

Thy Brother in Christ our Savior, William Attersoll.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Sacraments in general.
Of the agreement and difference between the Word and Sacraments. CHAP. 1.
GOD even from the beginning added unto the preaching of the word God always
gave his sacraments to his Church.
his Sacraments in the Church (as the Scripture teaches) outwardly
repesenting and visibly offering to our sight those things that inwardly he
performs to us: as Gen 2, 9.
the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil in the Garden.
After man's fall, when a new necessity was added, in regard of man's want and
weakness: he testified his love and ratified his Coueant by sacrifices and
Ceremonies, to our first Parents. He gave the Genesis 6, 14.
Arc to Noah and his sons, to confirm them in the promise which he made to
them, that they should not be drowned with the rest of the world. He added to
Abraham Genesis 17, 11.
the sign of circumcision, as a seal Rom, 4, 11.
of the righteousness of faith: and to the Israelites he gave the Passover,
Manna, oblations, purifications, the brazen Serpent, the Rock, and such like
spiritual tipes, whereby he assured them of the promise, that God for the
only sacrifice of Christ wrought upon the Cross, would give to all that
believe forgiveness of sins and everlasting life.

Now the word of God may fitly be resembled to writings and evidences: and the
The agreement between the Word and Sacraments.
Sacraments to seals which the Lord alone sets to his own letters. They
are as a visible Sermon preaching unto us most lively the promises of God: that
as the word we hear does edify and instruct the mind by the outward ears,
so do the Sacraments by the eyes and other senses. First then, that we may
understand the doctrine and nature of the Sacraments: we are to consider, what
the word and Sacraments have in common, and how they agree one with another:
then, what they have peculiar and proper each to other, and how they differ one
from another.

The argument between them stands in these points. First, both are of God,
and instruments which the Holy Ghost uses to this end, to make us more and
more one with Christ, and partakers of salvation: not that God needs them, or
that he is tied unto them, (for as he can nourish without meat and drink, so
he can save without word or Sacraments:) but because we need them, he uses
them when he will, and as often as it pleases him. The same which is
published and promised by the word of God, is signified and sealed by the
Sacraments. For they are not a delivering of new promises and articles of
faith, but seal up such as are offered in the word. Secondly, although God use
them as instruments of his grace, yet the especial working and forcible power
of them, is not in them, but depends on God alone: so that we must not
think that whosoever partaketh them is partaker of grace, salvation,
forgiveness of sins, and everlasting glory, but the virtue of them flows
from him only as from a fountain. A man may hear the word and receive the
Sacraments all the days of his life, and be never the better, except God
change the mind, open the heart, enlighten the understanding, cleanse the
conscience, and sanctify the affections to his glory.

Thirdly, as the preaching of the word profits nothing unless it be
understood, applied, and received, but Heb. 4, 1.
tends to judgment: so the Sacraments, except we bring the hand of faith
with us, cannot give us faith nor grace, but tend to our condemnation. Yet, as
the Gospel is always the savor of life unto life of it own nature, and the
Heb. 4, 12.
word lively and of comfortable operation, howsoever the unfaithful turn it
to be the savor of death unto death: So the Sacraments cease not in themselves
to be true Sacraments, although they be administered by unworthy Ministers,
and received by unfaithful people. For man's wickedness cannot pervert, much
less euert the nature of Gods ordinance. Lastly, as the best seed springs
not up and brings not fruit so soon as it is sown, but lies a time covered
in the earth to take rooting: so the fruit reaped by the word, and benefit
received by the Sacraments presently appears not, but grows and increases
at the time appointed of God, who will bless them in his elect, at what season
himself has ordained.

Thus we see what the word and Sacraments have in common; both are instruments
of the same grace, both have their benefit, blessing, and force depending on
God, both require faith to be mingled with them, without which they are
unprofitable; and lastly, they profit not by and by at the same moment they
are published, administered, heard, or received: but God afterward works
oftentimes by them in his children to their great comfort, when all fruit to
come by them seemed to be buried. The Disciples at the first understood no more
of Christ's resurrection then the unbelieving Jews did, when he said, John 2,
19.
Destroy this Temple, and I w^ll build it again in three days: But they lay
it up in their hearts, and long afterward remember the words he spoke unto them.

So when they saw Christ riding to Jerusalem, the multitude spreading their
garments in the way, and cutting down branches Mat. 21, 8.
from the trees, the City moved, and Children crying in the Temple, Hosanna to
the Son of David: they John 12, 16.
understood none of those things at the first: But when Jesus was glorified,
then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that they had
done such things unto him. If then at the present time of our hearing or
receiving, we find not, nor feel the fruit and comfort we desire: let us not
doubt and despair* but wait on God, who in his own appointed times will make
his own ordinances available to all his servants. Thus much of the things
that are common to the word and Sacraments.

In the next place let us see Difference between the word and sacraments.
what they have proper and peculiar, and so differ one from another. First,
forasmuch as the Sacraments are appurtenances and dependances to the word, and
are applied to this end to seal up our communion with Christ, and our
fellowship one with another: it appears that in men of riper years the
teaching and hearing of the word preached, and the open confession and
profession of faith did go before participation of the Sacraments, as Math. 28.
Mat. 28, 19.
Go teach all Nations, that is, make them Disciples of Christ, gain them to
the faith (as the word signifies) and then baptize them. Thus Philip taught
the Eunuch before he baptized him, Acts 8. to whom when the Eunuch said, What
lets me to be baptized? Philip answered, If thou beleeuest with all thine
heart, thou may: and he said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
And Acts 10. Can any forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Indeed touching childrens baptism,
there is another especial respect to be had, of which we shall speak
afterward: But touching others, this is the 1. difference between them, that
whereas the word was offered even to such as were out of the Church not having
heard of the name of Christ, and none excluded or debarred from the hearing of
it, whether believers or unbelievers, holy, or profane, Jew or Gentile,
Barbarian or Schythian. 1, C. 14 No person being an unbeliever or Infidel, was
ever admitted to the Sacraments, although he should offer himself (for that
had been to give Mat. 7, 6.
that which is holy to Dogs, and to cast pearls before Swine) but such only
as were instructed in the faith, and had made public confession thereof as
members of the Church. Another difference is in the necessity, end, and use
as well of the one as of the other. The preaching of the word is the ordinary
means and instrument of the Holy Ghost to beget and begin faith in us (except
God do deal extraordinarily, which of us is not to be looked for) and none
has entrance to Christ but by faith: so that men, if they will be saved, must
hear it. But the Sacraments are of another nature, they cannot engender faith
in us: we must bring faith with us, least we partake them unworthily, so that
he which believes, and could not come to the Sacraments, is yet partaker of
salvation. Wherefore the necessity of them is not simply and absolutely so
great, that without exception a man cannot be saved without them: for it is
the contempt, not the want of them that brings danger and damnation. Thirdly,
it may sometimes fall out, that in a visible Church, the word preached may be
found (as an essential note of the Church) without the Sacraments, and yet be
a true Church of God: so that the word may be without the Sacraments, but the
Sacraments cannot be without the word, as a writing may be without a seal,
but not the seal without the writing; set a seal to a blanke, and it is
vain, void, and unprofitable. Last of all, the preaching of the word rouseth
and affects only one of the senses, to wit, the ears, we see it not, we
touch it not, we handle it not, only we hear the sound thereof: but the
Sacraments are offered to the eyes as well as to the ears, so that we do
eue^ behold Jesus Christ as it were crucified before us, nay they move and
stir up the rest of the senses, whereby we may understand what they bring,
to what end they serve, and how they do avail unto our faith, making us
after a sort to handle Christ with our hands, and to see him with our eyes, to
taste him and touch him with our whole body. Wherefore, they do How the
sacraments are more effectual then the word.
more seal up then the word, not that God is more true of his promise when he
works by signs, then when he speaks by his word: but in respect of the
manner of teaching and receiving, because by his Sacraments he represents
his promises as it were painted in a Table, Horat. lib. de art pocti. Segnius
irritant animos, demissa per aures, quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus,
etc.
and sets them forth lively as in a picture before our eyes, that we may
not only hear, but see, handle, touch, taste, and even digest them. Again,
the promise of the Gospel is more effectually declared and sealed up by the
Sacraments then by the bare word, not for the substance and matter it self,
but for the manner of working which is here full, perfect, and more
effectual: so as that which we perceive and receive by many senses, as
hearing and seeing, is more sure and certain then that which is discerned by
hearing only.

Hitherto of the agreements and differences between word and Sacraments, and
we have showed that so soon as God gave his word, immediately he seconded the
same with his Sacraments. The uses which we are to make Thomas John 20, 25.
one of the Disciples, we will not believe them until in some sort we see
them, and in some measure feel them in our hearts. Wherefore God has ordained
these mysteries and holy actions, to keep in continual memory his great
benefits bestowed upon man, to seal up his promises, and as it were to offer
unto our sight those things which inwardly he performs to us, and thereby
strengthens and increases our faith through the working of his Spirit in our
souls. An house, the more props and posts it has to sustain and support it,
the more weak and ruinous it is; whereas if it were strong enough, it needed
nothing to bear it up: even so, seeing God contenteth not himself with
bestowing upon us, and blessing of us with his word, but gives unto us
together with his word his holy Sacraments also, so that our faith is not only
underset with the one, but underpropped with the other, it serves to lay
before our eyes our weakness, our distrust, and our unbelief. For if we had
fullness and perfection of faith, we should have no need either of the word
or Sacraments: and therefore when this world shall have an end, the ministry of
the word shall cease, and the administration of the Sacraments shall be
abolished.

Seeing, then the word is not sufficient, but the Sacraments were added for
further assurance: we must in this behalf consider the great goodness of God
toward us, who does not only give us faith by his word as by his saving
instrument, but has also added to his word, Sacraments or seals of his
promise and grace, that by the lawful use of them he might uphold and
strengthen our faith through his blessed Spirit. For in as much as the Lord not
only sent the blessed seed, for the redemption of mankind, for the remission
of our sins, and for the brusing of the Serpents head, but ordained for us
Sacraments to be pledges of his promises, testimonies of his faithfulness and
remedies of our distrustfulnesse: we must freely confess and thankfullye
acknowledge the bottomless depth of Gods endless mercy toward us, who
vouchsafes to be our God, to be reconciled to us being vile and miserable
sinners, to make a league and covenant with dust and ashes, and deliver his
only Son to suffer the shameful death of the Cross for us. And withal we
must ^abor more and more to feel our own blindness, distrust, infidelity,
and perverse nature; we would easily forget this mercy of God unless it had
been continually represented before our eyes.

Again, seeing nothing is offered and given in the Sacraments To. 1, 16, and
10, 14.
that believe? And whence proceeds it, but from palpable ignorance in the
matters of God and their own salvation, to be much troubled that the Sacrament
is not brought unto them, and yet never covet to have a word of comfort
spoken to them in due season. Let all such persons understand, that as the
Minister Acts 15, 21, and 19, 4, and 2, 42, 40.
is charged from God to teach every Sabboath day, and to preach the word in
season and out of season: to deal the bread to the hungry, and to give unto
every one in the family his portion: so is it required of all the people to
desire the sincere milk of the word of God that they may grow thereby; which,
howsoever it be to them that perish, foolishness; yet to such as are called,
1 Cor. 1, 24.
it is the wisdom of God and the power of God.

Thus Origin, a man excellently learned, and among the Ancients one of the most
ancient, says, When ye receive the Lords supper with all heed and reverence,
ye take heed that no small piece fall from it by negligence to the ground: how
the^ do you think it is a matter of less heinous offense to neglect his word
then his body? Whereby we see in the judgment of this Father and Doctor of the
Church, the loss of the word is as great a want as the loss of the Sacrament,
and the neglect of the word is as high an offense as the neglect of the
Sacrament, for as much as one God is the author of them both, and the worker by
them both.

Wherefore, we are deceived if we make account that there is less danger in
neglecting the word of God, then in neglecting the Sacrament of his last
supper: but we must take heed, that while we willingly desire the one, we
do not wilfully despise the other. For we must carefully consider, that as
the Sacrament is a visible word, so the word is a speaking Sacrament: and as
God lifts up his voice unto us in the one, so he reaches out his hand unto
us in the other. We must as well hear when he calls, as receive when he
offers. Now by his word preached, he calls: by his Sacraments administered,
he offers his graces unto us: and, as we must have hands stretched out for
the one, so we must have ears opened for the other.

Lastly, seeing the Sacraments are so nearly linked together,

Woe unto all them that vnioyne and put asunder those things, which God has
coupled together: woe unto such as do the work of the Lord negligently or
deceitfully. This is to serve him (...) halfes, and to worship him after our
own inventions. For as it is a counterfeit repentance to leave one sin, and
cleave to another: so it is a fained holiness to follow one ordinance of God,
and to omit or forsake another. True repentance stands in denying of all
sin: and true religion consists in practicing of all good things of God.
Among many that are often hearers of the word, you shall not find many that
are often receivers of the Supper of the Lord. These are like unto Ahaz,
mentioned in the Prophet Esaias, when God offered unto him a sign, and bad him,
ask it either in the depth, Esaias 7, 11.
or in the height above, to strengthen his faith, and assure him of the promise
of God, he neglected and contemned the same, through profaneness of heart,
albeit he answered in words, he would not tempt the Lord: This man is
worthily branded in the Scripture with the note of a wicked man: Verse 12. 2 Chronicles. 28, 22.
and has it set upon him as a mark whereby he may be known, for as much as in
refusing to receive a sign, beside all his other sins, he breaks out into
many sins, and shows his contempt, unthankfulness, hatred, pride,
infidelity, and hypocrisy. So it is with such as live among us, What sins
they commit that neglect the use of the Sacraments.
and love not to come to the Table of the Lord. First, they are disobedient to
God, and refuse to do that which he commands them to do. They contemn the
ministry of those whom God has sent to offer unto us the seals of his love,
the assurances of his promises, and the pledges of our salvation. To rebel
against God is no small sin, and to deny openly without fear and without
shame to obey his will.

Secondly, such as absent themselves from the Sacraments are most unthankful
unto God, who spares our weakness, and offers unto us wholesome stays, as
it were firm and strong pillars to uphold our faith. Such as have the greatest
and strongest faith, and have attained to the highest measure of assurance, do
yet in this life stand as much in need of the Sacraments, as a ruinous
building does of shores and supporters, or a weak body does of meat and
nourishment.

Thirdly, they are guilty of the grievous sin and horrible crime of hatred
against God, because like to Ahaz as much as lies in them, they would have the
glory of God darkened, that it might not shine, and the truth of God buried,
that it might not appear in the performance of his promises. If these men were
persuaded in their hearts, that the neglect of the Sacraments is a secret
hatred against God, and an unjust detaining from him the praise and honor that
is due to his great name, they would make more conscience of this sin then
commonly they do.

Fourthly, such as come not unto them with fear and reverence, are possessed
with spiritual pride and presumption, which is a dangerous disease, and so much
the more dangerous, by how much it is the less espied. For these men do
imagine they have strength of faith, greater then indeed they have: and in that
high and haughty conceit of their own gifts, do contemn the use of the
Sacraments, as neede-lesse and superfluous things: These are they that say they
are rich, and have need of nothing, and yet know not that they are wretched and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: these are heart-sicke and yet
feel it not, and are near without speedy repentance unto condemnation. For as
the sick man that refuses wholesome medicines and sovereign preservatives,
increases his disease, and draws death willingly and wilfully upon himself:
so such persons as regard not the Sacraments, which god (as the spiritual
Physician of our souls) offers unto us, as means to restore us and recover
us from the venomous poison of unbelief, which we have drunk from our first
parents, do by little and little harden themselves, and justly perish in the
evil way.

Fifthly, they bewray their infidelity, and an evil persuasion of the truth and
power of God, as Ahaz did when he refused the sign which of his grace and
goodness was offered unto him. He said, he would not ask a sign neither tempt
God; but because he asked not a sign, therefore he tempted God. So do all
they that refuse to help the weakness of their faith by the use of the
Sacraments, they tempt God, and make trial whether he will save them, or can
save them, without those ordinary means that he has ordained. This is a true
and certain rule, that all they which have faith will be careful to
strengthen their faith: such as have no faith at all, regard not any means
whereby they may obtain faith; as they that have life in them seek to
sustain it, but the dead stir not hand or foot.

Lastly, such persons as care not to be present at the Sacraments, have their
hearts possessed with hypocrisy and deep dissimulation, and do indeed and in
truth, no better then mock God and godliness. They profess themselves to be
desirous to know God, and to serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind, in as much as they are partakers of the word; howbeit, because they
regard not to resort to his Table, and to sit down with him as his guests:
they are far from that truth and inward sincerity that ought to be in all the
servants of God. Thus then we see how many sins do concur and meet
together, in all such as do not constantly and conscionably frequent the
Sacraments, which must be duly considered of us, least by heaping up all these
sins in the neck one of another, we also bring down from heaven upon our
heads many punishments and plagues, according to our just deseruings. For
inasmuch as the Lord not only sent the blessed Seed for the redemption of
mankind, for the remission of sins, and for the brusing of the Serpents
head, but ordained for us Sacraments to be pledges of his promises,
testimonies of his faithfulness, and remedies of our distrust; we must
confess and thankfully acknowledge the bottomless depth of his mercy toward
us, who vouchsafes to be our God, to be reconciled unto us being vile and
miserable sinners, to make a league and covenant with dust and ashes, and to
deliver his only son to suffer the bitter death of the shameful Cross. And
withal we must confess, and labor more and more to feel our own blindness,
and infidelity, which mercy we would easily forget, unless it had been
continually represented before our eyes.

CHAP. 2. What a Sacrament is.
IN every treatise and discourse, it is necessary first to know Arist. poster.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
whether a thing be, before we consider what it is. We have heard before, that
there are Sacraments and ever have been in the Church of God. Now then let us
consider what they are, that first the matter handled, may be defined. For in
vain we shall reason and speak of the Sacraments, unless we understand what
a Sacrament is. But before we set down any description of it, it shall not
be amiss to speak somewhat of the word. The name in so many letters and
sillables, is not indeed in the Scripture, no more then the word Trinity,
catholic, Consubstantiall, and such like: which being now generally received,
is not to be rejected, seeing the doctrine contained under it, agrees with the
Scripture, and nothing thereby is added to the Scripture. Now as the fathers of
the Greek Church called these holy rites by name of Mysteries, because the
substance of them was only known to the members of the Church, and hidden
from others: so the ancient teachers of the Latin Church, called them
Sacraments, in respect of the affinity and neerenesse between them and a
Sacrament. For a Sacrament properly is that solemn oath in war, by which
Soldiers bound themselves to their chief Captain. Such a regard had the old
Romans in the discipline of their wars, that it was Cicero de offic. Lib. 1.
not lawful for any to kill an enemy, or enter into the battle to fight,
unless he were sworn a Soldier. So when we are partakers of these holy
signs which God has appointed in his Church, by which he bestows upon us
spiritual gifts, A Sacrament properly is the Soldiers oath: metaphorically
the Churches band binding them to God.
we do bind our selves to him, we profess openly his true religion, we vow to
fight under his banner against our en^mies: so that they are testimonies and
tokens of the covenant between God and us, that he is our God, and we bind
our selves to be his people, to serve him and no other God. So circumcision
was a seal of Gods promise to Abraham, and a seal of Abraham's faith and
obedience toward God. By them man is bound to God, and God vouchsafes to bind
himself to man. Wherefore, the word Sacrament, being translated from the camp
to the Church, from a Soldier to a Christian, from a civil use to an holy,
let us see in this sense and signification what it is. Now, the word being
borrowed from wars, is A Sacrament considered 2. ways.
taken two ways: first in a general signification, and may comprehend all
manner of signs, whether natural, or miraculous, or voluntary, which God
commanded men to use, to assure them of the undoubted truth of his promise: as
when he gave to Adam in the Garden, the tree of life to be a pledge of his
immortality, the Rainbow to Noah and his posterity; sometimes he gave them
miraculous signs, as light in a smoking Furnace to Abraham; the fleece wet,
the earth being dry, and the earth wet, the fleece being dry, to Gedeon: to
promise and perform victory to Gedeon. In this large acceptance of the word,
we do not entreat of the Sacraments: we speak properly of those, which God
has left to be ordinary in his Church, to be seals of our communion with
Christ, and of the righteousness which is by faith. A Sacrament What a
Sacrament is.
thus considered is a visible sign and seal ordained of God, whereby Christ
and all his saving graces by certain outward rites are signified, exhibited,
and sealed up unto us. In this description, we are to consider these 3.
things. First the whole kind or general: secondly, the cause or author
thereof: and lastly the use of this doctrine delivered. Touching the first,
whereas it is said that a sacrament is a visible sign and seal, this is
proved and confirmed in sundry places of the scripture, as Genesis 17. speaking
of circumcision, (he says) Genesis 17, 11.
It shall be a sign of the covenant between me and thee. And To. 4. speaking
of Abraham (he says) Romans 4, 11
He received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of
faith. Indeed a sign and a seal differ one from another, as the general
from the especial: for every seal is a sign, but every sign is not a seal.
A seal certifieth, assures, and confirms a thing: a sign only shows it:
but a Sacrament does both. It is a sign to signify and represent: a seal to
ratify and assure: an instrument to confer and conueigh Christ with all his
benefits to them that truly believe in him: a pledge unto us of Gods promises:
a visible word, and as a notable glass wherein we may behold August de doct.
Christ. lib. 2. Cap. 1.
assured testimonies of Gods eternal favor, and of the abundant riches of his
grace which he bestows upon us. This teaches us to acknowledge, there is
more in the Sacraments then is seen with the eyes, or felt with the hands: and
therefore we must not conceive irreverently of them, nor come negligently unto
them, making them mere carnal and outward things: but we must think
reverently, speak soberly, receive humbly and penitently these holy mysteries.
Again, hereby we are brought to believe the promises of God: for if the
Sacraments be not only signs of his favor but seals of our faith, can we
doubt of his mercy and good meaning toward us, having left such pawnes and
pledges thereof with us, that we might have assured comfort and comfortable
assurance of salvation and eternal life? Is it not among men matter of
assurance, and a note of true dealing, to have a pledge left with us? But
behold God has left unto us two pawnes of his promises, as it were an
earnest-penny, that our faith should not waver. If then his alone word be
all-sufficient, having a noble addition of the Sacraments, as of his seals, let
us believe his promises, and in all tentations rest upon them with all
confidence and consolation.

Secondly it is said Sacraments were instituted o^ God alone.
a Sacrament is a divine ordinance. Not any Angel or Arch-angell, not any
Prince or Potentate, but only God himself is the author and ordainer of all
holy signs and Sacraments. This appears by many witnesses out of the word
of God, I have set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the
covenant between me and the earth: and when I shall cover the earth with a
cloud, and the bow shall be seen in the cloud, then will I remember my
covenant which is between me and you. Where we see, that when God determined
to be merciful unto the world, and never to drown the same with water again
as he had drowned it, he gave them a sign of his promise, to wit, His bow in
the clouds. When God would witness and stablish to Abraham and his seed after
him the promise of his mercy, he ordained a Sacrament to confirm the same,
Genesis 17. This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, let
every man child among you be circumcised. And the Apostle says, I have
received of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you. And Christ himself
instituted Baptism, and sent forth his Disciples to preach the Gospel. All
these testimonies as a cloud of witnesses do confirm us in this truth, that
none has power and authority in the Church to institute a Sacrament, but only
God. And the reasons are apparent: First, the Sacraments belong to the service
and worship of God: now it rests not in man to appoint and prescribe a
service of God, but to retain and embrace that which is taught by him, For in
vain they worship him, teaching for doctrines men's precepts. Again, the
Sacramental signs have Gods promises annexed unto them, confirming us in the
same, which they could not do, but by the blessing and benefit of him that
promises: so that God only is able to bestow grace, and he alone can appoint
true signs of grace. For as he only has authority to seal the charter and
pardon, in whose jurisdiction it is to grant it: so likewise God gives the
pledges and tokens of his grace which sheadeth the graces of the Spirit into
our hearts. Wherefore, the reverent Sacraments of the Church, none can
institute by his authority, but only God: and hence it is, that the signs
have the names of the things signified. None but Christ himself could say of
the bread, This is my body: none but he could say of the cup, This cup is the
new Testament in my blood: none but he, breathing on his Apostles could say,
Receive the Holy Ghost: none but he could make the water in Baptism to be the
lauer of regeneration.

Let us see what good and profitable uses arise from this 1 Timothy 3, 2.
rule, but we must not measure the profit of the receiver, by the person of the
Minister. If a thief do steal a sack of corn, we see if he sow it, it
grows up and brings forth increase, because the fault rests not in the
seed which is good, but in the sower which is evil: so does the Sacrament
profit the faithful, howsoever he be unfaithful that does administer it.
We see if the seede-man have foul, filthy, and unclean hands that sows,
yet if the seed be clean, sweet, and fair, it prospers: so the holy
things of God Evil Mininisters may deliver the good things of God.
cannot be defiled by the corrupt and sinful life of the Minister, while he
delivers nothing of his own, but dispenses the ordinances of God. Thus we
see that whether the Minister be good or evil, godly or ungodly, an heretic
or a Catholic, holy or profane, the effect is all one, the worthiness of the
Sacrament depends not on man, but proceeds from God; and therefore all such
as contemn the Sacraments of God for the sacrilege of man, shall bear their
condemnation whosoever they are. The two sons of Ely, Hophni and Phinehas, were
1 Samuel 1, 22.23.
exceeding sinners against the Lord, yet because the people of Israel abhorred
the sacrifices of God, and trod his worship under their feet, the wrath of
the Lord was kindled against the whole land, and he denounced 1 Samuel 6, 11.
sore judgments against the^. So then, the offense of the Priests was no
defense of the people: but as the Priests gave the offense, and the people
took it, so God bound the^ together in the same judgment. So we must know,
God will not bear the contempt of his ordinances under any pretense whatsoever
of the Ministers wickedness and unworthiness: if his hand be corrupt, let thy
heart be vncorrupt; though his sins be his own, yet the Sacram. be Gods: he may
minister comfort to thee, tho he bring none to himself: as the workme^ that
builded the Arc prepared a means to save other, but were drowned themselves,
or as the bells tho they move not themselves, yet serve to bring others to the
exercises of religion, or as the Scribes that pointed the way to the wisemen,
but themselves vouchsafed not to step out of doors to enquire after Christ.
The ears of corn do carry the corn with the chafe to be purged and cleansed
in the barn, and though the chafe be unprofitable, yet it profits the
corn, as the Lantern holds the candle to give light unto others that are
the passengers. As gold is gold, of whomsoever it is given and received: so the
Sacrament is truly a Sacrament, whether it be given of a good or evil
Minister: so is it with the word of God. This appears by the words of Christ
our savior, Math. 23. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: Mat. 23,
2, 3
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but after
their works do not, for they say and do not. Albeit then, the Scripture
condemns such as give offenses, yet such as take offense are not thereby
justified; let us magnify the ordinances of God, and then we may expect a
blessing at his hands. This is that which the 1 Cor. 3, 6, 7
Apostle teaches. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase:
So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watreth, but
God that gives the increase. Wherefore, the people of God notwithstanding the
wickedness and unworthiness of the Ministers, may safely and with a good
conscience use their ministry, both hearing the word from their mouths, and
receiving the Sacraments at their hands: and both of them are effectual and
available unto salvation, neither do they defile themselves by their
corruption. The Donatists in former times, and the Anabaptists in our days,
teach that such scandalous Ministers as give offense can profit us nothing at
al, nor further our salvation, nor do us any good, and that being defiled
themselves by their sins, they defile also the Sacraments. Heereunto they bring
the saying in the law of Moses, Whatsoever the unclean person touches, shall
be unclean: and the soul that touches it shall be unclean until even.
Likewise they allege the words of Haggai the Prophet, If a man bear holy
flesh in the skirt of his garmant, and with his skirt do touch bread or
pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? The Priests answered
and said, No. Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch
any of these, shall it be unclean? The Priests answered, It shall be unclean:
So is this people, and so is this Nation before me, says the Lord, and so is
every work of their hands, and that which they offer there is unclean.
Therefore whenever the Ministers are polluted with vices, they do pollute and
profane whatsoever they handle. I answer, these words are corrupted and
depraved by these heretics. The Prophet says not by way of application, so
do you pollute the Sacram. and sacrifices of the people, but the drift of the
place is to show unto us that our works are polluted and abominable in the
sight of almighty God, and utterly rejected of him, except they proceed from
the fountain of a pure heart and faith unfeigned: so that albeit they be in
their nature never so good, yet if we be unclean and vnpure, we make them
all vnpure to our selves: I say, to our selves but not to others. For why
should they bear the blame of our impurity? or why should they be punished for
our iniquity? The Apostle speaking of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. says, He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself,
not discerning the Lords body: he cannot eat and drink judgment to other
men, but he may to himself. Likewise, the same Apostle writing to Titus
says, Chap. 1.15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience
is defiled. No man can defile the Sacraments to others, but only to himself,
forasmuch as they take their nature and borrow their force from God, not from
men: and therefore are not to be esteemed by the vice or virtue of the
Minister, but by the power and virtue of God. If a Prince should send us a
pardon by his letters pattens, and deliver them into the hand of a wicked man,
as God sent Judas the son of perdition to the Children of Israel, to preach
unto the^ that the kingdom of God was at hand: would we refuse the pardon
because of the wickedness of the messenger? Or may we think it to be less
forcible and available, because he is an ungodly person? Woe then unto those
that bring in again the damnable doctrine and practice of the Donatists, long
since buried and shaken in pieces, who make a schism in the Church, and depart
out of the church for the faults and offenses of the Ministers; because we are
not baptized into the names of the Ministers, neither are made partakers of the
supper of the Ministers: but we are baptized in the name of God, and we are
made partakers of the Supper of the Lord. They are therefore their own
enemies, that look too much upon the messenger, and too

Secondly, is God the true and only author and appointer of Sacraments? Then
none must add unto, or take from the Sacraments instituted by him in the
church, no more then unto the Deuteronomy. 4.
word it self, Deutronomy 4. Ye shall put nothing to the word which I
command you, neither shall ye take ought there from, that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. And Revel. 22, 18, 19.
If any man shall Revel 22, 18, 19.
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written
in this book: and if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. If the
Sacraments were the inventions of men, they might also fitly receive the
additions and subtractions, the changes and the alterations of men: but seeing
they are the ordinances of God, we must be content to have them ordered by God.
All Ceremonies therefore and rites devised by men, as parts of Gods worship,
are so many abominations, and innouations of his service. As God only can
graciously promise, so he can only effectually perform what he has
promised. Wherefore, we must condemn those as guilty of rebellion against God,
that bouldly break out either to devise new Sacraments, or to add and
detract from them that God has ordained. We are commanded to rest in those
that he has appointed to the Church in his word: for as well we may devise a
new word, as deliver a new Sacrament: as well we may coin a new Article of
faith, as bring in a new confirmation of of faith.

Thirdly, we learn hereby, that they which condemn Cor. 11. He that eats
and drinks unworthily, 1 Cor. 11, 29
eats and drinks his own judgment, because he discerns not the Lords
body. If a man contemn or any way contumeliously abuse the seal of a Prince,
he is punished: and therefore such as scorn and make a mock of the
Sacraments, which are the seals of God, cannot go scot-free, but shall be
indighted of high treason and rebellion against his Majesty.

The last point to be considered in the description of a Sacrament is the end
of them, where it is added, Whereby Christ and al his saving graces by certain
outward rites are signified, exhibited, and sealed up to us. This is proved
directly by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10, 16. The 1 Cor. 10, 16
cup of bless^ng which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? So Peter speaks Acts 2. of the other Sacrament, Acts 2, 38.
Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gifts of the Holy Ghost.
And Paul says in another place, All ye Gal. 3, 27.
that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Our souls are washed in the
blood of Christ: his burial, his resurrection his sanctification, his
wisdom, his righteousness, his redemption is made ours, all his benefits are
ours, as Christ is ours.

Rome is here condemned, that say, we make the Sacraments bare and naked
signs. God forbid that we should say so, or make them to be so: they are the
sure seals of Gods promises, heavenly tokens, spiritual signs and authentike
pledges of the grace, and righteousness of Christ given and imputed unto us.
The Sacraments and sacrifices of the old Testament were not bare signs.
Circumcision was not Romans 2, 28.29.
a bare sign, as Romans 2. This is not circumcision which is outward in the
flesh, but the circumcision of the heart. And In Christ Col. 2, 11, 12.
ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, by putting off the
sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ. Even so Baptism
is no bare sign, it were great blasphemy so to speak; it were very great
iniquity so to think. The grace of God does work with his Sacraments, and
therefore the signs are never received in vain of the faithful and worthy
receiver. The water washes not from sin, the bread and wine feed not to
eternal life: but it is the precious blood of Christ, that does cleanse us
from al sin, and purchases for us all grace, which is the life and the truth
of the outward signs.

Again, is Christ Jesus offered by God the Father in the Christ is offered to
all: but received only of the faithful.
he offers Christ to all, even to the unfaithful, but they have not hands to
receive him. If a Prince should offer a rich present, and he to whom it is
offered, have no hand to receive it, he goes away empty. When the Sun gives
light upon the earth, if men shut their eyes and be wilfully blind, they
receive no profit by it. When God offers himself and his graces to us by
his word and Gospel, if we stop our ears and harden our hearts, it turns to
be the favor of death to death: so is it in the Sacraments when we come to
them, God does not feed our eyes with naked, vain, and idle shows, but
joins the truth with the outward token, and gives the grace signified with
the sign. If we bring the hand of faith with us, which opens the gate of the
kingdom of heaven for us, Christ is both offered and given to us. But
howsoever the sign be always inseparably joined with the grace that is
signified, in respect of God: yet hence it follows not that both of them are
of all received. For the outward sign is offered to the hand, to the senses,
and instruments of the body, which because all bring with them, all are
partakers of the outward parts. But Christ who is signified by the sign, is
offered to the soul and faith of the receiver, 2. These. 3,
which because many want, they loose the fruit of their work, and the
benefit of their labor.

Thirdly, if the right receivers receive Christ, and with with us, and meet us
at the same Table, cannot hinder and hurt us in our worthy receiving. The
unbelievers and unrepentant persons come indeed into the assembly of the
faithful, to hear the word of God read, preached, and expounded, and as they
come without faith, so they depart without fruit: yet their company defiles
not the saving hearer. So is it in the Sacraments: I confess it were to be
wished, that the Church were pure without spot, and perfect without corruption,
fair without blemish, and they even Gal. 5, 12.
out off that trouble the same: yet sometimes it Revel. 2, 14.20.
wants that good censure and godly severity which is required to separate
such as may infect with the leaven of their life and doctrine.

Again, as the faith of the wise and worthy receiver, cannot sanctify the
conscience of the hypocrite and offensive liver: so the infidelity or iniquity
of another, shall not bar the faithful soul from fruitful receiving to his
salvation, according to that Ezekiel. 18, 20
saying, The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. Every one is to prove and
examine himself, not to enter into the consciences and conuersations of other
men: we shall give an account of our own ways and works, not of the
deformities of others which we cannot reform and redress. Furthermore, as in
an Army every man has his standing, so in the Church every man has his
calling: it is not in the Private men are not to meddle with the censures of the
church.
power of private persons, but of the Governors of the Church to draw out the
censures of the Church against notorious offenders, and therefore in their
slacking and negligence, the people must tolerate that which they cannot
amend, and not make a separation or rent in the Church, as the manner of some
is, disturbing the peace and quietness thereof.

are laid up, must regard the Sacraments of Christ: and such as reject them,
reject Christ with all his benefits, The Sacraments are signs, not causes of
grace.
And whosoever is not a Christian before he receive baptizme, baptizme can make
him none, which is only the seal of the graces of God and his privileges
before received. The word of God and the Sacraments of God are both of one
nature: but the word is not able to confer grace, but only to declare and
publish what God will confer, inasmuch as to some it is the savor 2 Cor. 2, 16.
of death to death, therefore also the Sacraments of themselves do not confer
and bestow grace, having it tied unto them, or shut up in the^. For if the
Sacraments did actually and effectually give grace, by inherent power and
virtue in themselves: it would follow from hence, that every person baptized is
certainly saved, and has his sins remitted, or else that his sins remitted
may return and remain and be again imputed. But when God graciously
pardons sin, Ezekiel. 18, 22.
he remembers it no more. Besides, that which is proper to God, ought not to
be ascribed to the creature. Again, we see Abraham was not justified by his
circumcision, he was justified by his faith; for Genesis 15, 6.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: and
afterward he received Romans 4, 10, 11.
circumcision, to be the sign and seal of his justification.
Notwithstanding, the Sacraments may be said to confer the grace of
regeneration and remission of sins, as they are instruments used of God, and
as they are pledges and tokens to us. They are means to offer and exhibit to
the believer, Christ with all his benefits, whereby the conscience is assured of
comfort and salvation as the Princes letters are said to save the life of a
malefactor, whereas they only signify to him and others, that it is the
Princes pleasure to favor him. Again, they may not unfitly be said to give us
grace, because the sign exhibiteth the thing signified: the out-ward washing
of the body is a pledge and token of the grace of God, so that whosoever uses
the sign aright, shall receive forgiveness, and life everlasting.

CHAP. III. That the parts of a Sacrament are partly outward and partly inward.
WE have seen what a Sacrament is: now we are to consider in it two things,
first his parts, then his uses: for in handling these two points, we shall see
what is the nature of a Sacrament. The parts of a Sacrament are of two sorts,
some outward, open, sensible, earthly, visible, and signifying: some are
inward, hidden, spiritual, heavenly, invisible, and signified. For the nature
of a Sacrament is partly earthly, and partly heavenly. If we had been wholly a
spirit without body, he would give us his gifts spiritually without a body:
but seeing we are soul and body, he gives us his Sacraments, that so we
may apprehend spiritual gifts by sensible things. The outward part is one
thing, and the inward part is another thing: the outward is applied to the
body, the inward is applied to the soul and conscience. This division and
distinction of parts Romans 2* 28.29.
appears plainly in sundry places of holy Scripture, as Romans 2. He is not a
Jew which is one outward, neither is that circumc^sion which is outward in the
flesh: but he is a Jew which is one within, and the circumcision is of the
heart, in the Spirit, not in the letter: where we see, he makes
circumcision to stand of two parts, part in the flesh, and part in the heart,
partly in the spirit, and partly in the letter. Heereunto comes Col. 2, 11.
that saying, Ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands: so that
there is a circumcision without, and there is another within by the virtue of
Christ. The same we may say of Baptism, there is a baptizing of the body, and
there is a baptizing of the soul: the body is washed with water, the soul is
cleansed by the precious blood of our savior Christ, which is the hidden and
mystical part of the Sacrament. This appears by many examples recorded in
Scripture. Simon the sorcerer, though he were baptized with water, yet his
heart was not right in the sight of God, he remained Acts 8, 13, 21, 23.
in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, so that albeit he
were baptized, yet he was not regenerated. The Israelites were partakers of the
1. Cor. 10, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
outward signs, not of the invisible grace. They were all baptized unto Moses
in that cloud and in that sea: they did all eat the same spiritual meat,
they all drank the same spiritual drink, yet with many of them God was not
pleased. The like may be said of Judas one of the twelve, he did eat the
Pascall lamb as well as the rest of the Apostles, but he did not eat Christ
(who is the lamb undefiled and without spot) as the other did. This is that
also which John the Mat. 3, 11.
Baptist teaches, Indeed I baptize you with water to amendment of life, but
he that comes after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire: where, as the
Baptist makes two baptizers, himself and Christ, so he distinguishes their
actions, his own to wash with water, and the action of Christ to wash with the
Holy Ghost. Neither need we to seek far for reason, to persuade any to
believe this truth, that the nature of a sacrament, is neither wholly outward or
wholly inward, but takes part of both; seeing nothing can be a sign of it
self, but a sign is a sign of another thing, and seeing they are mysteries,
they have an hidden meaning and spiritual understanding. If the water in
Baptism had not grace annexed unto it, it could not be a mystery. We see the
sign, we see not the grace which is invisible. Now let us come to the uses.

These parts though distinguished really one from another, earthly cannot be
the heavenly, the seal can not be the thing sealed, the token cannot be the
thing betokened, nor contrariwise: (for this were to alter nature and mingle
heaven and earth together) yot in respect of the proportion between the sign
and the thing signified, and of the conjunction of them to the faithful, which
receive both the one and the other, one part is affirmed of the other. For we
must understand that the Scripture in regard of this union, speaks of the
Sacraments two ways, to wit, properly and figuratively. Properly, when that
which belongs to the sign is given to the sign, and when the thing
signified is given and applied to the thing it self; and thus each part has
his own, as Circumcision is called Genesis 17, 11.
the sign of the Covenant. And the blood of the Lamb is called Exodus 12, 13
a sign: these are plain and proper speeches, and without figure. Again,
when it says, Lu. 21, 19, 20.
My body which is given for you, my blood 1 Cor. 5, 7.
which is shed for many for remission of sins, we must understand the
words literally as they lie. Figuratively, when the sign is given to the
thing signified, and called by the name of it, as Christ is called 1 Cor. 5, 7.
the Passover: and the Ioh. 1, 29.
Lamb of God: his flesh is also said to be meat indeed, and his blood
drink indeed: the holy Spirit is called Eze. 36, 25.
water, or else the name of the thing signified is given to the sign, as bread
is called the Mat. 26, 28.
body of Christ, the cup is called the new Testament. These speeches must be
taken figuratively, and understood by a change of name according to the
intention and meaning of the Holy Ghost: so that we must beware that we do not
take or mistake the sign for the thing, nor the thing for the sign, seeing
the parts are distinguished in nature, though joined in the person.

Again, albeit by Gods ordinance these parts be so united, that by taking of
the sign the faithful are made partakers of the thing signified, no less
truly then the outward signs are received of our bodily senses: yet we must
conceive and consider, that these outward and inward parts remain distinct and
unconfounded, and therefore we must take heed we take not one for another: we
must not ascribe too much to the outward parts, and so take them for the
inward, which has been the occasion of sundry errors from time to time. Some
attribute too little to the out-ward sign, and some ascribe too much: both
ways the Sacrament is abused and the parts are misapplyed. Hence sprang as a
rank weed in the Lords corn, the doctrine of transubstantiation or carnal
turning of the substance of bread into the body, whereby the sign is
swallowed up, and the outward substance with them quite abolished; for their
fained Christ has consumed the outward sign, as the rich deuoureth and eats
the poor. Thus the sign is consumed and too little regarded. Others on the
other side, cleave too much to the outward sign, and rest in the external
work, placing holiness and remission of sins in the deed done: and thus
the thing signified is little regarded and wholly abolished, Genesis 41, 4.
as the evil favored and leane-fleshed Kine did eat up the fat and
well-fauored: this was Pharaohs dream, and the other is man's devise. For these
men give all to the outward receiving, placing holiness and remission of
sins therein, and thinking themselves sure and secure when the bread and wine
is taken at the Lords table.

Thus all hypocrites, libertines, and carnal Gospellers do: for all the
religion, devotion, and godliness of these idle and ignorant professors,
stands in outward resorting to the Church, and in an outward taking of the
communion of the body and blood of Christ; which is to make an Idol of the
sign, and to flatter themselves in their evils to their own destruction. For
albeit a man have been baptized and have received the Lords Supper, yet if he
live wickedly and walk after his own lusts, the Sacraments shall avail and
advantage him nothing at all, but further his condemnation.

Lastly, has the Sacrament some parts outward and some inward, some seen and
some not seen with bodilye eyes? Then it gives occasion, both to parents to
teach their children the meaning of these mysteries, and to declare unto them
the ordinances of God, as likewise to children and the younger sort to ask and
inquire of their parents, to hear and learn of them the doctrine of the
Sacraments, thereby to know the merciful promises that God has made to his
people. This appears Exodus 12, 26.27. and chap. 13 14, 15.
directly, where the fathers are forewarned to teach their children the hidden
mystery of the Passover, When your children ask you what service is this ye
keep? then ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, which
passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the
Egyptians, and preserved our houses. So likewise Chapter 13, 14. speaking of
separating and sanctifying the first borne for the service of God, he charge
parents to whet this doctrine on their children and to instruct them, how God
with a mighty hand and outstretched arm brought them out of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage. Again, Josh. 4, 6, 7.8, 21, 22, 23.
we see when the Lord had parted the waters of Jordan that the people might
pass, he commanded Joshua to set up 12. stones in memorial of the mighty and
miraculous work of God for his people against their enemies: and when their
children should ask them in time to come, what was meant by those stones, they
should answer that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the Arc of the
covenant of the Lord. He would not only have themselves to profit by his
wonderful works, but to retain the remembrance of them, he would have their
posterity to know the cause and occasion thereof, and so glorify his name for
ever. Heereunto we may fitly join Psalm. 78, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
what the Psalmist says, I will open my mouth in a parable, I will declare
high sentences of old which we have heard and known, and our fathers have
told us; we will not hide them from their children, but to the generation to
come we will show the praises of the Lord, his power also and his wonderful
works that he has done: that the posterity might know it, and the children
which should be borne should stand up and declare it to their children, that
they might set their hope on God, cannot forget the works of God, but keep
his commandments. All these things serve to this purpose, to show that it is a
duty and burden laid on the shoulders of all parents, to acquaint their
children with the works of God, especially with the benefits of our redemption
wrought by Christ for our salvation. If they ask the question why Infants are
baptized and washed with water into the name of the holy Trinity, we must make
plain unto them the meaning of that mystery. We must say unto them, My
children, How to teach our child^en the meaning of the Sacraments.
this is a sign of the Covenant of Gods mercy to us, and our duty to God: it
is a mystery of our salvation, and teaches that being in our selves unclean,
unrighteous, unholy, and sinful, our souls are washed by the blood of Christ,
even as the water in baptism washes our bodies: wherein the mercy of God is
so much the more maruailous in our eyes, insomuch as the Jews were entered into
the covenant by cutting, lancing, and effusion of blood in circumcision.

Again, before they come to years to receive the holy Supper of the Lord, we
must inform them at home, and declare the institution of that Sacrament and
the comfortable uses thereof to them, so they may afterward come to this
Communion with better warrant of their work, with greater comfort to
themselves, and with less danger to their souls. We must teach them, that as
the bread is broken and the Wine powered out, so the body of Christ was
crucified and his blood shed for the remission of our sins: and that if we
believe in the Lord Jesus, we are nourished in our souls to eternal life by
the passion of Christ our Savior, as certainly as our bodies are nourished
with the creatures of bread and wine. Notwithstanding there is a general
defect of this duty in many parents, neither are children ready to inquire and
learn at home, neither are parents able to answer any thing in these matters
of God: waywardnes in the one, and worldlines in the other, and ignorance in
them both, has taken away all care and conscience from them, touching these
holy and heavenly mysteries, so that neither the one teaches, nor the other
learneth, neither the Child enquireth, nor the father answers.

CHAP. IIII. Of the first outward part of a Sacrament.
THe outward parts of a Sacrament are such things, as What outward parts are.
under a certain similitude and sikenesse do represent and signify heavenly
things, to assure us they are as truly prelent and offered us, as we behold
with our eyes, and receive with our hands the earthly things given unto us. The
outward parts of a Sacrament are in number Four outward parts of a Sacrament.
four. First the Minister: Secondly, the word of institution. Thirdly, the
sign. Fourthly, the receiver. All these and every one of them are needful to
the being and nature of a Sacrament: take them away or any of the^, and you
take away the substance and bring in a nullity of the Sacrament. If there be no
Minister, no word, no element, no receiver: there is no Sacrament. If there be
wanting either Minister to deliver it or word to institute it, or element to
represent it, or receiver to take it: we cannot assure our selves to have any
Sacrament of God, but rather a tradition and invention of our own. In this
place I take the word [part] in a general sense and signification, and
therefore do conclude in it, and comprehend under it, as well the Ministers and
receivers to be outward parts of a Sacrament, as the signs themselves. All
men do confess that the signs are parts, because they are material: but I
undertake to prove the persons both of him that delivers and of them that
receive to be essential also. Besides, the actions of the Minister, and the
actions of the receiver are both of them significant (as is manifestly showed)
so that there is a fit resemblance between the works of the Minister and the
works of God the Father; for God performs the truth of that inwardly which
the Minister does outwardly: and the actions of the receiver do serve to
instruct the faithful what they are to do by faith. Wherefore if the signs
be parts, because they are significant: then we are to receive the Ministers
and receivers as parts also, because whatsoever they do is significant also.

First then, The Minister is the first outward part of a Sacrament.
there is required a Minister lawfully called, chosen, and ordained, having at
the least the approbation and allowance of the Church to pronounce the words of
institution, and to deliver the outward signs to the receivers. They are not
makers of the Sacrament, but Ministers: not authors, but administrators: not
deuisers, but deliuerers. Earthly Princes have their letters patents, and their
great seals, and keepers of the same: if another shall set to the seal that
is not appointed the keeper thereof, is it not made an heinous crime worthy of
heavy punishment? So the Lord is a mighty Prince, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: he has appointed his seals, to seal up his promise of forgiveness of
sins and eternal life: and he has ordained his Officers as it were keepers
of his great seals. God publishes salvation and pardon to all believers by
his word as by his letters pattents, and he adds baptism and the Lords
Supper as two broad seals for greater assurance and confirmation, and
appoints the Ministers to be keepers thereof.

Whosoever therefore shall presume to set to any of these seals without
warrant without a calling, without a function and direction from God himself
being no officer, no Minister, no keeper of them, prophaneth these seals, and
sets to a counterfeit stamp. For as no man may preach Romans 10, 15.
except he be sent: so no man may administer the Sacraments except he be
called. This is it the Heb. 5, 4.5.
Apostle teaches. No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God as was Aaron: and Christ took not to himself this honor to be
made the high Priest: but he that said unto him. Thou art my Son, this day
begat I thee, gave it to him. Now, to minister the Sacraments, is an honor in
the Church, which none can take to himself at his own pleasure, but God must
give it. They should have in their own consciences a witness of Gods calling
them to this office and honor. Wherefore the sacred functions ordained of God
must not be profaned by voluntary officers and usurped offices: no man must
take upon him without a lawful calling to teach these holy mysteries. Of these
the Ier. 23, 21.
Lord complains, I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not
spoken to them, and yet they prophesied. Thus these intruders did thrust their
sickle into other men's corn.

The reasons Reasons why the Ministers only are to administer the Sadraments.
why the Ministers and no others are to intermedle with the Sacraments, are
very apparent. First, because every part and member of the Church has his
especial office and his proper gifts to execute his calling: we see in a
camp, the Soldiers in war have their standing-place in sight of their
captain who has chosen the^ to be warriors: so in the Church must every one
keep his several calling in the presence of God, who has in wisdom and
mercy called him thereunto. We see in the natural disposition of the body,
See Book 2, cap. 3.
every member has his special use, the eye to see, the hand to handle, the
foot to walk, the ear to hear, and if one member should incroach upon the
office of another, it must needs tend to the destruction of the body. We see in
the government of an house and family, the husband and wife, the father and
son, the master and servant know and acknowledge their places to rule and to
obey, to command and to be commanded, without intruding themselves, and
incroching upon the function, as it were upon the free-holde of another. If we
would ascend a step higher, we observe in the affairs of state and matters of
the commonwealth, every man does keep within his own listes and limits, and
no man dare presume to charge any man or enterprise any thing in the Princes
name and authority, without a sufficient warrant from the Prince himself: so
may no man take upon him any functions in the Church, unless he have a
commission and commandment from the Lord. For as the Prince appoints by what
officers he will be served: so is it in the offices and officers of the
Church, God has placed and ordained the Apostle to plant, the Evangelist to
second and assist, the Prophet to prophecy, the Pastor to feed, and has set
every one 1 Cor. 12, 12, 14.
in his proper place and standing as it were in his watchtower, out of which
he must not wander and depart; It is a general and common rule set down by
the Apostle, Let every man abide in the same vocation wherein he was called:
and again afterward, Let every man wherein he was called, therein abide with
God. Whosoever therefore medleth without a lawful vocation, as it were
violently inuadeth another man's possession, as Ahab did the Vineyard of Naboth:
and cannot do it without the check and controlment of Christ Jesus, who is the
Josh. 5, 14.
Captain of his own host, Ephesians. 4, 15.
the head of his own body, the Heb. 3, 5, 6.
Lord of his own house, and the Revel. 12, 5.
great King of his own Church. Again, Christ the Prophet and teacher of his
Church, and the Prince of Pastors, has committed the office of administration
of the Sacraments to those alone to who^ he has committed the dispensation of
his word and preaching of the Gospel: therefore if any other shall set to the
seal, it is no true seal but a counterfeit stamp. The truth of this
appears by the words of John Baptist: Indeed I baptize with water, that is, I
that am appointed a teacher in the Church, to make ready a people prepared for
the Lord. And Paul being converted and called to preach, and to bear the name
of God to the Gentiles, did without further word, warrant, or commandment,
minister the Sacraments. Now then as we have seen the truth of the doctrine,
let us consider the uses thereof. First, is the Minister of the substance of the
Sacram. and a principal part of Christ's institution? Then he must consider, it
is his duty, being authorized from God and by his Church, to sanctify the
outward elements and administer the same, to deliver the outward signs and
offer the^ to the receivers. His works therefore are to put apart and
consecrate the signs to an holy use, to open and declare the covenant of God,
to pray for his blessing promised upon his own ordinance, to give thanks for
the blessed work of our redemption, to offer, give and deliver aright the
cretures so sanctified, in baptism to sprinkle with water and wash the body to
be baptized: and in the Lords supper to deliver the bread to be eaten, and the
wine to be drunk, to the spiritual nourishment of the Church. So then the
Minister ought not to refuse to baptize such as are brought unto him. Shall the
servant refuse to do the work of his master? When Christ the master shall
say, Go and baptize: shall he answer again, I will not? when the Centurion
says to his servant, Go, he goes and when he says Come he comes. If the
Lord keeper of the Kings broad seal should proudly and presumptuously disdain
to set the seal to the Princes letters pattents, were he not well worthy to
be displaced and removed? So if the Minister through envy, or hatred, or any
other sinister affection, which ought not to be harbored in their breast, shall
refuse to put the seal to the Lords Covenant, and hinder little children from
coming to Christ, he deserves justly to be displaced and to bear office no
longer in the city of God, but to be removed for his contempt, 1 King. 2, 35
as Solomon put down Abiathar.

have no part nor fellowship in this business. If notwithstanding these
restrainings of authority from them, they will run and rush forward, where they
should hang backward, their sin lies at the door, their punishment
hastneth and their judgment sleeps not.

Lastly, if the Minister be an outward part of the Sacrament, John may wash
with water, he cannot give the Spirit. Man indeed pronounces the word, but
God seals up his grace in the heart: man sprinkleth the body with water, but
God makes clean the soul by the blood of Christ: man may take away the filth
of the flesh, but Christ must purge the conscience from dead works, who is that
blessed Lamb of God that John 1, 29.
takes away the sins of the world. For as Paul 1 Cor. 3, 6.
planteth and Apollos waters, but God gives the increase: so the Minister
offers the element and outward sign, but God gives the heavenly grace. It
belongs to the Minister to handle the external part: it belongs as a
peculiar dignity to Christ to bestow grace, to give faith, regeneration, Mat.
3, 11.
and forgiveness of sins, and to baptize with the Holy Ghost. This truth
John confesses, I baptize with water, but one comes after me, who is
mightier then I, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost. Where we see, he
makes a flat opposition between himself and Christ, between his baptism
and the baptism of Christ. As on the one side we must take heed of the
contempt of him that teaches and ministers the Sacraments, because the
contempt of the word and Sacraments does necessarily follow the contempt of his
person: so we must beware we attribute or give not to him more the^ his right,
lest the power of the word and force of the Sacraments be attributed to his
person, whereby men rob God of his glory, and spoil themselves of the fruit
of them both. This was it wherein the 1 Cor. 1, 22.
Corinthians offended, when they said, I am Paul's, I am Apollos, I am Cephas, I
am Christ's. Wherefore to keep a golden mean between too much and too little,
we must do as if a Prince should send us some present by one of the meanest
messengers of his house, we would receive him favorably and entertain him
honorably for the gifts sake which he brings unto us: but the gift it
self we would receive for the Kings sake, from whom it was sent: So it
becomes every one of us to do, God has committed to his messengers and
Ministers the word of reconciliation, we must have them in singular love for
their works sake that labor among us, but the word and Sacraments we must
receive for the Lords sake from who^ they come. Thus much of the first outward
part, to wit, the Minister.

CHAP. V. Of the second outward part of a Sacrament.
THe second outward part of a Sacrament The word of institution, a necessary
part of the Sacrament.
is the word, necessarily required to the substance of a Sacrament: for August
in Ioh. 13. Tract. 18.
the word is added and joined to the element, and there is made a Sacrament.
This sacramental word, is the word of institution, which God in each Sacrament
has after a special manner set down; consisting partly of a commandment by
which Christ appoints the administration of Sacraments, and partly of a
promise annexed, whereby God ordains that the outward elements shall be
instruments and seals of his graces; as for example, when Christ says, Mat.
28, 19.
Go teach all Nations and baptize them, there is a commandment to warrant the
use and practice of Baptism: the promise likewise is in the next words, Into
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. So touching
the other Sacrament of his supper, when he says, Mat. 26, 26.27.
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, do this in remembrance of me, lo, there is the
commandment, commanding the continual use thereof until the second coming of
Christ. The promise is, This is my body which is given for you, this is my
blood of the new Testament shed for you and for many for remission of sins.
Whatsoever signs of holy things God gave to strengthen the faith of his
children, we may see and discern that God always added the word to the seal,
the voice to the sign, and doctrine to the sight, so that when the sign was
seen, the word was heard. When one of the Seraphins, bearing an hot coal in
his hand which he had taken from the alter, Esa. 6, 6, 7.
touched the mouth of the Prophet, he said, Lo, this has touched thy lips,
and thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sins shall be purged. Now, we
know a coal has not power and force to take away sin, but the word uttered
by the Angel did assure him that he should be purged by the Holy Ghost, which
was signified by the fire. So when Jeremy saw the rod of an Almond tree, the
Lord said unto him, Thou have well seen, for I will hasten my word to
perform it. He joins the sign with the word for a more ample confirmation,
signifying by the rod of almond (which first buddeth) the hastye coming of the
Babylonians against the Jews.

Again, when Christ gave to his Disciples the Holy Ghost, he breathed on them
and said, John 20, 22.
Receive the Holy Ghost. The corporal blast and breathing was not the
Holy Ghost, but he added his word and promise with the outward sign, to assure
them that with the breathing he bestowed a blessing. Thus we see, that the
Sacraments have the word always joined with them: and without the word,
whereby their institution and use is declared, they are as a dead body without
life, as a dumb show without voice, as an empty cloud without water, and as a
barren tree without fruit.

Let us apply this doctrine to our selves. First it teaches, that they partake
not the Sacraments aright, that have not the knowledge of the word, that are
ignorant both of the ordinance and institution of God, and of the promise
annexed to the institution of God: of which sort there are many in the world,
that never labor to know what he has appointed and commanded them to do. If
they do as others of the Church do, therein they rest and seek no further to
be able to warrant their own work. If they hear the word spoken, if they see
the body washed, the bread broken and the wine poured out, and receive the
outward signs, they regard no more, they go no higher, they imagine that they
have done enough, Understanding of the institution, required of all.
they never desire to understand the meaning of the words which are necessary
to be known, comfortable to be understood, and profitable to be marked. If a
man have goods befallen, or legacies bequeathed unto him by any will or
Testament, will he not resort to his learned counsel, to be careful to
understand the Testament, and know the meaning of the Testator? Christ Jesus
before his death made his will, he has made his children heirs of his
promise, he promises to them forgiveness of sins in this life, and
eternal life in the world to come. Does it not now behooue every faithful
Christian to search into it, and know what is promised and bequeathed unto him?
Men of this world for the most part make their eldest and first borne heir of
all, and leave little to the other: but every child of God is as the eldest
and as the Exodus 4, 22.
first borne most dear to him, he shall receive his double portion, the second
shall have no less then the first, nor the third less then the second, nor
the younger then the elder, the first shall be as the last, and the last as the
first, for he may do with his own what he list. Again, if a man do leave
all his sons heirs and rich inheritors, for the most part less is bestowed
on the daughters: but all the children of God, both his sons and daughters
Romans 8, 17. Gal. 4, 7.
shall be heirs, even the Heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ Jesus,
their share shall be as great as the portion of Sons. Moreover when a man has
passed all the days of his life in carke and care, what can he give to his
posterity but earthly riches, and a transitory possession, a fading
inheritance, leaving the^ inheritors as well of his sorrow as of his substance?
It is not so with the children of God. Christ by his last will and Testament
has promised to make his people sound in faith, rich in hope, blessed in the
pardon of their sins, and heirs of the kingdom which he has promised to
them that love him. This is a great and unspeakable comfort to all Gods
children, whether high or low, whether rich or poor. So then we ought to be
much more careful and earnest to know thoroughly and understand perfectly the
will of Christ, then any natural child is to search the meaning of the will of
his natural father. And if men were not wholly carnal, they would be thus far
spiritually minded.

Again, is the word an outward part of the Sacrament? Noah and al his
posterity the Genesis 9, 11.
Rainbow immediately after the flood as a sign of his covenant, he adds
his word unto the sign, My covenant will I establish with you, that from
henceforth all flesh shall not be rooted out by the waters of the flood,
neither shall there be a flood to destroy the earth any more. This is it the
Apostle means, 1. Cor. 11. Ye show the Lords death till he come. Where he
teaches, that the Lords Supper cannot be truly delivered and rightly
administered, unless there be a declaration and showing forth of the death of
Christ. Wherefore it is no Sacrament except the word and doctrine be joined
unto it, by way of explication and exposition of the outward sign.

Lastly, those Sacraments are proved hereby to be no is the outward Element
but a bare sign? What is the water in baptism but common water? What is the
bread in the Lords Supper but common bread? What is the wine but common wine,
such as men use, and all men may take at their ordinary tables? Seeing
therefore such signs and Sacraments as have not Gods commandment for their
institution: nor promise of grace and salvation annexed unto the using of them,
are void and nothing worth: hereby the imagined and devised Sacraments of the
Church of Rome are condemned, which delivers that it has not received of the
Lord, and imposes that to be believed which it never learned in the word.
Hereby the last annoyling or extreme unction is excluded, wanting the word to
warrant the continual practice of it. Also their confirmation has neither
word to institute the practice, nor element to assure any grace, nor promise
to approve any use. True it is, they have words to administer it, but they are
words of men, not of God; unwritten, not written: of tradition, not of
Scripture. The like might be said of marriage, though we confess and
acknowledge it to be an holy ordinance and Heb. 13, 4.
honorable institution of God, yet was it made no Sacrament, having no word of
institution, no promise of sanctification and salvation annexed unto all the
faishfull users thereof: neither is it an instrument, whereby God applies
Christ and his saving benefits to the comfort and consolation of his children.
Wherefore to conclude this point we affirm, that neither the sons of
Romulus at Rome, nor of Remus at Rhemes shall ever be able to show and prove,
that they are to be acknowledged and received as Sacraments of the church which
have no warrant of the word to command them, nor promise annexed to assure the
saving graces of Christ to the worthy receivers of them. But such are their
five pretended Sacraments of confirmation, penance, orders, matrimony, and
extreme unction, wanting either the word, or promise, or both: and therefore
we cannot receive, we cannot acknowledge, we cannot believe them. Thus much of
the second outward part, namely, the word of institution.

CHAP. VI. Of the third outward part of a Sacrament.
THe third outward part of a Sacrament is the The sign is an outward part of
the Sacrament.
element or outward sign. For wheresoever there is a Sacrament, there must of
necessity be a sign, such as water is in baptism, and bread and wine in the
Lords supper, not of their own nature, but by the ordinance of God, which are
sanctified by the especial word and prayer. Therefore, John the Baptist
baptized with water: and Christ when he instituted his last Supper, took bread
and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples: Likewise he took the cup, wherein
was the fruit of the Vine, as appears when he Mar. 14, 25.
said, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, until that day that I
drink it new in the kingdom of God.

Seeing then it is clear, there must in every Sacrament be a visible sign
that may be seen and handled, let us see how we may profitably apply this to
our instruction. First, seeing the signs and Sacramental rites are outward
parts: we must take heed we ascribe not too much to the outward sign, and so
commit idolatry to the creature. For the Water in Baptism has not power in it
self and force to wash away sin, but by the ordinance of God it is made a
sign and seal of regeneration. Even as the water of Jordan where John
baptized, was no better then the waters of others places and Countries, neither
had any strength and virtue to cleanse the Leapars that washed in it: yet by
the blessing of God, Naaman the Syrian 2 King 5, 12 14.
washing himself seven times therein, according to the direction of the
Prophet, was cleansed and healed of his leaprosie: So the water used in the
Sacrament of baptism, is in nature and substance the same with ordinary and
common water, neither has it vigor and virtue to cleanse the soul, yet by the
institution of God it is appointed to seal up the assurance of remission of
sins.

Notwithstanding, this confidence in the outward sign, which in it self is as
nothing, has since the fall of man rested and remained in his corrupt nature,
flattering himself and deceiving his own soul. This fond and false opinion
was in Adam immediately after his transgressio^; he did attribute too much to
the tree of life (which had in it self no more life then the rest of the trees
in the garden) and therefore God would thrust him out of the garden, Genesis 3, 22.
least he should beguile himself with that conceit and imagination.

Thus did the Israelites trust too much in the Arc, a sign of Gods
comfortable presence and protection, attributing salvation thereunto, saying, 1 Samuel 4, 3.
It may save us out of the hands of our enemies, therefore God overthrew them,
and gave them into the hands of the Philistims. The like we might say of their
circumcision, they gloried much of it, and rested altogether in it, and thought
themselves wholly discharged by it, howsoever they lived, and whatsoever they
practiced. This is the common error of the ignorant people, they imagine they
have done God good service, and sufficiently discharged their duty, when they
have been at the Communion, albeit they know not what they have received, nor
how it is to be received, albeit they know not nor understand the meaning of
the institution, nor to what end it was ordained. If they can say, Lord, we
have eat and drunk in thy presence, we have been at thine own Table, we
have sit down with thee as thy guests, we have been partakers of thy Supper;
they bless themselves in their own ignorance, and think themselves as sound
Christians as any that live in the Church. Thus do these silly souls deceive
themselves, and instead of the comfort of the Spirit, they heap upon
themselves further damnation: if they see any wilfully abstain and and sent
themselves from communicating and coming to the Sacraments, they are ready to
condemn them and cry out against them, and pronounce sentence upon them:
howbeit they never consider their own ways, that it were better never to
receive the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, then to receive ignorantly,
brutishly, and unworthily, forasmuch as they are guilty of the body and blood
of Christ. Not that any should be nourished or encouraged in their wilful
recusancy, but that al persons should learn to know what they do, and
whereabout they go, and wherefore they do receive, and so walk in the light
as children of the light, and thereby find comfort and rest in their own
hearts.

Again, we are taught hereby, that they are no Sacraments Transubsta^tiation
overthrown.
whatsoever overthrows the nature and use of a Sacrament, is not to be
admitted but omitted, neither to be received but rejected. But
transubstantiation overthrows and ouerturneth both the nature and use of a
Sacrament: and therefore not to be admitted and received into the Church. For
touching the nature of a Sacrament it is confessed, Iren. lib. 4. contr. haer.
cap. 34.
that it consists of two parts, the one earthly and the other heavenly: but
if after the words of consecration, the bread and wine are transubstantiated
into the body and blood of Christ, then the sign is taken away, the element is
overthrown, the material part is abolished; and consequently the nature of a
Sacrament is ouerturned. And touching the use of a Sacrament, there must be an
analogy and proportion between the sign and the thing signified. As in
Baptism the element of water washes and purges the body, so the Holy Ghost
through the blood of Christ cleanses and sanctifies the soul. Likewise in
the Lords Supper, as the Substance of bread and wine received, strengthens
and comfort the body: so Christ Ioh. 6, 33.
received by faith nourishes and feeds the soul. The very true principal
use of this Sacrament is to confirm our faith, that as surely as those earthly
creatures taken and applied, feed our bodies to a bodily life: so the body and
blood of Christ received and applied by faith, feed our souls to eternal
life. And do not all the faithful feel a sweet comfort, so often as they
come to the Lords table by this similitude and agreement, to consider and know
assuredly, that as the substance of bread serves to nourish and does feed our
bodies, so Christ does feed our souls? But if we must believe, that the
substance of bread and wine is changed and clean gone, that nothing remains
but accidents: where is this comfort and consolation? How can we be assured
and strengthened, that as our bodies are nourished with the material elements,
so in like manner our souls by feeding on Christ? Wherefore, while they take
away the substance of bread which should nourish the body, the nature and use
of the Sacrament is destroyed, and we are spoiled of the comfort of our hearts
and strengthening of our faith, which we should have by this notable comparison
and resemblance of the parts. So then, if we would receive comfort in coming
to this Communion, we must retain the substance of the sign, as a staff to
stay up our faith that it do not fail.

Lastly, seeing God gives unto us outward signs of his grace, it serves to
teach us, that wheresoever and among whomsoever God continues his signs, he
purposes to bestow upon them the things signified by the signs: and on the
other side, where God denies the means, he also denies the thing, and when
he takes away the sign, he takes away the grace also. This we see in the
Turks and Sarazins, because he denies unto them salvation, he takes from
them the seals and assurances of salvation: and because he refuses them to be
his Church, he vouchsafes not unto them the prerogatives and privileges of
his Church. Thus it falls out in the preaching of the word: upon those whom
God determines to save, and to bestow upon them the gift of faith, whereby
they are entered into the kingdom of heaven, he sends upon them his word and
causes it to be preached unto them: but when he will not show mercy, but leave
a people in their miserable estate and condition, he withdraws the Ministry
from them, as we see in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 16. When they were gone
throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia, They were forbidden of the holy
Ghost to preach the word in Asia: and after they were come to Mysia they
assaied to go into Bithinia, but the Spirit suffered them not. Even as when
God will bring a famine upon a land, he withholds the early and latter
rain, making the heaven to be as brass, and the earth as iron: but when he
will send plenty and open the windows of heaven, he sends a gracious rain
and showers upon the earth: so when he will send a famine, not of bread, nor a
thirst of water, but of hearing the word of God; he takes away his word and
the means of salvation, that they shall wander from sea to sea, and run to
and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it, but faint for
thirst. If any ask the question wherefore the Lord forbad Paul to preach the
word in Asia, and to come into Bythinia; we cannot assign this to be the cause
that they were unworthy to have the doctrine of salvation offered unto them,
forasmuch as they were as worthy as the Macedonians to who^ the Gospel was
preached, and no more unworthy then the other Gentiles. Neither can we say this
was the cause, that God foresaw how every one would receive or entertain the
Gospel, and that as he saw them ready and inclined to accept of the word or to
reject it, so he vouchsafed or not vouchsafed the same unto them: for he
pronounces openly, that he appeared to them of whom he was not sought, and
spoke unto them that never asked after him. Besides, this were to ground the
cause of salvation upon our selves, which is out of our selves, and to ascribe
it to our own merit, which is due only to his mercy. We are all by nature
the children of wrath, and destitute of the gift of faith: if there be any
willingness in us to obey, it proceeds from the Spirit of God, who as he
electeth freely, so he calls freely. Now that which is spoken of the
preaching of the word, may also be applied to the use of the Sacraments. When
he purposes to strengthen the faith which he has given unto us, he
vouchsafes the outward signs and seals of his promises, that thereby we
should be assured he means to bestow upon us the inward grace represented by
them. He deals justly and uprightly with us, he has no purpose to beguile
us and deceive us. For they are no bare or naked much less false and lying
signs, but effectual instruments of the Spirit to convey the mercies of God
in Jesus Christ into our hearts, and therefore we must be careful to use them
conscionably, as certain pawnes and pledges which God has commended and
committed unto us, that they might be as witnesses of his love and favor
toward us. And thus much of the third outward part, to wit, the sign.

CHAP. VII. Of the fourth outward part of a Sacrament.
THe last outward part of a Sacrament is the The receiver is an outward part of
the Sacrament.
receiver, which is as needful as the outward sign. We understand and take
here a receiver in general, for every one that comes to the Sacrament,
whether good or evil, godly or ungodly, faithful or unfaithful. Such a
receiver is likewise a necessary part of the Sacrament. For no sign has the
substance and essence of a Sacrament, unless it be received. Though there be
a Minister to administer it, a word to warrant it, a sign to represent it, yet
unless there be a fit person to receive it, there can be no Sacrament. If the
Minister should sprinkle water, and allege the words of institution where
there is no party to be baptized, this were a profaning, not a solemnizing of
Baptism: or if he should take bread and wine with prayer and thanksgiving,
where none are present to communicate and receive, this were to commit
sacrilege, not to deliver a Sacrament. Wherefore, unless there be a body to
be washed, and except there be Communicants to partake the Supper, there can
be no Sacrament. This appears by the words of God unto Abraham Genesis 17, 12.
giving unto him circumcision, saying, Every male child of eight days old
shall be circumcised. This also appears in the Mat. 28.19.
words of Christ speaking of baptism, and charging the Apostles to baptize the
nations in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Where he teaches, that it is not sufficient to take water, but there must be a
washing. So when he speaks of his Supper Mat. 26, 26, 27.
he says, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye: so that there must not only be bread,
but giving, taking, and eating: there must not only be wine, but giving,
taking, and drinking thereof.

This truth being evidently delivered, let us see how it may be profitably
applied. First of all, must the Sacraments and feeding upon it: so does the
Sacrament strengthen faith, not by reserving and keeping it, but by using and
receiving of it. For Sacraments are actions, not dumb shows. Christ said
not, Hear ye, see ye, gaze ye on, but Baptize ye, eat ye, drink ye, do ye
this in remembrance of me.

Bellar desacram. Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 2.
absurd opinion of Bellarmine, and other procters of the Romish religion, which
teach that the bread and wine being once consecrate, whether they be received
or reserved, whether they be distributed to be eaten and drunk, or whether they
be kept in boxes and vessels of the church, for days, months, and long times,
and carried solemnly in procession: are notwithstanding still the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ. Against which dotage we spoke in the former use,
and shall speak Book. 3. c. 6.
more in the third book following.

Judas in the Passover: so far went Simon that sorcerer in baptism: and so
far went Cor. 10.1, 2.3, 5.
the Israelites, as the Apostle shows. They were all baptized unto Moses in
the cloud and in the sea: they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did
all drink the same spiritual drink, etc. yet with many of them was not God
pleased, but they were overthrown in the Wilderness. And therefore John
Baptist said to the Pharisees and Saduces, when he saw them come to his
baptism, Mat. 3, 7, 8.
O generation of vipers, who has forewarnd you to flee from the anger to come?
bring forth therefore fruit worthy amendment of life. Now our righteousness
must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if we would enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Let us all therefore have this profitable
meditation, so often as we deal with the Sacraments and come unto them: we
must look further the^ to the outward sight, we must consider more then the
external sign, otherwise as we approach without preparation, so we depart
without edification. And thus much of the four outward parts of a Sacrament,
to wit, the Minister, the word, the sign, and the receiver.

CHAP. VIII. Of Consecration.
BEfore we proceed to the inward parts of a Sacrament, answerable to the
outward by a fit proportion: it shall not be amiss in this place to speak
somewhat of the Consecration of a Sacrament. First, we must consider what it
is: for the truth being known, it will cast down error, as the light
scatters the darkness. To consecrate then What consecration is.
is to take a thing from the ordinary and common use, and to appoint it to some
holy use. This therefore is consecration, sanctification, and dedication of
the outward signs, to apply them unto an holy purpose. This is done, partly by
the Minister, partly by the people, and partly by them both. The Minister
takes the water in Baptism, which signifies the blood of Christ, and he
pours it on the person of the baptized: he takes the bread and wine and
pours it out, he delivers them both: the people take and receive, they eat
and drink in remembrance of Christ: and both Minister and people join in
prayer and thanksgiving unto God the Father for the mystery of our redemption
accomplished by Christ our Savior, so that the Sacrament is consecrated by the
whole action of the Minister and people together. This makes the difference
between common water and the water in Baptism: this makes the difference
between that bread and wine of the Supper, and the bread and wine which is
used for ordinary meat and drink. True it is, in nature, in essence, in
substance there is none: but in the end and use. Common water we use for the
washing of our bodies: but the water in Baptism is sanctified by prayer to
another use, to be a sign of the cleansing of the soul. Bread and wine at
men's tables in their houses are set before them for the nourishment of their
bodies: but at the Lords Table they are ordained of God to an higher and holier
use, even to be signs of the body and blood of Christ. This is noted by the
Evangelists and by the Apostle Paul, that Mat. 26, 26. Mar. 14, 22. Luke 12,
19. 1 Cor. 11, 24.
the Lord Jesus before he brake the bread and gave it, he blessed and gave
thanks to his Father, that he had appointed him to be the redeemer of the
world, and given him authority to institute this Sacrament in remembrance of
his death and passion. For whereas the Evangelist Matthew says, he blessed: the
other by way of exposition say He gave thanks: so that the blessing here
spoken of, is Giving of thanks, which also appears, Luke 9, 16. compared
with Ioh. 6, 11. And the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 4.
Every creature of God is good, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. We see then that Consecration is,
when a thing is separated from a common and civil use to a more special use,
Justin. in Apol. 2
which is done by the authority of the word, and by the virtue of prayer,
whereby it has his full force, power, and virtue.

The knowledge of this point, serves to clear our Rome. First, it shows
that we hold and teach a consecration, that is, a sanctifying of the water in
Baptism, and of the bread and wine in the Lords supper, by the word, by
prayer, and by thanksgiving. The bread ^^d wine are changed, not in nature, but
in quality: not in substance, but in use: not in essence, but in the end: not
by force of certain words, but by Christ's institution. We acknowledge and
confess a consecration, not a conversion: a sanctification of the signs, not
a transubstantiation of the substance into the body and blood of Christ. He
blessed and praised his Father as Mediator of the Church, for the mystery of
the redemption of mankind: and he 1 Cor. 10, 16
blessed the creatures, that they might be effectual signs, and serve for
the confirmation and increase of our faith.

Secondly, we are taught, that consecration is not a bare and historical
reading of the Scripture, neither a magical This is my body, being murmured and
spoken over the bread, and, This cup is the new testament in my blood,
whispered over the wine, did fully finish a consecration, and made the elements
to be immediately changed into the body and blood of Christ, without any other
observing of the institution. For the Lord Jesus in pronouncing these words did
not speak to the bread or to the wine, but to his Apostles.

And hence it is, that the form of Christ's giving of thanks is not set down
by any Evangelist, because our corruption and superstition is so great, that if
we had the words, we would ascribe power and force to the words, sillables,
and letters, and therefore the manner of his thanksgiving is pretermitted. This
inclination of the heart is apparently seen in the Romish Church, who ascribe
efficacy and operation to the pronouncing of certain words, which is a part of
sorcery and a point of witchcraft. Whereas we avouch, that the whole action of
taking, breaking, pouring out, distributing, eating, drinking, praying,
praising, and rehearsing the institution of Christ, are the consecration, that
is, the separation of these creatures to this use.

Thirdly, if after the Sacramental actions, if after thanksgiving to God, if
after prayer that we may use the Creatures to the confirmation of our faith,
there do follow consecration, sanctification, and change of the elements to
another use: then the power, effect, and working of the Sacrament depends not
upon the intention of the Minister: and therefore the Council. Trident. sess. 7.
can. 11.
popish opinion is to be refused and reproved, that holds it to be no
Sacrament, if the Minister have not an intent and purpose in the administration
thereof, at least to do that which the church does, that is, to consecrate the
elements and to make a Sacrament. If his mind be not on his matters, and his
heart on his business in hand, they hold it can be no Sacrament. For
otherwise says Bellarmine, If a Priest should read the Gospel at the table
of Prelates and religious men, and in reading should pronounce these words,
This is my body, this is my blood, then all the bread and wine upon the Table
should be consecrate and changed into Christ's body and blood: which is not so,
because his intent is wanting. Again, if a father should lead his son to the
bath, and there dip him in the water, And say, I wash thee in the name of the
Father, and though he think nothing of baptizing him, yet it should be
baptism, if an intent of baptizing were not required. But I would gladly have
him answer this question: What if a father should intend Baptism by dipping
his child in the bath, whether that were baptism or not? Or suppose the Priest
we spoke of, reading at the Prelates table, should have a mind and meaning to
consecrate all the bread and wine upon the table, must it of necessity be a
Sacrament, and real change of al? Or admit the former Priest being in the
said Prelates wine celler, supposing himself to be in the Church and to
stand at the Altar, should pronounce the words of consecration with a purpose
and intent to make a Sacrament, should all the wine in that celler be turned
into the blood of Christ? Or if he being in a Bakers shop should there
solemnly say, This is my body, with the foresaid resolution should all that
bread be changed into the body of Christ? Let them speak plainly, let them
tell us directly what they hold. I think they will not say so: I am sure it is
not so. For other things are wanting, that are needful in this matter. We have
showed, that a Sacrament is not made by bare pronouncing of certain words,
ascribing force to them after the manner of enchanters, but the whole
institution of Christ must be observed; The Sacrament depends not upon the
intention of the Minister.
there must be distributing and receiving, there must be prayer and
thanksgiving, and from the use of these follows Consecration: all which are
wanting in the former examples and suppositions, there is no taking, no
breaking, no distributing, no pouring out, no receiving, no praying, no
thanksgiving. We see touching the word of God, with what intent and under what
pretense soever Phil. 1, 18. Mat. 23, 2, 3.
it be preached, if the Minister teach Christ crucified, howsoever he be
affected, it may have his effect in the heart, and work faith in the hearer:
so is it in the Sacraments, they have their efficacy and operation howsoever
the heart of the Minister be disposed. And as Isaac intended not to bless
Jacob but Esau, Genesis 27, 1, 4, 33.
yet it hindered not the purpose and determination of God: so the corrupt
intent, the wandering imagination, and rouing conceit of the Minister, cannot
hinder the blessing of God in the Sacraments, being his own ordinances. For
the force of the Sacrament depends no more upon the intention of the giver,
then it does upon the intention of the receiver. Again, if the right receiving
of the Sacrament depend upon the intent of the Minister, what assurance can any
man have, that he has ever received or shall ever receive a Sacrament? What
persuasion can we have in our hearts that we were ever baptized? What
knowledge that we were ever partakers of the body and blood of Christ in the
Supper of the Lord? Does not this leave us uncertain and unsettled, without
comfort, without fruit, without benefit by coming to the Sacraments, and
sets the poor distressed consciences of men upon the rack? Alas, we cannot
know the heart 1 Cor. 2, 11.
and understand the intents thereof, For what man knows the things of a man,
save the spirit of man which is within him? Furthermore, were not this hard
dealing and extreme cruelty in God, to hang the salvation of men upon the
pleasure of the Minister, whereby our faith and salvation shall always be
doubtful? and should it not be unjust in God, to make the evil of the Minister
to hurt the receiver? Besides, shall it rest in the power of the Priest, (if
this be a power) when the people of God are Mat. 18.
gathered together in the name of Christ, and long earnestly to be satisfied
with his grace, to send them away empty, and so to frustrate their assembly,
because his heart is straying, and his wits a wool-gathering? And if his
intention be a matter of so great importance, what privilege has the receiver
that comes with faith, above him that comes without feeling? Or what shall
become of their own doctrine, Ex opere operato. Ex opere operantis.
that the Sacrament profits and is available, being barely done and
performed, if it depend upon the working and operation of the Sacrificer? To
draw to an end of this question, Bellar. lib. 1. de sacra. c. 28.
our adversaries themselves confess, that the Church cannot judge of things
that are inward: whereupon we frame this reason; If the Church cannot judge of
things inward, then it cannot judge of the intent of the Minister: but they
confess it cannot judge of inward things, therefore not of the intent of the
Minister, and consequently although they be present at the action, they remain
doubtful of consecration. Wherefore, Bellarmine foreseeing the inconvenience
and absurdity of this unreasonable and uncomfortable assertion, confesses that
if one of their Mass Priests in his ministration, Bellar. lib. 1. de sacra.
ca. 27.
intend to do as the Church of Geneua does, it suffices to make a Sacrament
effectual and of force, This is the confession of a known and sworn enemy:
Whereby we see, that howsoever they say we have no Ministers, no ordination, no
consecration, no Church, that our Sacraments are no better then the feasts of
Ceres and Bacchus, and lay many false accusations to our charge, that the
Supper of the Lord with us is no Sacrament, but a bare sign without grace,
without effect, without virtue: yet they are constrained to confess and yield
thus far, that if a Masse-munger purpose to do as the reformed Churches do,
his doing is effectual, and the Sacrament is good. The effect of this point is
this, that if we desire to be comforted and assured of Gods favor when we come
to his Supper, we must not hang the profit of his ordinances upon the weak and
unstable foundation of Popish intentions. And if there were no other point in
controversy between the Church of Rome and us then this which now we have in
hand, it were sufficient to make us abhor and abjure the Popish religion: in
which they that live, cannot assure themselves whether ever they were baptized,
or received the Lords Supper, or were married, or absolved of their sins,
whether they have any Sacraments, any Priests, or any Popes; forasmuch as all
these hang upon the slender thread of the Priests intention. The Apostle says,
Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. But they cannot directly
prove or know, whether the Priest going about his business, intended to
baptize the^, or to deliver the Eucharist unto them, or to marry them, because
they know not his heart: and therefore in their adoration and worshipping of
the Sacrament, they may be Idolators, and cannot secure themselves from fear
of committing Idolatry. For if the substance of bread and wine remain in their
nature, it follows by necessary consequence, that they fall down to a piece
of bread, and commit grievous Idolatry in the grossest kind, whereof the
Gentiles would be ashamed. The like might be said of their Sacrament of
Orders. It is not to be proved or known, that he which ordered the Pope had
an intention to give him Orders. They say it is an high point of faith, to
believe that the Bishop of Rome is the successor of Peter, the Vicar of Christ,
and the head of the Church: yet if the Priest that baptized the Pope had no
intention to baptize him, then is he no member of the Church, much less the
head of it: and if he that ordained him had no intention to ordain him, then
is he no Priest, much less the high Priest: and therefore they must rest
altogether doubtful and uncertain, whether Clement or Paul, or any other
sitting in the Popes Chair and sea of Rome be true Pope; and thereupon cannot
assure themselves, whether the Decretals which pass under the name of Popes,
were indeed their Decretals whose names they carry. Popish shifts to justify
the Priests intention.
True it is, notwithstanding the grossness of this assertion, they have
invented sundry shifts to cover their own shame and nakedness: but they are
as figge-leaues which are easily pulled away. Among the rest two are most
principal, which do not suffice to heal the wound, but serve rather to make
it wider. First of all, when they are urged and pressed, that the Priests
purpose and intention makes the people always in doubt, and leaves them in a
maze and mammering what they do; so that they oftentimes adore an
unconsecrated Host, and call that God which is no God, but a bare bit of bread:
Pope Adrian will have the Host adored with condition, and with a secret
reservation to himself, I adore thee if thou be Christ. And therefore Thomas
of Salisbury forbids a man precisely to believe that it is the body of the
Lord. Thus though they fall down with great devotion at the elevation of their
God amight, yet all their adoration is made at hap-hazard, so that we may say
to them as Christ does of the Samaritans, Ioh. 4. Ye worship that which ye know
not. For seeing their worship, to make it warrantable, must be joined with an
[if] If it be Christ, it makes them always in doubt; and where doubting is,
there is no faith; and where no faith is, there is sin, as we noted before,
according to the doctrine of the Apostle James; Ask in faith, and waver not.

The second shift is set abroach by Bellarmine, (which we touched before) that
it suffices, if he intend to make no more then that which the Church makes:
and to draw out the Spiders web as long and large as he can, he says, It is
not needful for the Priest to do that which the Church of Rome does, but it
shall suffice, if his intention be to do that which the Church of Geneua does.
But this is a poor beggarly shift, that cannot help him: both because he will
have it to suffice to work this strange feate of transubstantiation, to do
that which is done out of the Church, by schismatics, by heretics, and by
Infidels: For such he accounts those that are of the Church of Geneua; he
acknowledges them to be no Church, because they are not subject to the Bishop
of Rome, neither submit themselves to his authority and jurisdiction. And
again, because the Church of Geneua has an intendment not to make the body of
Christ in their consecration, so that their intention is not to intend it. Thus
we see what silly stuff they bring. But as they that are in danger of
drowning, are ready to catch hold of every rush or reed to see if they can
save themselves: so do these Jesuits, or else they would never teach so
strangely touching the Priests intention, that it suffices to make the body
of Christ, to have an intent not to make it. O miserable people led by such
blind guides! O wretched guides of such blind people! what a woeful condition
is this, that a man shall live all the days of his life in the bosom of their
holy mother the Church, and yet her Sons and daughters can never assure
themselves to have been baptized, (though they make the want of it a note of
reprobation) or ever to have received the Lords Supper, or to have been
married, which also they make a Sacrament, seeing all depends upon the
Priests intention and lawful ordination? This is the lamentable condition of
all those that live under the hard yoke and heavy bondage of superstition.
There is no peace nor comfort in such a doubfull and doleful religion.
Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, Revel. 18, 4. Go out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
Thus much of Consecration.

CHAP. IX. Of the first inward part of a Sacrament.
THe outward parts of a Sacrament have hitherto been declared, by a diligent
performance whereof Consecration is performed: now the inward parts follow to
be considered, and handled of us, in which the very soul and life of the
Sacraments consists. For the outward parts profit nothing without these, as
the word profits nothing, except the inward and true husbandman give the
increase; according to the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 3, 7.
He that planteth and he that waters is nothing; but God that gives the
increase: so the force of the Sacraments is to be looked for, from the Creator
that did institute them. Peter says, 1 Pet. 3, 21.
Baptism does save us, but he adds, not Whereby the filth of the flesh is
washed away, but in that a good conscience makes request to God. As the
Apostle Paul teaches, that 1 Timothy 4.8.
Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable to all things:
so the outward sign profits little, but the inward parts being applied and
received, are profitable to all things.

Behold the creatures which God uses, as instruments of his mercy toward us,
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, fire, water, herbs, and such like: we ought
not to put any confidence in them, nor admire them as first and chief causes
of any benefits. So our trust ought not to be in the outward signs though
ordained of God as holy helps unto us (which were to convey his glory to them)
but our faith must be lifted up to God being the author of the Sacraments,
and the creator of all things. The inward parts of a Sacrament are such
invisible and heavenly things as are signified under the earthly and outward
parts. We heard before, the outward parts of a Sacrament to be these, the
Minister, the word, the sign, and the receiver: so the inward are What are the
inward and invisible parts of a Sacrament
four in number, answerable to the outward, to wit, 1. God the Father:
Secondly, the Spirit. 3. Christ. 4. the faithful. Now there is a notable
proportion and worthy agreement between the outward and the inward parts, The
proportion between the parts.
these resembling each other, as one face answers another in the waters. For
even as the Minister by the word, offers and applies visibly the outward
element and sign to the body of the receiver: So GOD the Father, by the
Spirit, offers and applies JESUS CHRIST inuisibly to the faithful
receiver. This is the resemblance and likeness between the external and
internal parts: whereby we see, that God the Father is represented by the
Minister: the Spirit, by the word: Christ, by the outward element: and the
faithful receiver by the outward receiving. This conueniency between the
sign and thing signified, does S. Augustine notably deliver in his 23.
Epistle, when he says, If the Sacraments should not have some similitude of
those things whereof they are Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at all:
for of that resemblance, many times they take the names of those things whereof
they are signs. Thus was it in the Paschall Lamb, represe^ting Jesus Christ
unto us in a lively figure, Ovid de Fast. lib. 1. Quid placidae Commeru^stis
oues?
not only by reason of the innocence of this creature, but especially in that
it was slain by the Priest, and eaten by the faithful, to signify and seal
up the death of Christ, the unspotted Lamb, the only nourishment of our
souls.

The first inward part is God the The first inward part of a Sacrament is God
the Father,
Father, offering and applying Christ and his saving graces to the faithful.
The Minister offers and delivers the outward signs to the receivers, and
can go no further: herein he represents God the Father, who offers Christ
to all, albeit the reprobate receive him not. He does not dally and deal
falsely with us, but truly offers in the Sacraments Christ with all his
gifts and benefits, if we have hands to receive him, he is given to us.

The use of this doctrine is, first of al to distinguish between God and the
Minister: the outward signs are given by the hands of the Minister, whether he
be good or evil, but the truth and substance of the Sacraments is given by God
the Father. Whosoever confounds these parts and works, robs God of his
glory, depriueth himself of the grace of Christ offered, and makes flesh his
arm. Wherefore, as the works of God and of the Minister are distinct, so must
these parts remain distinguished, howsoever to the faithful they are not
separated and sundred, as in the publishing and preaching of the Gospel, the
Minister speaks unto the outward man, and the sound thereof enters into the
ear, Act. 16, 14.
but it is God that opens the heart, and speaks to the conscience of the
faithful hearer.

Secondly, it serves to strengthen our faith and help John 6, 32.
sealed up his Son unto us. My Father gives you that bread from Heaven. He
will as surely give Christ, as the Minister delivers the bread and wine.
Albeit the Sacraments should be ministered by some hypocrite and wicked man: yet
they have as much force and as great efficacy, as if they were ministered by
faithful and godly men. The virtue of the Sacraments hangs upon the Minister
no more, then the goodness of seed depends upon the sower: which if it
light in good ground, will bring forth plentiful fruit, albeit it be sown of
an ungodly and unskillful man.

Thirdly, consider here the difference between a Sacrament and a Sacrifice.
For we learn from Leuit. 16, 5.
For the Sacrifices were burned in part or in whole with fire, to note out the
purity of Christ's Sacrifice, and the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9, 14.
by which he was offered to God: whereas they were properly called by name of
Sacraments, which were eaten or applied to the body; and therefore altar was
appointed for the Sacrifices, but a Table for the Sacraments that were eaten.

CHAP. X. Of the second inward part of a Sacrament
HItherto of the first inward part: The second part of a Sacrament is the holy
Spirit.
the second inward part of a Sacrament is the holy Spirit, as Math. 3. He
shall baptize you Mat. 3, 11.
with the Holy Ghost and fire. So in Christ's Baptism, when he was baptized and
prayed, the Luke 3, 22.
Holy Ghost descended in a visible shape like a Dove upon him. And Paul says,
1 Cor. 12.13
By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Graecians, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into
one Spirit. And the Apostle lays down the circumcision of the heart by the
Spirit: Romans 2, 29.
He is a Jew which is one within, and the circumcision is of the heart in the
Spirit. So the same Apostle, Titus 3, 5, 6. According to the mercy of God he
saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost
which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. Nothing can
be fruitful and profitable without his gracious work in us, he works and
setleth the word of promise in our hearts, and therefore we must necessarily
hold the blessed Spirit to be an inward part of the Sacrament, making it and
all other ordinances of God available.

After that ye believed, Ephesians. 1, 13.
ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise? Then as often as we hear the
promise uttered by the Minister, it confirms us that the Father by his Spirit
works the same in our hearts. The water in baptism, cannot by any force and
virtue inherent in it, wash our consciences from dead works to serve the
living God, as it has power to wash away the filth and corruption of our
bodies. The bread and wine in the Lords Supper have no inherent strength to
nourish the soul to eternal life, as they have to strengthen the body: they
are instruments of the Holy Ghost, who works by them to the great comfort of
the faithful. Grace is not contained and shut up in them, as water in a
vessel, or as a medicine in a box: the Spirit helps our infirmities,
sealing up to our consciences the fruit of the word that is heard, and of the
Sacramental signs that are seen.

But because this doctrine is contradicted by the defenders of the Popish
faith, it shall not be amiss briefly to propound their chiefest objections
whereby they would prove that the outward signs in the Sacraments have force
and power to save and justify sinners (howsoever the persons be disposed that
partake them) and then to frame short answers to every one of them. For what
needed this inward part of the Sacraments, to wit, the working of the holy
Ghost, if the outward washing were effectual to save and to sanctify the
souls of all them that are baptized? Grace is not tied to the Sacraments.
And if these graces were so tied to the Sacraments that al which use them
should be justified by them, we make the^ more effectual then the word of God
it self is; forasmuch as all that hear the word are not saved by it, nor
transformed into the obedience of it, nor receive life from it, nor are
regenerated by it. John the Baptist, who was the first Minister of that
Sacrament, confesses that he could do no more then wash the body, it lay not
in his power to give grace and to baptize with the Holy Ghost. Besides, we see
all in our days are brought to be baptized, but all these are not by it
regenerated: Acts 8, 13.
as in the Apostles times Simon himself was baptized, yet he remained an
hypocrite, and was destitute of true faith that joins us to Christ. But
because we have handled this point before, let us come to such objections as
the adversaries have made and mustered together, Bellar. de Sacra. lib. 2, cap.
4.
which are taken partly from types and figures, and partly from places of
Scripture wrested from their true and natural meaning. Touching the types
borrowed, some from the old and some from the new Testament, albeit it were
sufficient to make this general answer, that similitudes, parables, and
comparisons do not prove; yet least we should seem thereby to turn our backs
and yield to the enemy, I will not stick to propound them in particular, and
vouchsafe to yield unto them a particular solution.

The Spirit moved upon the waters to make them fruitful. As then the water
received a certain lively force from the Spirit to bring forth the creatures,
so does baptism to make us new men receive strength from the Spirit. Thus
does Bellarmine reason. I answer, ex opere operato, that is, by the force and
virtue of the work done, and that words uttered have no power but by the Holy
Ghost. For as the Spirit gave force to the waters whereby the creatures were
fostered and formed, which were not of themselves auailable to give life, being
as it were dead, and without any vigor: even so the Spirit makes the water in
baptism serve to signify and seal up our regeneration, and not the bare and
outward element. The body of man without the soul is dead and without life:
so the water without the Spirit cannot confer grace. It is the Spirit that
quickneth, without it the water is as common water.

Egyptians in the red sea, Exodus 14. and the passing of the Israelites
through the River Jordan to the land of promise, Joshua 4. where it appears,
that the waters themselves saved his people. I answer, Noah had believed that
the waters could of themselves have saved him, he should have set up an altar
as a monument to the waters, and not builded one to God the Lord, Genesis
eight, verse 20. But the Scripture ascribes all to the mercy and clemency of
God toward that remnant and remainder of mankind, because he had seen Noah
righteous and religious in that generation before him, Genesis 7, verse 1.
Therefore it is said he found grace in the sight of the Lord, Genesis 6, verse
18. That the Lord stablished his covenant with him, Genesis 6, verse 18. That
the Lord had him enter with all his household into the Arc, Genesis 7. verse
1. That the Lord shut him in the Arc when he was entered, Genesis 7, verse 16.
That the Lord remembered him while he was in the Arc, Genesis 8. verse 1. And
after the ceasing and decreasing of the waters, brought him out of the Arc,
Genesis 8, verse 16. So that whereas the waters had of their own nature
overwhelmed them, even the proud waters had gone over their soul to have
drowned them, God in mercy saved them, that they might ascribe the praise of
their preservation to the Lord of Hoasts, not to the power of the waters And if
the Israelites had been delivered at the red sea, and in passing over Jordan
by the strength of the waters, they would have erected a trophee to them, and
not have sung a song unto God.

Another type is taken from Circumcision, Genesis 17. Paul speaks, Colosians
2. Ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, in putting off the
body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him
in baptism; and Baptism then is like unto circumcision: but circumcision that
is outward did truly and effectually cut off the flesh, and was not only a
testimony of cutting it away.

I answer, Rhem. on Heb. 10.
remission, and justification, that they were but shadows, obscurely
representing the graces of the new Testament? How can they reconcile
themselves, when they make this difference between the old and new Sacraments,
that the old did only signify, the new contain and confer grace and
sanctification? Thirdly, if the outward cutting off the flesh, did by the work
done give grace, and that the sign were not to be separated from the thing
signified, how comes it to pass that Ismael being circumcised as well as
Isaac, and Esau circumcised as well as Jacob, yet one being borne after the
flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit, Genesis 21. Galathians
4.29. the other was not beloved of God, neither had grace given unto him, as
the Scripture says, Rom, 9, 13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated?
Lastly, the outward circumcision that is in the flesh, may be out of the
Church and received of them that are no members of the Church; as it was of the
Idumeans, Ismaelites, Samaritans, and such as were strangers from the covenant,
as also the Turks and Sarazins receive it in our days. So is it with
baptism, it does not bring us justification by the outward work done, but
sometimes it may go before the sign, and sometimes follow after. The like
might be said touching Manna given unto the Israelites, Exodus 16. and the water
of separation, Number. 19. We may join all these together, because the force of
them is alike, and therefore the answer to the one is an answer to the other.

The next type is touching the cleansing of Naaman the Syrian, by washing
seven times in Jordan, 2. Kings 5. as then those waters did truly heal him,
so the water in baptism does heal the soul and justify the sinner. I
answer, Damascus. 2 Kings 5, 12.
And therefore Naaman being cleansed did not magnify the strength of that
water above all other Rivers in other regions, but the great mercy of God
toward him, and promised he would worship no other God but the God of Israel.

The next type is from the poole of Bethesda John 5. Siloam, wherewith the
blind man is commanded to wash, John 9. I answer,

Again, if this power had been natural and inseparably tied unto it, then
the water would have cured and healed all the whole multitude of impotent
persons, of blind, of h^lt, and of withered that should step into it, contrary
to the express words of the text, Whosoever did first after the troubling of
the water step into it, John 5, 4.
was made whole of whatsoever disease he had: So that the poor impotent man
which had an infirmity 38. years needed not to have complained, that no man
(when the water was troubled) would put him into the poole, but while he was
coming, another stepped down before him. And touching the blind man he was
not healed and helped, either by the spittle, or the clay, or the waters, or by
the force of all them together, which had of themselves served and sufficed
rather to have hindered the sight, then to have opened the eyes: it was the
miraculous work of Christ's own hand, who works sometimes above means and
sometimes contrary to means. Thus much touching the objections arising from
sundry types and allusions, which he has heaped up and hudled out of the old
and new Testament.

Now touching the objections drawn from express John Baptist says, I baptize
you with water, but he that comes after me shall baptize with the
Holy Ghost, Math. 3. I answer, John shows in these words that he was only
the Minister of the outward sign, and could work nothing in the hearts of
men: whereas Christ who^ he pointed out and of whom he spoke, would bestow the
Spirit upon them, and those things which belong unto their salvation. Even as
the Apostle speaking of his ministry, does notably in other words expound this
saying of John, 1 Cor. 3. I have planted, Apollos has watered, but God gives
the increase: so that neither he that planteth nor he that waters is any
thing, but God that gives the increase. That which Paul utters touching the
preaching of the word, and John of the Sacrament of Baptism, we may fitly
transfer and aptly apply to the Supper of tho Lord, wherein the Minister
does distribute the bread and deliver the cup of the Lord, but the Lord
himself does feed those that believe in him with his body and blood, which is
meat indeed and drink indeed.

The next testimony is taken out of Mark 16, 16. He Here the force of saving
is ascribed to baptism, not to faith: now it cannot save, but by justifying
and washing away the filthiness of our sins. I answer, They were baptized,
confessing their sins. Again, Christ our Savior teaches, that salvation
depends on faith, John 5, 24. He that believes is passed from death to life:
he never said, Whosoever receives the outward baptism is passed from death to
life. It is faith that joins us to God, and not the washing of the body with
water.

Lastly, if grace were tied to the outward sign, he would have said, He that
is not baptized shall be damned; whereas Christ says only, He that believes
not shall be damned. Nevertheless, faith and baptism are both joined
together, that every one should submit himself to the ordinance of God, and
know that to the gift of faith he must annexe the use of the Sacraments.

The third testimony is borrowed from the conference Nicodemus, John 3. Except
a man be borne again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. I answer, The water of life, John 4, 11. and 7.38. where
speaking of the water of life, the Evangelist adds, This he spoke of the
Spirit, which they that believed in him should receive. Again, water is
joined with the Spirit in this place, as fire is joined with the Spirit in
another place, Math. 3, 11. He shall baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire:
but there is no necessity, nor so much as probability there to understand fire
properly, why then should we take water properly in this place? and wherefore
in places that are like, should we seek a meaning that is unlike? Lastly,
these words cannot enforce any thing to prove that there is any inherent force
in the outward element, seeing the Spirit is joined with it, which adds
power and gives efficacy to the water, as it does also to the word in all the
saving hearers of it: for as the word is a bare sound without the Spirit, so
baptism cannot save without the Spirit.

Peter exhorts the Jews, that were at his preaching pricked in their hearts,
to believe in Christ Jesus whom they had betrayed and crucified, saying, Repent
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Christ for the remission of
sins: and chap. 22, 16. where Ananias persuades Paul to be baptized, and to
wash away his sins, calling on the name of the Lord. In both which places,
forgiveness of sins is ascribed to baptism, and therefore it gives and
conferreth grace. I answer, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved. Thus we have seen the principal pillars of the Romish error
beaten and battered in pieces, and every reason that caryeth any color laid
even with the ground, so that we are wholly to ascribe to the Spirit of God the
lauer of regeneration, and the answer of a good conscience toward God.

Again, is the Spirit of God an inward part of the Sacraments? Then we must
learn and remember, that we can never hear the word or receive the Sacraments
with fruit and comfort, without the special assistance and inward operation
of the Spirit of God. Therefore the Prophet joins the Spirit and word
together, Esaias 59. I will make this my covenant with thee (says the Lord) Esaias
59.21.
my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of the seed of thy seed from henceforth and for ever.

A man indeed has power to hear the word and to receive the Sacraments, his
will is free in these outward works: but he has no power or strength to do
them with profit and comfort, except it be given him from above. Though we
hear never so much, though we communicate never so often, the Spirit must
open our hearts, as he opened the heart of Lydia. So 1 John 2. That anointing
1 Ioh. 2, 27.
which ye received of him dwells in you, and ye need not that any man teach
you, but as that same anointing teaches you of all things, and it is true,
and is not lying. Likewise Acts 10. Peter preached the Gospel to Cornelius and
his household, and while he yet spoke to them, The Acts 10, 44.
Holy Ghost fell on them all which heard the word. So also the Apostles being
sent out with their commission, and commanded to preach the Gospel to every
Mar. 16, 20.
creature, it is noted that they went forth, and preached every where, and the
Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signs that followed. And
John 14. The John 14, 26.
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you al things and bring al things to your remembrance which I have
told you. Pharaoh often heard Moses and Aaron, but he harkened not, but hardened
his heart, because there was no inward touching or teaching of the Spirit.

The Israelites had heard and seen the wonderful things of God, yet they
profited not in faith, in repentance, in regeneration: and the reason is
rendered, Deuter. 29. Ye have seen all Deuteronomy. 29, 2.3, 4.
that the Lord did before your eyes in the Land of Egypt unto Pharaoh and unto
all his servants, and unto all his Land, the great tentations which thine eyes
have seen, those great miracles and wonders: y^^ the Lord has not given you
an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and care to hear unto this day. When
we come to hear the word, which is a word of power, of life, and of
salvation, when we come to receive the Sacraments, which are signs of Gods
graces, and seals of his promises, we see many return as ignorant, perverse,
corrupt, froward, rebellious, hard-harted, and disobedient as they came to
these ordinances of God: and whence comes this? how falls it out? and what
may be the reason hereof? Surely it is not in him that Luke 13, 24. Romans 9,
16.
wills; nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, who gives
eyes to see, ears to hear, and heart to understand, to whom he thinks good
in his heavenly pleasure. Wherefore our duty is, seeing the natural man
perceives not the things that are of the Spirit of God, to pray unto him to
give us wisdom to see our corruptions, blindness, ignorance, and hardness
of heart. Anabaptists do, Against anabaptists depending on revelations.
which depend upon revelations, and inward inspirations, upon private motions
and divine illuminations without the word. They will not be taught by the word;
they will not be strengthened by the Sacraments: but take away the use of both,
following their own foolish fancies and devilish dreams. They boast of the
Spirit of God, and are led by the spirit of the Devil. We must for our
direction and practice learn, that as to rest upon the Spirit without the
word is fantastical and heriticall, and the mother of al errors: so the
word and Sacraments without the Spirit are no better then a dead carcass
without life, an empty sound without substance, a naked show without truth, an
empty casket without the treasure: and therefore we must knit them together,
and assure our selves that the Spirit speaks evidently in the Scriptures,
the Spirit works effectually by the Sacraments, and the Spirit helps our
infirmities to profit by them both.

CHAP. XI. Of the third inward part of a Sacrament.
THus much we have spoken touching the holy Spirit, being the second inward
part: the third inward part Christ is the 3. inward part of a Sacrament.
is Jesus Christ crucified, the very subject and substance of all Sacraments.
He was represented by circumcision and the Paschal Lamb, by Manna and the
water that flowed out of the Rock: and he is represented in baptism and in
the Lords Supper. When we receive the outward signs, God the Father offers
his Son and all his graces with him, to confirm our faith thereby. The sign
is but a figure and token: Christ is the truth and substance. This we showed
before, Chap. 2. in the description of a Sacrament, that therein Christ and all
his saving graces are truly offered, sealed up, and given to the faithful
that believe in his name. Heereunto comes the doctrine of the Apostle, where
he teaches that the Jewish Sacraments, being in the truth of them the same
with ours, did signify 1 Cor. 10, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Christ, for They drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and that
Rock was Christ. So he does teach elsewher, that by baptism we Gal. 3, 27.
put on Christ, we are buried into his death, and are planted Romans 6, 4, 5.
Col. 2.11.12.
into the similitude of his resurrection. Wherefore, this is the use and end of
the Sacraments, to lead our faith to the only Sacrifice of Christ once
offered upon the Cross, as to the only groundwork and foundation of our
salvation: as touching the other Sacrament, the same Apostle shows, that the
breaking of the bread seals up the 1 Cor. 10.16
communion of his body, and the pouring out the wine the communion of his
blood. So then, this is an evident, plain, and manifest truth, confirmed by
testimony of the Scripture, that Christ is the matter and substance of a
Sacrament.

Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father: let us run unto him, let us
hunger and thirst after his righteousness, let us acknowledge him to be our
wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification, and redemption, and let us
look for our salvation from him and in him. What though our faith be frail
and weak? What though it be as a grain of a Mustard-seede, which is very
little and small? What if it be but as the growth and strength of a Child,
which is ready to fall except he be stayed up? yet this weak, this small, this
little, this frail, this feeble faith, is able and sufficient to ingraft us
into Christ. A child taking a staff in his hand, is able to hold it, as
truly though not as strongly as a man: so if we lay hold upon Christ by
faith, though we do it with many wants, and much weakness, yet it shall serve
and suffice us to salvation. For God looks not so much to the perfection as
to the truth of faith, neither so much to the measure as to the manner of our
believing. Even as Mar. 8, 24.
the blind man in the Gospel when he began to perceive the moving of men, and
saw them walking as trees, when yet he could not discern their bodies, did as
truly and certainly see them as other did, though not so clearly, plainly,
and distinctly: So when we have the least spark of faith, it will as truly
assure us of our salvation as a stronger.

The poor prisoner that lies in a deep and dark dungeon, may as well discern
the light of the Sun at a little hole and creuice, as he that walks in the
open air; so albeit we be compassed about with ignorance, doubtings,
weakness, and manifold fraileties of the fles^, yet by a dim light and
sight of faith, we may certainly apply unto us the mercies of GOD and the
merits of Christ, as well as if we had a strong and perfect persuasion of our
election and salvation before the foundations of the world. Thus we see,
howsoever the faithful may be afflicted, yet 2 Cor. 4, 8, 9
they are not distressed: though tempted, yet not overwhelmed: though cast
down, yet they perish not, For 1 John 5, 4.
this is their victory that has overcome this world, even their faith, whereby
they apprehend Jesus Christ, who is offered of God the Father in the Sacraments
to all the faithful.

Secondly, if Christ be given us, how should not the Romans 8, 32.22, 23.
Apostle concludes, If God spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all
to death: how shall he not with him give us al things also? When we enjoy him
we enjoy al things; if we want him it is nothing, though we abound in all
things else. Wherefore, when the Father gave him for us, it is more then if he
had given to us heaven and earth. For having right and interest in him, we have
possession of all things, his righteousness, his sanctification, his obedience,
his innocence, and whatsoever he has is made ours. He that has Christ who is
the Lord of al, cannot doubt but he is made partaker of that which is his. He
that has Christ who is heir Heb. 1, 2.
of al things, may assure himself to be made fellow heir with him. This is it
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3, 21.
Let no man rejoice in men: for all things are yours; whether it be Paul or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, whether they be things
present, or things to come, eue^ al are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods.
When a parcel of ground is purchased and made ours, thereby the profit and
commodity thereof is made ours also: so when Christ by the free donatio^ o^ God
the father is given unto us, his righteousness and obedience becomes wholly
ours together with him. He then that has Christ, has al things: he that has
not Christ, has nothing, howsoever he think himself to be something. If we
have him given unto us, let us take no thought for any other thing whatsoever.
He is the maine and greatest gift, the rest are but appurtenances unto it, or
dependants upon it. Let us therefore watch over our hearts, that they be not
set upon other gifts more then upon him; and rejoice more in that the Father
has given us his own Son, then if we had received a great possession and
an earthly kingdom.

Adam by the Lord himself, and afterward revealed to Abraham and his
posterity: as also it was published by Christ and his Apostles: albeit in the
time of the law more darkely and obscurely, but in the time of grace more
plainly and clearly. The same saving and justifying faith was in Abraham the
Father of the faithful, and in all other that ever were or shall be saved: And
therefore John 1, 29. Revel. 13, 8.
Christ is called The Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.
And in another place, The lamb slain from the foundation of the world. To
this purpose the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10. That the Israelites did eat the
same spiritual meat, and drank of the same spiritual drink (that we do)
for they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock
was Christ. Likewise in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 13. Jesus Christ
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. He was always the foundation of
the Church, and the Fathers were saved by no other means then we are, that is,
through him only. God has appointed him over al things, to be the head of the
Church, and the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 1, 22, and 4, 16. There is given no
other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4, 12. No man knows
the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Math.
11, 27. Ioh. 14, 16.


Lastly, he says of himself, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: In
which words, he speaks exclusiuely, shutting out all others, and means
that he is the way alone, the truth alone, and the life alone, by which Adam
and all his posterity that believed, attained unto salvation. No man therefore
comes unto the Father but by him. He shows, John 8.56. that Abraham
rejoiced to see his day, and he saw it, and was glad. They which lived under
the law and before the law as well as such as live under the Gospel, were no
otherwise justified, reconciled, and saved, then by the blood of the only
mediator Christ Jesus, who indeed was the end of the law: forasmuch as the
Gospel is no other then the law promised, Romans 1, 2. 1 Pet. 1 10. and the law
is no other then the Gospel exhibited and accomplished, and all the Prophets
bear witness of Christ and his Gospel, Acts 10. For albeit he was manifested
in the flesh in the last age of the world, and was crucified when the fulness of
time came: yet his death was as effectual to the faithful before the flood and
after the flood, before the law and after the giving of the law, as to the
faithful that lived with Christ, and after the ascension of Christ: and it was
as powerful and profitable to them that lived before he dwelt upon the earth,
as when he did hang upon the Cross. This point duly marked, offers unto
us diverse good meditations to be pondered in our hearts. First, that there is
but one faith, and one true religion, one way to heaven, and one truth in all
the Sacraments, albeit they have diverse forms and figures. We have one Lord,
and one Baptism, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. Gal. 1, 8.
We have but one Christ, and one Gospel. If an Angel from heaven preach any
other Gospel, any other faith, any other Christ, any other Sacraments, let him
be accursed. Secondly, the Fathers before Christ's incarnation and taking flesh
of the blessed Virgin were saved, and went in soul to heaven as directly and
certainly as they do that dye now in the faith of Christ. The gates of the
kingdom of heaven were not as a Palace that is locked and bar^ed, but they
were opened to all believers, before the resurrection and ascension of Christ,
as well as in our days, when he sits at the right hand of his Father, and
makes continual intercession for us. Enoch and Elias were translated from the
earth, and ascended into heaven: they were in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.26. and
23, 42.43.
which is no other then heaven, Luke 16.26. So the penitent thief before
Christ rose again went with him into Paradise, Luke 23. which is nothing else
but the kingdom of heaven, as appears by comparing the request of the thief
with the answer of Christ. The Prophet David says, Psalm 112. The righteous
shall be in everlasting remembrance. And Solomon Prou. 10, 7. The memory of the
just is blessed. For seeing they are justified by the same means that we are,
why should they not receive the crown of glory, and reward of righteousness
in the same manner that we do? This serves to overthrow the doctrine of the
Church of the Romanists, I do not mean the true Church to which Paul wrote,
but the false Church of the Romanists that now glory in the name of a Church,
as they do in the name of Catholics. But like Church, like Catholics: a
bastard Church, bastard Catholics. Their Church is antichristian, and they
themselves heretics: they have a name that they live, but they are dead.
These men (as if they were of counsel with God) take upon them to tell us many
secrets and hidden mysteries in heaven and hell, as if they had searched the
utmost bounds and borders of them. The popish orders of Angels.
In heaven they stick not to define the degrees and orders of Angels, and they
number up nine several names of them, Principalities, rules, powers,
dominions, thrones, Cherubim, Seraphim, Angels, and Archangels. Likewise they
make four infernal and subterrestriall places, hell, purgatory, limbus
infantum, The popish division of Hell.
and limbus patrum. Hell is made the lowest room where the Reprobate and
damned abide in everlasting fire, from whence is no redemption. Purgatory is
the next hot house, where the souls of such as dye in venial sins lie
puling and purging themselves till they be helped out by dirges and masses,
and pardons, and such like trumpery and foolery, that I do not say, impiety
and blasphemy. The third dungeon is called limbus puerorum, where children
remain and continue that dye unbaptized, which hau^ lost the glory of heaven,
and yet lie there without pain and torment: a gentle kind of hell invented by
themselves, and contradicted also by their own writers, among whom many teach
that the want of heaven is as great a punishment as the sense of hell. The last
Cabbine of hell which is the uppermost, is limbus patrum, where the Fathers
lived before Christ. Here is deep divinity of no small fools, here are the
great keys of the popish religion: howbeit because they are uttered without
warrant, they may be laughed at without danger, and rejected without reproof.
Lastly, our religion and doctrine of the Sacraments that we profess, cannot be
vpbraided with strangeness and nouelty: we teach, we receive, we practice no
more then was believed and received from the beginning. The form of our Church
service is in substance the same which the Jews used in their Synagogues: for
they read a Lecture out of the law and Prophets, Acts 13, 15.
Acts 15, 21. They preached the word, they prayed, they sung Psalms, and
administered the Sacraments. So in the primitive Church they had all these, they
began with confession of sins, they had the use of baptism and the Lords
Supper in a known tongue, as also the manner is among us. It is the popish
religion that sauoureth of nouelty, and is defiled altogether in the marrow and
pith of it with newfanglednesse, some part of it being taken from the Pagans,
and some borrowed from the Jews, and some devised by themselves, to please and
allure all sorts; as the Alchoran of the Turks was patched and pieced
together, partly from one sect and partly from another, to try if by all means
they might draw many Disciples after them, and so make them twofolde more the
children of hell then themselves.

Thou preparest a Table before me, in the presence of mine enemies: thou
annointest my head with oil, my cup runs over. Psalm. 36, 8.9.
And in another place, They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
th ne house, and thou shall make them drink of the ri^er of thy pleasures.
Solomon in the book of the Proverbs d^scribeth this feast at large, and sets
down the Master of the feast, the place of the feast, the cooks and dressers
of the feast, the abundance of the provision, and the inuiting of the guests,
Prou. 9, 1.2, 3. Psalm. 9, 1, 2, 3.
Wisdom has builded her house, she has hewn out her seven pillars, she
has killed her beasts, she has mingled her wine, she has also furnished her
Table, she has sent forth her maidens, she cries upon the high places of the
City, etc. These heavenly blessings which are the souls diet, do as truly
and fully satisfy and sustain the life, the health, the strength, and good
estate of the soul, as all outward provision does nourish and maintain the
body: and therefore the Prophet cries, Ho, every one that thirsts, Esaias 55, 5.
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy, and eat, yea
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. So does Wisdom call
the simple-hearted, Prou. 9, 5.
Come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Seeing
then we have so many kind callings, let us not refuse to come, least thereby
we refuse Christ himself, who is both the master and matter of the feast, the
feeder and the food, the nourisher and the nourishment. Let us not be like to
that ungodly and ungracious son, who being called of his father to work in
his vineyard, answered readily, but answered hypocritically, Mat. 21, 30.
I will Sir, but went not. If our hearts be toward God, as his is toward us,
let us sit with him at the Table, and eat in his presence. If we open the
door to him, he will come in to us, and we shall suppe with him, and he with
us, Reave. 3.20. Hence it is, that Christ proclaims, Ioh. 6.51. If any man
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. If we come to his Table, and
receive not this bread of life, we were better not come at all.

These things being thus made plain and manifest, let us remember that
excellent exhortation of the Apostle, 1. Corinthians, Chapter 5. stirring up
the Corinthians upon this consideration to be careful solemnly to keep this
feast, that seeing Christ our Paschall Lamb is slain and crucified for us,
and for our salvation, we should become a new lump, we should purge out the
leaven of maliciousness, and every one follow after newness of life. The
Passover was an institution of God to the Israelites, that they should kill
and eat a Lamb without spot, to be a type and figure of that true Lamb; and
that with the blood thereof, the posts of their doors should be sprinkled,
to the end that the destroyer might pass over their houses when he slew the
Egyptians.

Now, these types are our examples, and were written to admonish us upon whom
the ends of the world are come. The Lamb figured out Christ: the sprinkling of
their posts with the blood of the Lamb, figured out the sprinkling of our
consciences with the blood of Christ: the passing over of them represented the
merit of his death, through which God passes over our sins, and does not
impute them unto us: the feast of the Passover notes out the spiritual joy
that we are to receive for our deliverance from Satan and eternal death: the
keeping of the feast without leaven signifies the casting out of the remnants
of infidelity, and the infection of sin, and stirs us up to lead an
holy, vncorrupt, and unblameable life, in token of thankfulness to him that
has delivered us from so great wrath and vengeance to come, and saved us from
death and damnation.

Hence it is, that the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians, Chapter 5. verse 7, 8.
Purge out therefore the old leaven that ye may be a new lump, as ye are
unleavened: for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: Therefore let us keep
the feast not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Then indeed we
acknowledge Christ to be ptesent with us in the Sacraments, and confess that
we are made partakers of him and his graces, when we learn to dye to sin,
and to renounce all our evil ways, and seek to be united unto him. We cannot
be partakers of his holiness, except we forsake our own unrighteousness. And
hereby we may examine our selves, whether Christ be in us or not, for then
the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive through
righteousness. This is that which the Apostle teaches, 2. Cor. 5, 17. If any
man be in Christ, let him be a new creature: old things are passed away, behold
al things are become new. So the Prophets prophesying of the kingdom of
Christ, do foretell of a new heaven and new earth, Esaias 65, 17.
signifying thereby that all such as belong to Christ and have him dwelling in
them by faith, must be renewed and regenerated by water and the Holy Ghost. He
is not as a dead body that has no working: but he works wheresoever he
comes and dwells, and alters al those that are truly partakers of him,
not in substance, but in quality, giving them new minds, new wills, new
affections, and a new conversation. Happy are they that find this change in
them, for they shall be saved in that great day of the Lord, the day of
account, when the mouth of iniquity shall be stopped, and all the ungodly put
to silence. Thus much of the third inward part of a Sacrament.

CHAP. XII. Of the fourth inward part of a Sacrament.
THe The last inward part of a Sacrament is the faithful receiver.
last inward part of a Sacrament is the faithful receiver, desiring,
apprehending, receiving, hungring and thirsting after Christ. There is required
a faithful receiver, if we would receive Jesus Christ, faith must of
necessity go before, without this there is no justification, without this
there is no salvation; as Romans 14. Whatsoever Romans 14, 23 Heb. 11, 6.
is not of faith, is sin, And Heb. 11. Without faith it is impossible to
please God. Judas executed the function of an Apostle, he was partaker of the
Passover: yet he ceased not to remain an hypocrite, a devil and the child
of perdition, John 17, 12.
that the Scripture might be fulfilled: Neither was he bettered or sanctified
by that Sacrament, or by the use thereof. Ananias and Sapphira his wife, Acts
5, 4, 9.
being in the number of Disciples, were no doubt baptized of the Apostles, and
had also received ofttimes the Lords Supper; yet they continued in their
wickedness, lying, and hypocrisy: the Sacrament did not take away their
wickedness, nor give them a justifying and saving faith, Acts 15, 9.
which purifieth the heart by repentance and works new obedience in the
soul. The like we have said of Simon the sorcerer, Acts 8, 23.
who albeit he were baptized, yet remained in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity. Wherefore the Apostle teaches, that the word profited not,
Heb. 4, 2.
because it was not mingled with faith in those that heard it. If the signs be
received without faith, they hurt: not that Gods gifts and ordinances hurt of
themselves, but not being received aright, they hurt through our sin and
default. As the word not received by faith is an empty sound without force: so
the Sacrament is an unprofitable and a naked show without substance. Wherefore
the Sacraments in regard of the unbelievers and ungodly, are no Sacraments to
them, because to them they are not seals of the righteousness of faith. True
it is, they remain Sacraments, in respect of God who offers his own Son,
but they loose their strength and force toward the unfaithful, that do abuse
and contemn them; Romans 2, 25.
as the Apostle expressly teaches, Circumcision verily is profitable if thou
keep the law: but if thou be a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision is
become uncircumcision. The same Apostle speaking of such 1 Cor. 11, 20.
as used the Lords supper without true godliness and due preparation, says,
This is not to eat the Lords Supper; denying that to be, which was not done as
it ought to be.

Wherefore, seeing the right use of the Sacrament is, Panem domini, non pan^m
dominum. ^ugust, hom. in Ioh. 65.
the bread of the Lord, but they eat not the bread and the Lord: because the
sign without the right and holy use thereof, is not an available Sacrament to
the receiver of it. We see therefore the wicked partake not Christ, although
they partake the signs of Christ, Ioh. 20, 6, 7.
as they that found his clothes but missed his body.

Secondly, we see hereby, that the elect ordained to void and unlawful, does
then become lawful and comfortable; as we see in the word heard without fruit
and faith, by an unbeliever, is made a word of salvation afterward when he is
converted.

For this cause many are sick and weak among you, and many sleep: for if we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. Where the
Apostle teaches, that God brought a judgment upon his own house, and
punished this Church with weakness, sickness, and death it self, for their
vnreuerent, unworthy, and disordered receiving of the Lords Supper. Although
many among them (no doubt) were elected, and all of them professed the Gospel
of the kingdom: yet God visited their want of preparation and reverence with
diverse diseases and great mortality, Leuit. 26, 14 25, 21. Deuteronomy. 28, 15, 16,
20, 21.
according to the threatening annexed to the law, If ye will not obey me, nor
do all these commandments, if ye shall despise mine ordinances, or your soul
abhor my laws, then will I do this unto you, I will appoint over you
fearefulnes, a consumption, and the burning ague to consume the eyes and to
make the heart heavy. And if ye walk stubbornely against me and will not obey
me, I will then bring seven times me plagues upon you, according to your
sins. Wherefore, when we have received grace to believe, and have tasted the
first fruits of the Spirit to the comfort of our souls, we must not be puffed
up in our knowledge, we must not grow secure, but stir up the gifts of God in
us, when they begin to wax faint. Let us seek to prevent his judgments
before they come, which we may do, by judging our selves, by making inquiry
into our own ways, and by searching the reins of our hearts, with purpose to
condemn all ignorance, error, security, and ungodliness, and as it were to
take punishment of our selves: then this would follow thereupon, we should not
be judged and punished of the Lord. This then is the remedy to avoid the sin
of unworthy receiving. A man thus visited with sickness, weakness, and diverse
kinds of diseases, and smitten with the stroke of Gods own hand, cannot
possibly be restored by any creature in heaven or earth: and yet behold the
Lord has not left us without means to remove them and take them away, to
wit, by taking away the cause, that we may remove the effects. The cause of
these puninshments is taken away by judging our selves. Now a man in judging of
himself What we are to do in judging our selves.
must perform four things. First, he must examine himself of his sins.
Secondly, he must confess them, and himself to be guilty, as the poor
prisoner that stands at the bar. No denying of the fact, no defending of
the fault, no hiding of the offense, no justifying of our person can procure
our pardon: the way to have forgiveness, is to acknowledge our own
wickedness. Thirdly, he must condemn himself, and give sentence against
himself without partiality. Fourthly, he must plead pardon for the remission
of his sins, and never rest until he give him peace of conscience, and
restore him to the joy of his salvation.

CHAP. XIII. Of the first use of a Sacrament.
HItherto of the parts of a Sacrament, both outward and inward: now we come to
the uses thereof. For unless we know the use and understand the end why they
were ordained, it shall not profit us to know the parts. Every thing must be
referred to his right uses and proper ends: so must the Sacraments be.

The ends are especially Three chief uses of the sacraments.
these three. First, to strengthen faith. Secondly, to seal the covenant
between God and us. Thirdly, to be a badge of our profession. Touching the
first end, the Sacraments serve for the better confirmation of our faith, as
appears, 1. Pet. 3. where the Apostle having set down the drowning of the
world, and the preserving of Noah by the Arc, he says our baptism 1 Pet. 3,
21.
directly answers that type, which is a taking to witness of a good
conscience, and saving us by the resurrection of Christ. So then, by faith
confirmed in Baptism, we have an infallible assurance in the death of Christ
of our salvation. Many indeed come to the Sacraments, are present at baptism,
are partakers of the Lords Supper, that feel no strength of faith, no increase
of Gods graces, no spiritual growth in the body of Christ, so that they work
not salvation in them, but further their condemnation. For the Sacraments (as
we have showed) give not grace, but more firmly, surely, and comfortably
confirm faith, they apply and seal up Christ crucified. The Sacraments cannot
give faith to the faithless, neither were they instituted to the end men
should believe, but because they do believe: as meat was not given that men
should learn to eat, but that they eating might be nourished. Faith indeed
receives them, August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 25. cap. 25.
and then they serve to nourish it. And they confirm not faith by any inherent
power included in them, but the holy Spirit applies Christ to us, and
frames this comfortable conclusion in our hearts. All such as are converted
and do rightly use the Sacraments, shall receive Christ and all his saving
graces: But I am converted and do rightly use the Sacraments: Therefore I
shall receive Christ and his graces. Thus does the Comforter comfort all those
that come rightly and religiously to the Lords Table.

Now if we would enquire and search after the reasons of this first end, we
should find that one cause why they confirm faith is, because God is true in
his promises, he confirms and makes good that which is gone out of his
mouth. All the 2 Cor. 1, 20.
promises of God in Christ Jesus are yea and are in him Amen, unto the glory of
God through us. For as Princes seals confirm their charters, assure their
grants, and make certain their pardons: so do Gods Sacraments witness to our
hearts and consciences, that his words and promises are true and are
established to continue for ever. For as he declares his mercies by his word,
so he seals and assures them by his Sacraments. Again, this appears by
the example of Abraham, who first believed the promise, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness, being yet uncircumcised; and afterward received the
sign of circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of faith, as the Apostle
Romans 4, 9, 10, 11.
teaches: We say that faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness: How
was it then imputed? when he was circumcised, or uncircumcised? Not when he
was circumcised, but when he was uncircumcised, etc. Where he shows that
Abraham was justified in uncircumcision, but yet was afterward circumcised,
that the gift of righteousness might be confirmed in him. The Acts 8, 36.
Eunuch likewise believed before he received baptism, and therefore it sealed
up the increase of his faith and of Gods graces. And Acts 2. They that gladly
received the words of Peter, Acts 2.41. and 10, 44, 47, 48. and 22, 16.
were baptized. And, as Peter preached to Cornelius and others of the Gentiles,
The Holy Ghost fell on them all which heard the word, and he said, Can any
forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? So he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the
Lord. Wherefore, when the Minister washes with water, it represents our
burial with Christ, into his death, and our rising again with him into
newness of life. As bread nourishes and strengthens man: so the body of
Christ taken by faith feeds the soul. We take the bread and cup into our
hands, we eat, we drink, we are refreshed: so we feed on Christ, whose flesh
is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed, and we are comforted.

Chrisost. in Math. hom. 83.
we should not need the Sacraments. We must not therefore abstain from them
for the weakness of our faith, but for that cause come to God and to the
Sacraments of God, praying for strength and confirmation thereof; Mar. 9, 23, 24
as that father did, whose son was possessed with a dumb spirit when Christ
said to him, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that
believes, he answered crying with tears, Lord I believe, help mine
unbelief. And Luke 17. The Apostles Luke 17, 5.
say to the Lord, Increase our faith. Undoubtedly he that never doubted, never
believed: For whosoever in truth believes, feels sometimes doubtings and
wauerings of his faith. Even as the sound body feels oftentimes the
grudgings of a fever and distemperature of the body, which if he had not health
he could never find and feel: so the faithful soul finds sundry
doubtings, which if his faith were not sound, he could not discern. For we
feel not corruption by corruption, nor sin by sin, Lu. 11, 21, 22
because when the strong man possesses the house, all things are in peace: but
we feel sin and perceive corruption in us by a contrary grace of Gods
Spirit. The lesser and smaller measure of grace we have, the lesser is our
feeling: and the more grace we have, the more quick we are in feeling of
corruption. What is the reason that many have no sight of sin, no feeling of
their corruption, no tentations, no trembling, no terror, no fear of Gods
wrath, but wholly live, lie, and dye in their lusts? Surely, because they are
without grace, without Gods Spirit, and without his inward work in them. But
the faithful who are not led by the flesh but by the Spirit, are often
tempted, assailed, turmoyled, tried, and provoked to many evils, according to
the Luke 22.31, 32.
words of our blessed Savior, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to
winnow you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not;
therefore when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. As a man carried up
and set upon an high Tower or on the Pinnacle of a Temple, and there fast bound
in chains of Iron that he cannot fall although he would, when he looks down,
fears, and all his joints tremble, because he is not acquainted and
accustomed to mount up so high in the air, and to behold the earth so far
beneath: but when he remembers himself and perceives himself fast bound and
out of all danger, then he conceiueth constant hope of continuing, and casts
away all fear of falling: So when we look downward upon our selves and our
own ways, we have doubtings, wauerings, astonishments, horrors, terrors,
tremblings, and fears: but when we look upwards, to behold the sweet
consolation which God has promised, Christ has purchased, the word has
published, the Holy Ghost has sealed, and every believer has tasted, we feel
our selves sure, and cease to doubt anymore. For faith though assaulted with
doubtings may be certain. The Sun always shines in the firmament, though
the clouds have covered it, and the light appear not. The tree has life in
it, though it be not in winter discerned. So faith has his assurance and
persuasion, though it be shaken with doubtings, and assaulted with tentations.
Wherefore, so often as we feel these doubtings and imperfections, let us set
against them the certainty of Gods truth: let us set before us the
unchangeableness of his promises: let us draw near to the holy Sacram. and
thereby seek strength and increase of faith.

Moreover, was this one end of the Sacraments to strengthen unto it, as well as
a sound and strong hand, albeit not so strongly: So is it with faith; though it
be feeble and as a grain of mustard seed, yet if it be unfeigned, it will
apply Christ effectually; which weakness God leaves in us as a means to stir
us up to go to the Sacraments. We read that David called lame 2 Samuel 9, 7.8
Mephibosheth to his table, thereby honoring the son for the fathers sake: so
does God receive us al deformed and defiled to his heavenly Supper. And as
Mephibosheth professed himself unworthy to eat bread at the kings table,
saying, What is thy servant, that thou should look on such a dead dog as I
am? So must we confess our unworthiness, and be Mat. 15, 26.27.
contented with the crumbs of his grace, that fall from his heavenly table. And
thus acknowledging our selves to be blind, he will restore us: to be poor, he
will enrich us: to be wounded, he will cure us: to be captives, he will
deliver us: to be sick, he will heal us: to be weak, he will strengthen us:
to be lost, he will save us: to be hungry and thirsty, he will refresh us: to
be brokenhearted, he will bind us up: to be sold under sin, he will
ransom and redeem us.

Bellarmine, a factour and attorney of the Church of Rome, Bellar. de Sacram.
lib. 1. c. 14
who denies that the Sacraments are scales of the promises, or serve to
nourish and confirm our faith, and to assure us of free remission of sins by
the death of Christ. Contrary to that we heard before, in the example of
Abraham, who received circumcision to seal up and assure his justification, by
faith; whose example is set forth to show how all men are justified before
God, Romans 4, 11.
and what is the use of the Sacraments in all that are partakers of them. So
does baptism seal up to us Gods promises in Christ, and assures the
remission of sins, 1 Pet. 3, 21.
as Peter teaches.

sanctification, justification, remission, and salvation: then how say some, we
cannot be assured in this life of our standing in the estate of grace, of the
forgiveness of sins, and of our adoption in Christ? Does not the Romans 8, 15,
16.
Holy Ghost testify unto us particularly the adoption of children, the
remission of sins, and salvation of our souls? As Romans 8. We have not
received the Spirit of bondage to fear, but the Spirit of adoption, whereby
we cry Abba father: the Spirit bears witness with our spirits that we are
the children of God. In these words, Gods sanctifying Spirit, and our
sanctified spirit, are made the two witnesses of our adoption. This we must
certainly believe by faith. And this made the Apostle Romans 8, 38.39.
most confident in the end of the same Chapter, saying, I am persuaded that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. If any object, we may hope well for forgiveness of sins, but we cannot
believe the same. I answer, Faith and hope cannot be separated, they do
always as loving friends accompany each other, they are never sundered and
divided; so that if we may be assured of our salvation by hope, it follows we
may be certainly persuaded. True hope follows true faith, as the effect does
the cause, and no man can truly hope, that is not truly assured. Besides,
this is the property of hope, Romans 5, 4, 5.
it never makes any ashamed, they shall not be confounded and disappointed,
they shall attain unto the thing hoped for, according to the doctrine of the
Apostle, Experience brings forth hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us. Hitherto of the first end of a Sacrament.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the second use of a Sacrament.
THe second end of a Sacrament is this; The second use of a Sacrament is to be
a seal of the Covenant.
It serves to be a seal of the Covenant between God and us, that he will
be our God, and we will be his people, as Genesis 17 I am God Ge^. 17, 1, 11
all-sufficient, walk before me, and be upright. The Sacraments are assured
testimonies and confirmations of the favor and good will of God, who is well
pleased toward us in Christ his Son. By them as by certain pledges given and
received, God of his great mercy does as it were bind himself to us, and we
bind our selves to him to remain his people, and to walk in obedience before
him: for they be as strong chains to compass us, as sure cords to hold us,
and as fast knots to keep us, that we do not depart from him, and cast off the
fear of his name. Circumcision was a seal of Gods promise to Abraham, and a
seal of Abraham's faith and obedience toward God. But let us see what What the
covenant is between God and man.
this covenant is, what are the Articles of agreement between God and us, and
what things each part interchangeably couenanteth and contracteth each toward
other. The covenant of God in respect of himself, has three parts. He
promises, Rom 11, 26 Ier. 33, 8. Esaias 43, 25.
first of all, forgiveness of our sins: for The deliverer shall come out of
Sion, and shall turn away the ungodliness from Jacob, and this is my covenant
to them, when I shall take away their sins. Secondly, the adoption Ier. 31,
31.32, 33. 2 Cor. 6, 16.18. Zach. 8, 8.
of sons and acceptance of us to be his children, joined with the promise of
his continual favor, love, grace, and protection: as Iere. 31. Behold, the
days come (says the Lord,) that I will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel and with the house of Judah, not according to the covenant that I made
with their fathers, when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the Land
of Egypt, the which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto
them, says the Lord: but this shall be the covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel, after those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Behold, the indenture of covenants written by the finger of
God, wherein for better assurance he has bound himself to forgive our sins,
and promised to be our merciful God. And to the end there might be a pair of
these indentures, interchangeably given each to other party; the Lord by the
hand of the Apostle, writing to the Hebrews, has drawn as it were the
counterpane of the former word for word, expressed as it is in the Prophet;
Heb. 8, 10, 11
so that we have a pair of indentures of covenants, to show the stablenes of
his counsel. The 3. part of the covenant in respect of God is, Revel. 21, 4.7.
the promise of the full possession of the heavenly inheritance and of eternal
glory after this life, as Revel. 21. God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither
shall there be any more pain, for the first things are passed: he that
ouercometh shall inherit all things: Also cha. 2. To him that overcomes, will
I give to eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of
God, he shall not be hurt of the second death: he shall have power given him
over the Nations, and rule them with a rod of iron: he shall be clothed with
white array, and I will not put his name out of the book of life: he shall be
a pillar in the Temple of God, and shall go no more out. I will grant to him to
fit with me in my throne, even as I overcame, and fit with my Father in his
throne. Thus we see, how God on his part, by writings and evidences promises
to give to his people remission of sins, adoption of sons, and possession of
heaven; he has couenanted by word and by oath to perform these things: neither
is he as man that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should deceive.
These are great grants, of great blessings, by our great God, to the great good
and comfort of his children. For what greater blessings can there be, then
being miserable sinners, to be graciously pardoned? being utter enemies; to be
freely accepted as sons? being bondslaues and prisoners of hell, to be made
heirs of heaven and salvation? Again, the covenant on our part requires
three conditions: for when men intend to covenant and contract one with
another, they set down articles, as well on the one side as on the other.
First, faith to God, to believe his promises, as John 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And Cha. 14. Let not your
heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. And Romans 10. With the
heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses unto
salvation: for the Scripture says, whosoever believes in him shall not be
ashamed. Secondly, God requires of us love toward our brethren: for seeing he
has showed so great love toward us, 1 John 4, 7, 9, 10, 11.
he exacteth love of us again, as John exhorts, Beloved, let us love one
another, for love comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of God,
and knows God: herein was the love of God made manifest among us, because
God sent his only begotten Son into this world, that we might live through
him: beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Thirdly,
he requires as a necessary covenant to be kept on our part, holiness, and true
obedience throughout the whole course Josh. 24, 24.25. 2 Kings 29, 3.
of our life and conversation. This is repeated and urged in many places of the
word of God, as Josh. 24. when they said they would serve the Lord their God
and obey his voice, Joshua made a covenant with them the same day, joining God
and the people together. So also Josiah stood by the pillar and made a covenant
before the Lord, that they should walk after the Lord, and keep his
commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all their heart and
with all their soul. Likewise, to the same purpose we read, 2. Chro. 15. They
made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers: and whosoever will not
seek the Lord God of Israel, shall be slain, whether he be small or great,
man or woman. Thus we see the conditions of the covenant, both what he
promises to do, and what he looks for at our hands. He requires of us
faith, love, and obedience to become his people, if we will have him to be our
God. All these three parts of the covenant, 1 John 3, 23 24.
are mentioned and expressed, 1. John 3. This is his commandment, that we
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave
commandment: for he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in
him: and hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the Spirit that he
has given us.

The uses of the second end of a Sacrament are, first to Psalm. 32, 1.2.
may cry out with the Prophet in the rejoicing of their spirit Blessed is he,
whose wickedness is lightened, and whose sin is covered, Blessed is the man,
unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. This kindness is so great, that the
eternal God should make a covenant with dust and ashes, that it ought never to
be forgotten of us us, nor depart out of our hearts.

Again, let every one be careful to keep the former Luke 1, 74.75.
and to walk in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. Our Savior Christ directing our love to our brethren, and teaching that
the streams thereof should flow unto our enemies, shows that if we love the^
that love us, the Mat. 5, 44.46, 47.
Publicans do the same: and if we be friendly to our brethren only, this is no
singular thing. Behold 1 John 3, 1.
, what love the Father has given unto us, that we should be called the Sons of
God: he loved us graciously and freely: he loved us when we were enemies unto
him, and spared not his own Son, but gave him to death for us al: do not these
things deserve love again? are we not bound to show duty for these mercies,
and love to our brethren for this love of our God? and yet many regard neither
these blessings of God, neither walking in vprightnes of heart Abraham had
received many promises from God, of reconciliation, of posterity, of blessing
and protection, that he would be his buckler, his bulwark, and his great
reward, and give unto his seed the land of Canaan; yet we read not that God as
yet made a covenant with him, until by a solemn rite and ceremony he
established it, Ge. 15. where we see that Abraham took an heiffer, a
shee-goate, and a ram, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one
against another In the same day the Lord made a covenant with him. This he
confirmed afterward by the sign of circumcision, as also he confirms his
covenant with us by two Sacraments. If any were asked the question whether they
would have God to be their God, gracious and merciful unto them, they would
answer it is their whole desire: howbeit if we would have God magnify his
mercy toward us, we must magnify and make much of his sacram. whereby he has
sealed up his love toward us. Could Abraham have God to be his God, and the God
of his seed, and yet reject circumcision commanded unto him, which was a sign
of the covenant? Could the Israelites acknowledge God to be the author of their
deliverance out of Egypt, and yet refuse the Passover that was instituted in
remembrance of their delivery and of his mercy? O that we could consider these
things, and learn them aright, to make us wise to God and to our selves. If
we give to any man a piece of money to bind a bargain that has passed
between him and us, we would think ourselves much abused, if he should not
count himself tied by it to perform his promise and make good his word. So
has God left with us his Sacraments (as an earnest penny) to assure us of his
word, and the unchangeable faithfulness of his promise: shall we then make no
account of them? or esteem them at our own pleasure? We make our selves
guilty of the blood of Christ, and as much as lies in us, say to the almighty,
Depart from us, we will none of the knowledge of thy ways, we will walk after
the stubbornnes of our hearts.

Lastly, are the Sacraments as a band with a condition? that leaves us not at
liberty to do what we list, but and our redeemer. And on the other side, men
bind themselves to faith, repentance, and obedience, and to be thankful unto
him for so great and gracious benefits. This mutual compact and covenant, that
it might be made firm and authentical, is sealed by the outward badges and
tokens of baptism and the Lords Supper, which are sacred signs testifying
Gods good will toward us, and confirming our duty toward him. This is no small
mercy showed unto us, but the most sacred and sovereign gift of God that can
be bestowed upon any people in this life: as Psalm. 111.9. The Prophet
remembers in the last place, that he sent redemption unto his people, he has
commanded his covenant for ever. So the Apostle makes it as a wonderful
privilege that God gave to the Jews, in that they had the sign of
circumcision and the Oracles of God committed unto them, Romans 3, 1, 2.
According to the saying of the Prophet, Psalm. 14.19.20.
He showed his word to Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel: he has
not dealt so with every Nation, neither have they known his judgments. This
ought to teach diligence, and work conscience in all sorts of men, least we
deprive our selves of the gifts of God lent unto us and bestowed upon us. Thus
we see first of all, that mankind generally, neither was, neither is within
the covenant, but only such as by faith embrace and lay hold on the covenant.
The Apostle says, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that
the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe.
Without faith it is impossible to please God, and therefore there is no promise
of reconciliation made without faith. The covenant between God and man
touching righteousness and eternal life, was delivered and revealed from the
beginning to our first parents, immediately after their fall, before they were
driven out of the Garden of Eden, Genesis 3, 15. The seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Serpents head. And in the tenor of this covenant God did put a
difference between the seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent. By the
seed of the woman he means, the head and his members, Christ and the
faithful that believe in him: as also by the seed of the Serpent, all the
reprobate that live and dye in their sins, forasmuch as he that commits
sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3, 8. and, he is their father. John 8, 44. Hence
we see, how foul and fearful a thing it is to be without faith, all such are
without life, without Christ, without the covenant, even strangers from the
covenants of promise, without hope, and without God in the world. Again, al
such as contemn grace offered unto them in the Mediator Christ Jesus, who is
the foundation and groundwork of this covenant, in whom all the promises of
God are yea, and amen: All such as follow sin with greedines, and drink
iniquity as water, such as are both bare and barren in good things for ever,
but plentiful in bringing forth the works of darkness, and the fruits of
disobedience, are all out of the covenant, and have no promise made unto them
of grace, of righteousness, of reconciliation, of protection, and of
salvation: It is required of us to repent and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1, 15.
But if we begin to break with God, shall we think to hold him close to his
covenant, and to challenge him with his word? Will we tie him to conditions,
and imagine to go free our selves? Will we urge him hard with his promise, and
as it were lay heavy burdens upon him, and not touch them our selves with our
little finger? He promises nothing unto us, except we keep covenant with
him. And what reason is it, that we should look to receive blessings at his
hands, when we will yield no duty of obedience unto him? For as God promises
to be with us and bestow all good things upon us, so we bind our selves unto
him, to become his children and his servants, to fear him, to love him, and to
walk in uprightness before him. God never begins to break with us,
neither falsifyeth his truth. He never forsakes us until we forsake him: and
therefore the Prophet said to Asa king of Judah, 2. Chron. 15, 2. The Lord is
with you, while ye he with him: and if ye seek him, he will be found of you:
but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. In all covenants the condition
must ever more be marked, considered, and observed. It is impossible that God
should lie, he cannot fail us or deceive us. The like fidelity toward him is
required of us. It is not enough for us to know what God has promised, but it
is requisite for us to learn upon what conditions he has promised to be
gracious unto us. He never promised to be merciful unto any, but under the
express condition of sincere obedience. If we will believe and obey, we shall
prosper: but if we become rebellious and stubborn, he will also walk
stubbornely against us, and bring upon us all the curses theatned in his word.

CHAP. XV. Of the third use of a Sacrament.
THus much of the second use: the third use of the Sacraments, The third use of
a Sacrament is to be a mark and badge of our profession.
is to be badges and marks of our Christian profession, that thereby one of
us should acknowledge an other to be of one household and of one family, of one
society, and as it were birds of one feather. For hereby we do manifest whose
we are, whom we serve, to what house we belong, is and to what people and,
Church: we are thereby gathered into one religion, and distinguished from other
sects: August cont. Faust. lib. 19. cap. 11.
we are gathered into one Church, and knit together in one, as Ephe. 2.
Remember that ye that ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, Ephe. 2,
11, 12, 13.
and called uncircumcision of thom which are called circumcision in the flesh
made with hands, ye were at that time without Christ, without God, without
hope: but now in Christ Jesus ye which once were far off, are made near by
the blood of Christ. The Jews by circumcision were distinguished from other
people, 1 Samuel 17, 36.
and the name of uncircumcised was reproachful, they were accounted unclean
and unholy person, for the uncircumcised males were to be Genesis 17.14.
cut off from the number of the people of God. So by baptism we are separated
from all other religions, and are consecrated only to Christian religion: and
such as continue unbaptized with contempt of that Sacrament, we take them not
for our brethren, nor for the people of God, nor for members of his Church,
because they refuse to take the Sacrament of baptism, as the badge and
cognizance by which they should be known: such as are Atheists, Infidels,
Sarazens, Turks, Persians, Moors, Jews, and other nations that want this
mark to be discerned to belong to the family of Christ. Christ Jesus sending
out his Apostles, bad them teach and baptize the Gentiles, Mat. 28, 19. Mar.
16, 16. Acts 2, 39, 41.42.
to whom he directed them: therefore where the word and Sacraments are, there is
a Church and Congregation of the people of God. And Mar. 16, 16. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved. And heereunto comes that saying, Acts
2. When the Apostles, had exhorted the people to amend their lives, and to save
themselves from that froward generation, Then they that gladly received the
word were baptized: and they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers, and the same day there was
added to the Church three thousand souls. Thus we see that by the Sacraments
as by certain bands and chains, God knitteth and binds his people to
himself, and keeps them in his covenant, least they should part asunder and
fall away to infidelity. And the people are warned, that by these outward
signs they differ from the barbarous savages, and unbelieving Gentiles, and
consequently should endeavor and provide that they likewise differ from them in
those things that are signified by those signs.

This offers to our considerations very good uses. bear the badges of Christ
our Lord. How do men in this world desire to wear the cloth and shroud
themselves under the badges of great persons of countenance to protect them?
how much greater preferment is it to be the servants of Christ, to be gathered
under his wings and to be his Disciples, whose service is perfect 1. Cor. 7.22.
John 8,, 6.
freedom and protection from all evils? and whose badges are instruments of
his saving graces? If this be the glory of the faithful, let us seek to
maintain our dignity and freedom, Ioh. 3, 1, 2. Ioh. 1, 12.13.
according as Ioh teaches, Behold what love the Father has given to us, that
we should be called the Sons of God: for this cause the world knows you
not, because it knows not him. And again in his Gospel, As many as received
Christ, to them he gave prerogative to be Sons of God, even to them that
believe in his name, which are borne not of blood, nor of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God. Whereas on the other side, the estate and condition of
ungodly men is base, vile, miserable, and contemptible; they live to themselves
and to sin, they dye to judgment and condemnation. What can be more
fearful? what can be more wretched?

Pergamus, Revel. 2, 13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where
Satan's throne is, and thou keep my name, and have not denied my faith, even
in those days when Ant pas my faithful Martyr was sla^ne among you, where
Satan dwells. So Christ our Savior taught his Disciples, Math. 10.32.33.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father which is in heaven: But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father which is in heaven. Wherefore, this condemns those
that say, I will keep my conscience to my self, none shall know my religion
but God and my self, I will not be too forward for fear of after reckonings,
nor any way countenance such as be forward. These men, while they suppose to
keep their religion to themselves, do indeed proclaim openly that they are
of no religion. For if they did truly believe in their hearts, they would
likewise confess with their tongues, according to the saying of the Romans 10,
9, 10.
Apostle, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved:
for with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation. And Iam. 2, 18.
the Apostle James teaches us to try faith by works, as gold by the
touchstone, and the tree by his fruits, Chap. 2. Show me thy faith by thy
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. So then, let us not be
ashamed of the Romans 1, 16.
Gospel of Christ, Which is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes, and not shrink for trouble, as false cloth in the wetting, and a
deceitful bow in bending, least our Master be ashamed of us before his Father
and the holy Angels.

Thirdly, if the Sacraments be as badges to show forth Revel. 3.15.16.
as it is said to the Church of the Laodiceans, I know thy works, that thou
art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest cold or hot: therefore because
thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it shall come to pass, that I
shall spew thee out of my mouth. Wherefore, let us not be discouraged in
well-doing, but walking through good report and evil report, let us remember
that as Christ is our Lord and Master, so our profession and the Sacraments
are our badges.

Man. 1, 6.
where is the fear and reverence due unto him? Is it not meet we should show
our selves thankful for so great mercies and gifts? Were it not intolerable
unthankfulness and insufferable pride, for any man to wear the cognizance of
another, and yet to scorn his service, and deny him duty? Might not one
worthily check and control him as Christ did the Jews, who unwillingly
paid such taxes and tributes as were laid upon them? He called for a penny,
Mat. 22, 19.20, 21.
and said unto them? Whose image and superscription is this? They said unto
him, Caesar's. He answered, Give therefore to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and give to God the things that are Gods. So likewise might one say
fitly, Whose badge wearest thou? whose Arms bear thou on thy sleeue? Does
not this put thee in mind of thy state and condition, and of the service and
honor thou owe thy Master? In like manner may it be said to us, Whose badge
bear thou? Is it not Christ's? we are not therefore our own men, as the
Apostle reasons and concludes, 1 Cor. 6, 19, 20. Know ye not that your body
is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, whom ye have of God? and ye
are not your own. For you are bought with a pr^ce, therefore glorify God in
your body and in your spirit, for they are Gods. So many therefore as come
without knowledge and true repentance, break their faith given to Christ, and
betray the body of Christ as much as in them lies. Wherefore to the right use
and partaking of the Sacraments, there is required the knowledge of God in three
persons, especially of the person of Christ, perfect God and perfect man, and
of his three offices to save his people: to be their Priest, perfectly by
sacrifice to reconcile and justify them: to be their king, by the government
of his Church, to kill sin in them and to sanctify them; to be their
teacher, to instruct them in the will of his heavenly Father. After these is
required true faith, and earnest repentance, otherwise we cannot receive
Without faith and repentance we cannot receive Christ.
Christ in the Sacraments. Put food into the mouth of a dead man, it cannot
nourish him: So if one that is unworthy and unfit, lying dead and rotting in
his sin do come to the Sacraments, certainly they do not give him life and
worthiness, 1 Cor. 11, 27, 29.
but such a one does lade himself with a greater burden of sin and punishment,
as 1 Cor. 11. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, he eats and
drinks his own judgment, because he discerns not the Lords body.

CHAP. XVI. Of the number of Sacraments.
HItherto we have spoken of the chief uses of the Sacraments: now we are come
to speak The number of Sacraments.
of the number of Sacraments, according as we take the name and have declared
the nature of them. Let us see then how many such visible signs and seals of
spiritual grace in the new Testament, were instituted of God to set forth the
benefits of Christ, for the continual use of the Church. Many live in the
bosom of the Church, hear the word, come to public prayer, take themselves
to be goodly Christians, offer themselves to the Lords-table, and are made
partakers of the Sacraments, who yet are ignorant how many Sacraments there
are, and what they are. None almost so simple but he can number his sheep and
cattle: he knows their marks, he knows their differences: but ask him
how many commandments of the law, how many Articles of faith, how many
petitions of the Lords prayer, or how many Sacraments of the new Testament, he
can answer nothing. They know no difference between commandment and
commandment, between the first Table and the second, between article and
article, and between one petition and another. Such have their wits wholly
exercised on the world, and on worldly things, which iustle out religion and
the knowledge of heavenly things. If we have ears to hear, let us hear what
is the faith of the Church in this point, grounded upon the infallible rule and
rock of the word of God. The Sacraments of the Church ordained by Christ, to
assure our communion with him are only two: Christ instituted only two
Sacraments.
Baptism whereby we are received into the covenant of God, in stead of
circumcision: and the Lords Supper, whereby we are nourished, maintained, and
retained therein, in stead of the Passover. For albeit the covenant be but
one, yet the scales thereof are two, to assure us that by union with Christ, we
are regenerated and shall be nourished to eternal life. He has delivered us
a few Sacraments in stead of many, he could have instituted more if he had
thought it good for the benefit of the Church. These are as it were the two
eyes whereby we see and behold the promises of God. These are as the two hands,
whereby we after a sort do handle Christ crucified and lay hold on the graces
of salvation. Christ has appointed no more Sacraments, he has laid on us an
easy yoke and a light burden.

That these two are the only Sacraments of the new Testament, may appear by
these reas^ns Reasons why there are only two Sacraments.
following. First, Christ taught no more to his Apostles, the Apostles
delivered no more to the Churches, the Churches embraced no more for many years.
When the Lord Jesus lived on the earth, Luke 1, 76. and 33.
he instituted baptism, by the ministry of John Baptist, who as he was sent
to prepare the hearts of the people, so he preached the baptism of repentance:
Afterward the Lord Jesus establish it with his own mouth, in the commission
given to his Disciples: So he appointed and himself first administered his last
Supper in remembrance of his death, until his second coming again with power
and great glory. These two true Sacraments of the Church, to wit, baptism and
the Lords Supper were instituted and warranted by the mouth of Christ himself,
and none other beside these. These we receive because Christ ordained them:
other we receive not, because he ordained them not.

Secondly, the Apostle Paul admonishes the Corinthians to beware of Idolatry,
not to flatter themselves, or to think themselves the members of Christ, and
therefore should escape the judgment of God, because they had the Sacraments:
for the Church of the Israelites had as great privileges as they, they had the
same Sacraments 1 Cor. 10.1.2, 3, 4.
the same Baptism, the same Supper in substance and effect, yet God was not
pleased with them, but overthrew them in the wilderness. If then the
Corinthians had any more then these two, they might have justly replied, We
grant indeed, in respect of these they are equal with us, but we have other
which they had not, wherein they are inferior to us, and we superior to them,
and therefore are preferred before them. If then the Apostles reason conclude
strongly, we may hence gather directly, that there are only two and no other
Sacraments, because the Apostle mentions no more, where he purposes to set
forth the privileges of the Jews, and to make them equal with the Gentiles.
Wherefore we must receive two Sacraments only, or else the Apostle has
reasoned weakly.

Furthermore, the same Apostle 1. Corinthians 12.3. purposing to show that many
members of the Church are one body in Christ coupled by him as by joints,
proves this point by a full enumeration ot the Sacraments, being pledges of
our setting into the body of Christ and continual nourishment in the same,
when he says, As by one Spirit we are all baptized nto one body, whether
Jews or Gentiles, so we have all been made to dri ke into one Spirit, Where
the Apostle shows, that all the faithful by the effectual working of the
Holy Ghost are made one body in Christ, which he confirms by the two
sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, without mention of any more.

Moreover, another reason may be framed, by comparing the Church of the Jews
with the Churches of the Christians in regard of their ordinary Sacraments.
There are no more Sacraments delivered in the Gospel, then were prefigured
under the law: for their Sacraments were types answering to our Sacraments, as
1 Pet. 3, 21. Our baptism answers the figure of the waters, refresenting the
same that our Baptism does. True it is, the Sacraments of the old Testament
were not Jewish Sacraments not figures of Christian Sa^^ments.
figures of the Sacraments of the new Testament, for then their Sacraments
should be the sign, and ours should be the thing signified: and so there
should be Sacraments of Sacraments, which were foolish and absurd. Again, the
Jewish Sacraments should be signs of things altogether unknown unto them and
not given them of God, for they were utterly ignorant of Baptism and the Lords
Supper. Besides, that ancient people should be saved by believing baptism and
the Lords Supper to come: for doubtless they were saved by believing that
which their Sacraments did signify: but they were not saved by believing
Baptism and the Lords Supper, but by believing in Christ to come. Lastly, the
old Sacraments should have one signification, and the new another; for the old
should signify the new, and the new should signify Christ and all his
benefits. (...).
Notwithstanding, the Sacraments of the new testament succeed in the room of
those of the old, and signify the same things that they do; baptism Col. 2,
11.12.
came in place of circumcision, and the Lords Supper is come in place of the
Paschall Lamb, as appears in that it was administered presently after it,
Luke 22, 14.15.
to declare the abrogating of the one and establishing of the other. As then
there was the same faith and the same way of salvation by Christ, Revel. 13.8.
who was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Heb. 13, 8.
he was yesterday and to day, and the same for ever: so had the Jewish rites
respect to 1 Cor. 10, 3, 4.
Christ, and al of them are reduced to our two Sacraments. Wherefore, as the
Jews had only 2. ordinary Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passover, as
appears: Exodus 12, 48
If a str^nger dwell with thee, and will observe the Passover of the Lord, let
him circumcise all the males the belong unto him: So the ordinary Sacraments of
Christ's Church are Baptism and the Lords Supper agreeing to the same. Now the
5. other Sacraments newly invented, were not prefigured in the law, they
succeed not in the place of their ceremonies, they are not answerable to any
types of Jewish rudiments, therefore they are no Sacraments.

Fifthly, these two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, are altogether
perfect and sufficient, not only to enter and plant a Christian into the
Church, but also to retain him in it: and therefore all other are frivolous,
vain, and superstitious, as superfluous branches to be pared away. Now that
they are sufficient to these purposes, appears by the effects and uses of
them, What other grace can we have then to be borne again in Christ, to have
justification, forgiveness of sins, and all privileges of eternal life, and
then afterward to be nourished and kept continually in him? All these are fully
represented and sealed up to us in these two: whereupon it follows, that
Christ who ordained the fewest and best Sacraments under the Gospel, appointed
these and no more. Thus then we may gather, that by the institution of Christ,
by the argument of the Apostle, by comparison of the Jewish ceremonies, and by
the sufficiency of the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, that
these are the only two Sacraments; the rest are forged and counterfeit
Sacraments, they seal not up Christ, August. in Psalm. 40.
they never flowed out of his side, John 19, 34.
from whence issued only water and blood.

Lastly, this number of 2. Sacraments appears not only by the testimony of
ancient Fathers, but by the confession of the adversaries. For howsoever in
many other controversies, their words are many, and their arguments probable
and very specious: yet for the auouching of 7. Sacraments, they are dumb and
silent, and are not able to produce the reverent witnesses of the elder time.
Bellarmine proves the word Bellar. de es^^ct, sacr. lib. 2. cap. 24.
Sacrament, sometimes to be given to all the seven: but this is when the word
is taken in a large and general signification, for any mystical sign and
token, C^nsur. Colon d^al. 7. page 248
which may signify some other thing, and may more properly be called a sign
then a Sacrament, as the covering of the head in the woman was a sign of
subjection: laying on of hands in ordination of the ministry, is a sign of
their separation to that work, and of Gods presence to assist them with his
grace and blessing: the Saboth day was a sign of the heavenly rest. In this
sense Augustine calls the Aug. de sim. lib. 3, cap. 9.
mystery of the Trinity a Sacrament; and fire a Sacrament, because by the heat,
light, and shining brightness thereof, the Trinity may after a sort be shaddowed
out. Besides, Warnw. Enc^unt. 1. c. 13.
the late Warneword, Page 91. handling this controversy of the number of
Sacraments, does not prove the number of seven Sacraments out of the
Scripture, neither goes about it, neither is able to derive it further then
the counsel of Florence holden in the year 1440. and from Peter Lumbard,
S^nent. lib. 4 d st. 2.
who was indeed the Father and first finder and founder of this number of
seven. Augustine, when speaks of Sacraments in the strict and proper
signification, and takes them for holy signs and seals, not only
signifying, representing and exhibiting spiritual graces, commanded by Christ,
succeeding in the room of the Jewish two ordinary Sacraments, and offering
Christ to all faithful receivers, the use whereof is perpetual and
universal, reckons them as we do, August de simb. ad cate^hu.
Haec sunt Ecclesiae gemina sacramenta. i. These be two Sacraments of the
Church. And in one other place, August. de doctr. Christ. l^b. 3. cap. 9.
Christ and his Apostles have delivered unto us a few Sacrament instead of
many, as Baptism and Lords Supper Cyprian, that lived before him, Cyprian lib.
2. Epist. 1.
is of the same judgment who says plainly, Tunc demum plane sanctificari,
etc. that is may be thoroughly satisfied and become the children of God,
Vtroque. Sacramento. Paschas. de coena dom.
if they be newborn by both the Sacraments. And likewise Paschas. 9. speaks
to the same purpose, sunt Sacramenta, etc. that is, The Sacraments of Christ in
the Catholic Church are, baptism, and the body and blood of our Lord. So S.
Ambrose entreating purposely Ambrose lib. 1. de Sacra. cap. 1.
of the Sacraments, speaks but of two, as the reformed Churches hold at this
day. Innocentius the third, speaking of them, C. Firmiter.
only makes mention of those two which we receive, not of the rest which we
refuse. Yea Thomas of Aquine the Chief Doctor of the Papists holds herein
the truth, In lib. 4. sent. did. 28. qu. 4.
teaching that the form of Baptism and of the Lords Supper is found in the
Scripture, but not of the other pretended Sacraments and namely of extreme
unction. To conclude, Bessar. de sacra. Eucharist.
Cardinal Bessarion confesses this, Haec duo sola Sacramenta in Euangelijs
manifest tradita legimus, that is, we read that these two only Sacraments
were delivered us manifestly and plainly in the Gospel. Thus we see that
others before us do join with us, and speak directly of both the Sacraments,
of two Sacraments, and of only two Sacraments: and therefore the bringing in
of seven is as strange and monstrous, as if a man should say we wanted seven
feet to walk, or seven eyes to see, or seven hands to handle, or seven
ears to hear, whereas two of each sort are sufficient, and the other five are
needless and superfluous in the body

Now let us come to the uses of this division. In heavy burden pressing down
the Father of the old Testament, and keeping them Act. 15, 10.
in great bondage: now the yoke is broken and we are delivered. As we see the
like mercy of God, in teaching a short form of prayer, as a perpetual
direction to the Church, and in delivering the ten Commandments divided into
two tables: so he has not troubled us with many Sacraments: whereby also our
nature prone to idolatry is respected, and the grace of the new Testament is
wonderfully amplyfied. We see how superstition and gross Idolatry have
prevailed in the Church of Rome, and infected with deadly poison one of the
Sacraments: how much greater danger were it if more Sacraments had been
commanded and commended unto us?

Again, hereby we may perceive and conceive the Difference between the
Sacraments of the old Testament and the new.
between those given to the Jews and these retained among Christians. For
ours are few in number, theirs are many in number; the Arc, Circumcision, the
Passover, Manna, the Cloud, the Sea, the Rock, many purifications and
oblations which are not easy to be numbered. But the Gospel acknowledges only
two, as two twins begotten of the same father, and brought forth of the same
mother. Hereunto we may add not unprofitably, other material differences to
be acknowledged. They differ in time: ours show forth our communion with
Christ already come, and so are more firm and durable, as those 1 Cor. 11, 26
which are not to be changed to the end of the world, 1 Cor. 11. Ye show the
Lords death till he come. Their Sacraments were ordained only until the
coming of Christ, because they showed and pointed out Christ to come, so that
the work of grace was more obscure unto them. Again, they differ much in
variety of Sacramental signs and rites, as the cutting of the fore-skinne,
the Lamb of the Passover, iournying through the Sea, saving by the Arc,
drinking of the rock, lifting up the brazen Serpent, raining down of Manna,
washing of their body; they had calves, sheep, goats, doves, bread, wine,
oil, and such like: we have only water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the
Lords Supper. Thus the signs do greatly vary. Fourthly, they differ in
easiness. For the ceremonies committed to the people of the Jews were hard,
cumbersome, painful to the flesh, and some of them were administered with
effusion and shedding of blood, partly of man and partly of beasts. Of man, as
in circumcision: of beasts, as in the Paschall Lamb and in the sacrifices. But
our Sacraments, though Sacraments of Christ's blood shed for us, yet of
themselves be void of blood. Fifthly, they differ in measure of signification,
For our Sacraments have a more plentiful and full representation of grace
offered, and stir up a greater measure of faith then the Sacraments of the
old Testament (which were more dark and obscure) the Lord reserving a fuller
measure of knowledge unto the blessed times of the Gospel. For as the
exhibiting of Christ Jesus in the flesh in fullness of time, and as it were in
the old age of the world, is of more efficacy to move us then the expectation
of him to come, so we have better helps and an holy advantage to raise and
rouse up our faith unto a greater assurance of grace and mercy, by how much the
accomplishment is more then the promise, and the fulfilling greater then the
foretelling.

Lastly, they differ in respect of the people to whom they were given, and for
whom they were ordained: ours belong to all people dispersed over the face of
the whole earth (that are ingrafted into the Church) whereas theirs were tied to
one Nation, to one people, to one place, to the posterity of Abraham.
Notwithstanding these differences which are in signs and circumstances:
touching the chief thing even the matter and substance of the Sacraments they
are equal, Wherein the Sacraments of the old and new Testam^nt agree.
having the same end and the same signification, and being of one efficacy; as
also the word of the Prophets and Apostles is. One and the same God is author
of them. One and the same Mediator between God and man, even the man Jesus
Christ is represented in both the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.
They signify and show forth the same Communion of Christ, by which all the
elect are saved, and seal up salvation and remission of sins to all that do
receive them by faith. For they were given to be signs and seals of grace and
of the promises of God, to distinguish the faithful from all other sects and
religions in the world, and that they should be received with profit only of
the faithful. In these and such like things, the Sacraments of the Jewish and
Christian Church are not unequal: although in the outward signs and
circumstances they be diverse, yet in the substance and in the thing signified
there is no difference.

2 Cor. 1.20.
his only promise is assured payment: yea all the promises of God in him are
yea, and are in him Amen, unto the glory of God. But seeing the goodness of
God has abounded in granting unto us two, Sacraments that where doubting
abounds, there faith might abound much more: our sin is the greater, if now
we waver like Iam. 1, 6.
a wave of the sea tossed of the wind and carried away. One tree of life serve
Adam to assure him life: one raine-bowe sufficed Noah: one return of the Sun
backward was enough to Hezekiah, and they believed. If then we seek a sign
we have two given unto us, that having two vnchangeale Sacraments as it were
two witnesses of his word, and assurances of his promise, we might have strong
consolation. The unbelieving Jews said to Christ, Mat. 12.38. and 16, 1.
Show us a sign, and we will believe thee. Behold the Lord shows us two
visible signs of his spiritual and invisible graces, and shall not we
believe, being steadfast in faith and grounded in hope? We desire forgiveness
of sins and assurance thereof: by these two the Lord promises, couenanteth,
and indenteth to give the same unto us, setting the seals to his own writing.

Lastly, this division and numbering up of the Sacraments Council. Trid. sess. 7.
de sacra. in genesis can. 18. 11. and 13.
maintained of the Church of Rome, to wit, Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony,
Orders, and extreme Unction. Baptism we embrace: the Lords Supper we
acknowledge: of these two we move no question, we make no controversy: the
other five, whose father is unknown, we refuse as bastards, and cannot admit
them into the number of Sacraments, the reasons whereof we will render in the
Chapters following.

CHAP. XVII. That Confirmation is not a Sacrament.
THe Apostles as the Maister-builders of the Churches, planted the Gospel
where the name of Christ: had not been heard. Now because many seducers arose
that troubled the peace of the Church, and the faith of many believers began to
waver: the Apostles agreed together to go again to the Churches where they had
laid 1 Cor. 3.12.
a golden foundation, (howsoever other had builded hay and stubble thereon) to
see how they Acts 11, 22.23, and 15, 36.
increased or decreased, as Acts 11. And they confirmed their hearts, and
established them in the faith which they had taught. And Chap. 15. Paul said
unto Barnabas, Let us return and visit our brethren in every City where we
have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. And we doubt not, but
when the Gospel was revealed, the Apostles by laying on hands gave the guists
of the Holy Ghost to the believers in Christ. This practice of the Apostles we
find, this we confess, this we approve and allow. But of any Sacrament of
confirmation we read not, and therefore allow not. Again, it was a lawdable
custom (in the primitive Church) of Christian parents, to bring their Children
to the Bishop, who examined them in the principles and fundamental points of
religion, Heb. 6, 1.
he asked the^ reason of their faith, he instructed them further in the
mysteries of godliness: and that this action might have the more reverence and
dignity, he laid his hands upon them, and prayed unto God for them, that he
would increase and continue the good things that he had begun in them.
Confirmation is no Sacrament.
This imposition of hands, with prayer to be strengthened in the Holy Ghost, and
to have increase of grace, corrupted with annointings, depraved with crossings,
and defiled with sundry superstitions, is no Sacrament. First, every Sacrament
should have warrant and appointment from Christ, and a promise annexed unto it,
but this has none. 2. it has no word of institution in the Scripture, nor
commandment to continue the use of it until the coming of Christ and end of
the world, and therefore no Sacrament. For the word must be added to the
element, and so it is made a Sacrament. True it is, they use a forged and
counterfeit form in their confirmation, I sign thee with the sign of the
holy Cross and I confirm thee with the oil of salvation, in the name of the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. These indeed are words, but no word of
God: they show an intolerable presumption, not to be excused. But indeed a
counterfeit word is fit enough for a counterfeit Sacrament, and there is a good
agreement when both writing and seal are suitable, that is, both forged.
Thirdly, it wants an outward sign instituted by Christ. We read oftentimes
that the Apostles used laying on of hands, we read of no oil or Chrisme.

Besides, we know they gave thereby, the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost
which now are ceased, as Acts 8. where we see, when Samaria was converted to
the faith by preaching of Phillip, and baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,
the Apostles sent thither Peter and John, who prayed for them, Acts 8, 5, 14
15, 1^, 17.
That they might receive the Holy Ghost, (for as yet he was fallen down on
none of them) then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
Ghost. This confirmation thus used, had then a profitable use in the Church of
God. But as the brazen serpent commanded by Number. 21, 8.9
God, and set up by Moses for good purpose, was afterward abused and 2 King.
18, 4
incense offered unto it, and lastly was by that good king Hezekiah destroyed
and demolished: so popish confirmation has many intolerable abuses mingled
with it, and sundry foolish ceremonies, no better then apish toys, accompanied
with horrible superstition; as if it were invented to bring the faith of
Christ, the Sacraments of the church, the worship of God, and all holy things
into contempt. For first of all, the Bishop that must play this play, The rites
and ceremonies used in Confirmation.
acts, the matter with Stage-like iestures, he must breath with his stinking
breath upon the pot or cruze wherein the chrisme or unction is, and saluteth it
with these gracious or rather graceless words, Hail hol^ Chrisme, making an
abominable Idol of it, and speaking to it as if he had breathed life into it.
For the popissh religion carries no reverence with it, if there be not an Idol
set up at one end of it. Secondly, Bellar. de s^cra. Confir. lib. 2. cap. 13.
he strikes him a gentle blow with his hand that comes to be confirmed, to
teach him patience, and to bear the Cross for Christ's sake: whereas himself
rather deserves to have a sound rap on his pate, for abusing the party, the
place, the people, God, and his Gospel.

Thirdly, the childs forehead is bound about with a linen swathing band,
least that the oil should run down, and so all the fat were in the fire,
and the grace of God lost which was never obtained. Fourthly, neither head, nor
forehead must be washed seven days together after the anointing, to assure
us (I think) when all is done, that it is but a fluttish and unsavory
Sacrament. Fifthly, this supposed and counterfeit Sacrament must be given and
received by such as are fasting, to be sure they shall not surfeit at the taking
of it, and that notwithstanding all this preparation we must look for nothing
but hungry stuff: for otherwise here were enough to make a man spew and empty
his stomach. Lastly, it is such an holy blessing, that it must be bestowed
only on high days and feastiuall times for fear of the contempt of this
babble, as at the solemn feast of Easter, and especially at Whitsontide,
because then the Apostles were forsooth first of all confirmed by God himself.
Here is no talk of teaching youth the principles of religion, and of
examining them how they profit in knowledge and understanding; here is deep
silence touching these things, as if it were a needles matter, and altogether
impertinent unto them. Moreover, it is ministered in a strange tongue that none
understand what is spoken and meant: they call the oil, the oil of salvation:
they account him no perfect Christian that is not anointed by the Bishop: they
prefer it before baptism, because Cens^r. Colon d^al 11. page 326, 327.
any of their Priests may baptize, nay private men, nay women in their
supposed time of necessity, but Confirmation may be given among them only by
the hands of a Bishop: and lastly, they blow and hallow their oil, that it may
be made a spiritual ointment to purify soul and body forsooth. These errors
are so gross, that of every one they may be seen: they are so palpable, that
they may be felt. Wherefore, seeing their confirmation is wroght by
anointing, seeing it has no word of God but a word of their own, seeing they
have no commandment for it, nor promise of the presence of the Holy Ghost, and
last of all seeing it has many abuses joined with it; we have very just causes
to thrust it out of this place and rank of the Sacraments, and throw it down
from that high seat which it has long usurped. And so much the rather, because
some of the first and sounder Schoolmen have taught, that Confirmation as it
is a Sacrament was not ordained, either by Christ or by his Apostles, but
afterward in the counsel of Melda, Alex. Halens. part. 4. quest. 24.

CHAP. XVIII. That popish penance is no Sacrament.
THe doctrine of repentance and turning from all our sins to God, to bring
forth fruits of amendment of life, is taught in the Sacraments Joel. 2, 12, 13.
and commended unto al, Joel 2. Turn you unto me withal your heart, and rent
your heart, not your garments. There is none that lives and sins not, we
are corrupt and become abominable, the imaginations of our heart are only
evil, and that continually: Genesis 6, 5. Romans 7, 18.
in us, that is in our flesh or unregenerate part there dwells no good thing:
we were conceived and borne in sin, and therefore whosoever says, He is
without sin, deceives himself, and there is no truth in him. This
corruption of our nature that has taken hold on all mankind (for there is
none that does good no not one) must be mortified, and the new man which is
spiritual and regenerate by the Holy Ghost must be quickened. Repentance
therefore consists in an Esa. 1, 16, 17 Psalm. 34, 15. Mat. 3, 8.
inward sorrow for our sins, in an hatred of them, in suppressing the
corruptions of nature, in a purpose to obey God, in a care to forsake our sins,
in confessing the greatness of them, in condemning our selves for them, in
acknowledging the desert of them, in an holy indignation and anger against our
selves, that we have been so careless in looking to our own ways, in
fearing least we run into the same sins again, in desiring ever hereafter to
please God, and to walk more carefully before him in zeal touching the
service of God, and in taking revenge sometimes and punishment upon our selves
for former offenses. For we confess plainly and deny not, but some outward
penalties and chastisements of the body may be used and do please God, not of
themselves, but because they are profitable means and good helps to further
and forward true repentance. As for example, he that has offended grievously
in surfeiting and drunkenness, and has great heaviness of heart and sorrow
of mind that he has sinned against so gracious a God and merciful Father:
may prescribe and appoint to himself without appearance of superstition, or
error of satisfaction, or opinion of merit, some fasting or abstinence for a
certain time, that he may be better fitted to Gods service, and further
strengthened against those sins into which he is fallen. This doctrine we
receive as the doctrine of Christ, and agreeable to the Prophets and Apostles,
as appears, 2 Cor. 7. where Paul sets down the effects or fruits of true
repentance. This is our doctrine and the doctrine of the Church of God,
touching repentance: let us consider a little the popish penance and what they
teach touching it, and we shall see plainly, that heaven and earth, light and
darkness are not more opposite then their devices and inventions are to the
truth. For they have forged a new Sacrament which they call Penance, What popish
penance is.
when a man is contrite for all his sins, and makes a full and sufficient
reckoning up and rehearsal of them all in the ear of the Priest, of whom he
is enjoined to make satisfaction after he is absolved of them: So that this new
coined Sacrament consists of these four counterfeit parts, The parts of
popish penance.
the contrition of the heart, the confession of the mouth, the satisfaction of
the work, and the absolution of the Priest. Thus they abuse the name of a
Sacrament, when they apply it to these things, as we shall see afterward.
Again, they require all these things as necessary to salvation in all that are
of years of discretion, whereby they lay snares for men's souls and set them
upon the rack, requiring an impossibility at their hands, forasmuch as no man
can have perfect sorrow, nor number up all his sins, nor yet make
satisfaction for them, and therefore this Penance is not a board to escape
shipwreck, neither physic for the soul, but the high way to desperation.
Lastly, they make the performance of all these things meritorious, and teach
that remission of sins is obtained by them; which tends to the reproach and
dishonor of Christ. Let us speak somewhat of these in order.

Touching the first point, to wit, Contrition, we grant that godly sorrow of
heart for sin is necessary to repentance, as also to have a true feeling of
sin, and an hatred and detestation of it: howbeit it is no part the
repentance, but only the right and ready way that leads to it, because the
more sin does press us and afflict us, the more we learn to fly to the
mercy of God in his Son Christ. But they teach that this Contrition ought to
be perfect, and that the greatness of the grief must be answerable and
equivalent to the greeuousnesse of the sin; they make it a necessary mean
and cause of justification, and apart of satisfaction for our sins, that we
deserve by it remission of them; and therefore their doctrine is devilish and
blasphemous, translating unto mortal and sinful men, that which is proper to
Christ the Son of God.

The next point is Confession. Such as the Scripture allows and approves, we
admit and acknowledge; as first, public confession of the whole Church,
acknowledging themselves before the congregation to be grievous sinners in the
sight of God, consenting to the Minister that conceiueth the prayer, and
craving pardon of our heavenly Father in the name of Christ our Savior. This
is practiced continually of all the faithful met together, they begin the
exercises of religion with this public humiliation, Nehe. 9, 3. Nehe. 9, 3.
For wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his name, where he is in
the midst of them, there is always confession of sin: forasmuch as there is
nothing can withold good things from us, but our own unworthiness.
Secondly, there is a private confession, when a man pours out his heart before
God alone, and desires forgiveness of his sins. This did David, Psalm. 32, 5,
and ^1.1.2. Luke 18.
this did the Publican practice: and so does every believing soul almost at
all times. For we do all of us find continual occasions to pour out our
meditations before him, to keep us from sin, to hold us up in tentations,
and to weaken the power of sin daily in us. Thirdly, there is another
confession, when such as are banished from the Church, and excluded from the
Sacraments, and excommunicated out of the society of the faithful, do openly
acknowledge their offenses, and desire to be reconciled to the Church, which
they have notoriously offended, as we see in the example of the incestuous
Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2.6. 2 Cor. 2, 6.
who humbled himself before God, and asked forgiveness of the Church. Fourthly,
there is a kind of confession of such as have offended their brethren; not
that which we mentioned before, belonging to ecclesiastical discipline: but a
private acknowledgement of the injuries and wrongs done unto them, and a
craving of forgiveness at their hands, which duty the offenders are bound to
perform, and the offended are bound to grant, according to the rule of
charity. Mat. 5, 24, and 6, 14. and 18.15.
For we are all charged to reconcile our selves unto our brethren, and to
forgive as we desire to be forgiven. Lastly, there is a lawful and lawdable
kind of confession, pertaining to such as are troubled in conscience for sin,
and desire to find comfort, and to be at peace with God. These are to make
confession of that particular sin which lies heavy upon their heart, either
to the Minister, if he have the tongue of the learned, and be able to minister
a word of comfort in season; Iam. 5.16.
or to some other faithful and godly brother, that their spirits may be raised
up and refreshed by their prayers. All there sorts of confession we know to be
good, and therefore receive: but what are they to the auricular confession
secretly whispered in the ear of an ignorant and sottish Priest, wherein men
are enjoined to confess all particularly, at the least all their mortal sins,
Rhem. annot. upon John 20.
whether they be committed in mind, heart, will, and cogitation only, or else
in word and work, with all the necessary circumstances and differences of the
same. This they will have done once a year, in the holy time of Lent, before
the Lords Supper be received at Easter. This is a mere invention of carnal
men, not an institution of God: forasmuch as Christ neither by commandment,
neither by example ordained any such auricular Confession or particular
enumeration of all our sins; of which we shall speak further in the third
book, where we entreat of the preparation required of such as come to the
Table of the Lord.

The third point is satisfaction; and it is true that the justice of God must
be satisfied, forasmuch as he can never forget to be just: but it is folly and
madness, blockishnesse and sencelesnesse, nay high presumption and blasphemy for
flesh and blood to think that they can make recompense to God for their sins
and fully satisfy his justice. For who is able to bear the burden of his
wrath? Psalm. 90.11.
For who can pay a price sufficient for his sins? or who dare offer to the
righteous God the rags and patches of his own works, to merit thereby his
favor? What is the sprinkling of holy water, the building of Churches, the
erecting of Monasteries, the mumbling up of prayers, the lighting of Candles,
the giving of alms, the putting on of sacke-cloth, the chastising of the
bodge, the saying of Masses, the buying of indulgences, the going on
pilgrimages, and such like superstitious vanities and impieties; what I say, do
all these avail to make satisfactiOn to God for the sin of our souls? And
when it shall be said unto them, Who required these things at your hands? Esaias
1, 12.
what shall they be able to answer? nay when it shall be said, I detest and
abhor your devises and dotages, what can they find out to mutter or utter in
defense of themselves? Then they shall be taken speechless, and have nothing
to answer for themselves Our satisfaction to God is only Christ's satisfaction
(which is perfect and absolute, and imputed to us by faith) who of God is made
unto us wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1,
30. 1 Cor. 1, 30.
As for the popish satisfaction, it is not to be received for these causes:
first because they affirm that it stands with the justice of God to retain
the punishment after the sin committed is forgiven. Secondly, they hold that
the temporal punishments of this life due to sin, may be bought out, and
redeemed by our good works. Thirdly, they teach that it is not sufficient to
believe that Christ has fully satisfied for us, who notwithstanding was made
sin for us which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5, 21.
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him, neither that it is
enough to amend our lives; but that God must be satisfied by us for our sins in
our own persons, by the punishment and chastisement of our selves; as by
penance enjoined by the Priest, or by prayers, fastings, alms, chastisements,
and such like shows of wisdom, Col. 2, 23.
in voluntary religion and humbleness of mind, and in not spring the body,
which are things of no value, since they pertain to the filling of the flesh,
Col. 2.23. Lastly, they avouch that satisfaction by this will worship is not
only profitable to the sufferers themselves, but also available for others,
so that one man may bear the burden and discharge the debt of another, one
man may merit and satisfy for another. The very naming of these impieties and
absurdities is sufficient to overthrow them, and to make us to detest them.

The last point is absolution arising from the former, wherein stands the
life of this dead Sacrament. For when the penitent has performed all the
former, his contrition, his confession, and his satisfaction, he is by the
Priest fully absolved of his sins, albeit he know nothing of the doctrine of
hatred of sin, of amendment of life, and of flying to the mercy of God and
the merit of Christ his Son, without which there can be no true repentance.
Besides, these three supposed and pretented parts of Penance, may be found in
the reprobate, as we see in Judas, who had their contrition, for he was
sorrowful: their confession, for he said, Matthew 27, 4. Mat. 27 4.
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood: and their satisfaction, for he
brought back again the cursed money that he had taken, and cast it down in
the Temple: and yet he was far from true repentance, as appears in this,
that he went out immediately, and hanged himself. Thus we have heard at
large, what the popish Penance is.

Now the question Penance no Sacrament.
arises between the Church of Rome and us, whether this repentance which is a
dying to sin, and a walking in newness of life, and whether reconciliation
to the Church and absolution from sin be a Sacrament of the new Testament,
instituted by Christ, to assure his saving graces to us? We answer it is not.
First, it was in time of the old Testament from the beginning of man's fall and
transgression: it was continually preached and published by the Prophets, and
therefore before Christ's coming in the flesh, and cannot be a Sacrament of
the new Testament.

Secondly, it wants an outward sign such as water in Baptism, such as bread
and wine in the Lords Supper: now every Sacrament must have an outward element
and sign to represent the spiritual grace: therefore Penance can be no
Sacrament.

Thirdly, it has no word to command it, no particular promise of God, which is
the chief stay and staff of a Sacrament. Bellarmine affirms, that Bellar.
lib. 1. de poenit. ca. 10
Christ instituted the Sacrament of Penance, when be breathed upon his
Apostles after his resurrection, and said unto them, Ioh. 20.22.
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye rem't they are remitted, and whose
sins ye retain they are retained. And he says, the words of absolution are
the sign, and that remission of sins is the promise of grace which is
signified. For answer to this assertion, would gladly ask this question,
whether the Apostles had this ministerial power to forgive sins to repentant
sinners, when they baptized to remission of sins, if this power were here
first instituted and given unto them? Do they not by tying the authority of
remitting sins to this time, make their baptism of none effect? Besides, we
have showed that it is not sufficient to have a sound of words that may be
heard, to make an outward sign: there must be a visible sign that may be
seen, to warrant a Sacrament. Now to make a Sacrament without such a sign,
were to make a Sacrament without a Sacrament. Lastly, as they take and
understand Penance, it is neither Sacrament, nor sacred: it is neither holy
sign, nor holy thing: it is neither an institution of God, nor any way of God.
For they mean not thereby amendment of life, or inward sorrow and grief of
mind for the life past, which is sometimes testified by weeping and mourning,
by sacke-cloth and ashes, by fasting and humiliation: but they understand by
Penance and external discipline, satisfaction for our sins to God by our own
sufferings: and that wearing of sacke-cloth, sprinkling of ashes, chastising of
the body, whipping of the flesh, putting on rough apparel, lying on boords and
hard places, abstaining from flesh, and afflicting our selves by such outward
exercises, are a paying of the pains due to sin, part of amends made to Gods
justice, and meritorious before him. This punishment, this Penance, these
penalties we abhor, as an horrible blasphemy against the blood of Christ,
which is the only satisfaction to God for sin. For if we satisfy for our
selves, then has not Christ satisfied for us, nor paid the price due unto our
sins. Besides, they charge God the Father with injustice, in that having laid
the guiltiness of our sins upon his own Son, and punished them in him, they
make him not satisfied with that punishment, but to exact the debt of us
again, for which his Son as our surety has fully and sufficiently answered,
Esa. 53, 5, 7.
He is punished for our transgressions, he is bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace is laid upon him, and by his str^pes we are healed:
the Lord makes the punishment of us all to light upon him. Likewise 1 Ioh. 1,
7. Reu^l. 1, 5.
the Apostle John says, The blood of Jesus Christ does purge us from all sin.
And in the Revelation he adds, Christ has washed us from our sins in his
blood. Whereby we see we are taught to believe, that we are pardoned and
reconciled to God, not through our own satisfaction, not for our own works,
not by our own sufferings, but only through the death and bloodshedding of
Christ. Wherefore, their Penance is to be acknowledged to be sacrilege, and
not accepted as a Sacrament: to be injurious to Christ's death, not meritorious
for our life.

CHAP. XIX. That Matrimony is not a Sacrament.
THe Council of Trent under Pius 4. sess. 8. decrees, Council. Trid. sess. 8.
can. 1.
If any shall say, that Matrimony is not truly and properly one of the 7.
Sacraments instituted by Christ, but was brought in by men into the Church, and
does not confer grace let him be accursed. Hereby they would seem to set
forth the dignity of marriage above us, seeing they lift it up into the number
of the Sacraments of the Church. Yet (as a liar seldom agrees with himself)
they complain that we too highly magnify the married estate, and themselves
cannot abide it in their Clergy, because forsooth it is written, Be ye holy for
I am holy: and Romans 8. They which are in the flesh cannot please God. Marriage
therefore is too holy an ordinance for their unholy Clergy, inasmuch as they
teach in this point 1 Timothy 4.1.2, 3.
the doctrine of devils, and are led by the spirit of error, that forbid
marriage which God has left free. We confess touching marriage, so much as
the word of God teaches us, that it is an ordinance of God, instituted before
the fall of man while he was without sin, Genesis 2.18.
and blessed of God, who said, It is not good for man to be alone, let us make
him an helper meet for him. This estate Christ did not abrogate and disanull,
but repeated and confirmed, Mat. 19, 16. John 2, 1, 2. Heb. 13, 4. 1 Cor.
6.9.10.
not only by word, but by his own presence, and has left it as a lawful
remedy against fornication and uncleanness. We account it an honorable estate
of life among all, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers God
will judge, and cast into utter darkness, where their worm shall never dye,
and their fire shall not be quenched; as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 6. Know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived: neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
buggerers, nor drunkards, shall inherit the kingdom of God. Notwithstanding,
Reasons why marriage is no Sacrament.
we cannot call and account it a Sacrament, for diverse weighty reasons, and
evident causes. First, seeing it was not instituted by Christ, but was from the
beginning of the world, and therefore it was before the law and under the law,
how can it be a Sacrament of the new Testament? Again, matrimony may be among
Infidels and unbelievers, out of the Church and society of the faithful. For
the matrimony of Infidels is lawful. God did institute it for all mankind.
The commandment is general, Increase and multiply. The Apostle teaches, that
if the unbelieving woman will dwell with the believing husband, Grati. in dec.
c. 28. qu 1. Lumb. lib 4. did. 39.
he must not put her away for her infidelity: and marriage is honorable among
all persons. Seeing therefore it was before the fall of man, before the giving
of the law, under the government of the law, and made honorable among all, it
cannot be a Sacrament of the Church of Christ, and for the members only of the
Church. Thirdly, it is not common and commanded to all the faithful, for it is
not needful and necessary that all in the Church should be married. 1 Cor.
7.7. Mat. 19, 11, 12.
Every one has his proper gift, some one way, some another. And albeit God
have not tied grace to the Sacraments, yet they in some sort H^w the Sacr^ments
are necessary for the Church.
are necessary for the Church, and to be partaked of the children of the
Church, whether we respect the commandment of God who requires them: or
whether we regard our own weakness, who stand in need of all holy means and
profitable helps that tend to the confirmation of our faith. Seeing then
matrimony is not commanded to all, neither serves to confirm faith, it cannot
be received as a Sacrament. Fourthly, the Sacraments are ordinances of God,
applying Christ and his merits to all the faithful: but matrimony is not an
instrument whereby God applies Christ and all his benefits: much less is it
a common instrument of the common salvation and benefits that all have in
Christ Jesus. Furthermore, we have showed how the Roman Church is contrary to
it self in this point: for our adversaries call matrimony a profanation Greg.
Mart. dis. Chap. 15.
of holy orders. And Pigghius.
another says, it is more tolerable for a Priest to keep many Concubines,
then to marry, If matrimony be an holy Sacrament, how should the sacred order
of your Priesthood be profaned, polluted, and defiled thereby? Lastly, it
has no promise of salvation joined to it (as it ought to have) though it be
lawful and used lawfully: in every Sacrament there must be likewise an
outward sign or element, as water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords
Supper, together with a sanctifying word to warrant it: but in this supposed
Sacrament there is neither matter, nor word, therefore no Sacrament. Hence it
is, that Durandus one of their own Doctors says, that Matrimony in a strict
and proper kind of speech is no Sacrament at all. The answer that Bellarmine
makes to this last reason is as absurd as their doctrine it self, namely,
that the word of institution in marriage is, Bellar. lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 6.
I take thee, which are the words expressing their mutual consent: and that
the matter or sign are the parties married. For not every word can consecrate
and sanctify, 1 Timothy 4, 5.
but the word of God. Again, the married persons are receivers of this
pretended and supposed Sacrament, so that they cannot be the matter or sign:
For the sign and the receiver are two distinct outward parts of a Sacrament,
so that they cannot be confounded or mingled together, as before we declared,
Chap. 3. The matter cannot be the receiver: the receiver cannot be the matter.
The thing received, cannot be the receiver: the receiver cannot be the thing
received. If then the persons married be the receivers, they cannot be the
sign received. If any further object and say, Marriage is the sign of an holy
thing, to wit, of the spiritual conjunction between Christ and his Church: I
answer, it was not instituted to confirm our faith in that point, but for
other ends which we named before. Besides, if we should call al signs of holy
things Sacraments; we should treble the number of seven; for so many
comparisons as we find in Scripture, we should have Sacraments: and then the
Stars, a grain of mustard-seede, leaven, a draw-net, a shepherd, a Vine, a
door, nay a thief, a murderer, and infinite other things, should be
Sacraments; which sometimes are made signs of holy things. This were not so
much to increase the number of Sacraments, as to multiply absurdities. Lastly,
the Sabbath was ordained to the Jews to be a sign between God and his
people in their generations, Heb. 4, 8.
and signified the spiritual rest in Christ, yet was it no ordinary Sacrament,
albeit it were blessed and sanctified of God. Wherefore all mystical and
signifying signs are not Sacraments.

But the greatest reason whereof they are most confident is, where the vulgar
translation and the Rhemish interpretation Ephesians. 5, 32.
reads, This is a great Sacrament. I answer, first the word signifies a
mystery or secret: but not every mystery or secret is a Sacrament: neither will
they admit a Sacrament, wheresoever a mystery is named. Secondly, the Apostle
speaks not of Matrimony, but of the spiritual conjunction between Christ
and his Church, as the words following do declare, This is a great mystery: but
I speak of Christ and of the Church. Where the Apostle preuenteth this very
objection, and shows in what respect he spoke of a mystery. For where one
might happily object and say, Do thou call marriage this mystery? he
answers, I speak not this of Marriage, I speak it in respect of Christ and
of his Church. This appears likewise in that he calls it a great mystery;
that is, A great secret. But the conjunction of man and wife is sensible, not
secret, much less a great secret. Now the Sacraments are called mysteries, Why
sacraments are called mysteries.
in respect of the Sacramental union between the sign and the thing
signified, between the representation and the thing represented; so that at
the same instant that one is present to the eyes, the hands, the mouth, and
every part and member of the body: the other by the power and working of Gods
Spirit is as present in a wonderful, mystical, and secret manner to the
faith, being the eyes and hands of the soul. Wherefore Cardinal Caietan not
so gross as many among them, Caiet in Ephesians. cap. 5.
confesses that these words prove not matrimony to be a Sacrament. Further, it
is evident to all that consider the circumstance of the text, that the Apostle
brings not forth marriage in this place as a similitude to represent the near
conjunction between Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5, 23, 25 28, 29, 32.
but contrariwise he brings forth the exceeding and eminent love of Christ as
a similitude to declare and enforce what should be the love of the husband
toward the wife. For the maine point of exhortation is set down, verse 25.
Husbands love your wives. This is argued and enforced by the example of Christ,
As Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it. Again, The man is the
head of the woman, as Christ is the head of the Church: and afterward, He that
loves his wife, loves himself, for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord does the Church. By all these
things it is plain and manifest, that if they will needs in this place dream
of a Sacrament, consisting of a sign and thing signified: Christ and the
Church must be the sign, representation, and consecrated mystery to represent
man and his wife, and their mutual love each to other, and not marriage a
consecrated sign of him. Last of all, I would know of them, whether so often
as the old translator uses the word Sacrament, they will have it taken
strictly, properly and particularly for the Sacraments of their church? I
think if they be sober minded and well advised, they dare not say so: for 1 Timothy 3.16. Ephesians. 1, 9, and cha. 3, 9. Revel. 17, 7.
then godliness shall be a Sacrament, Gods will shall be a Sacrament, the
calling of the Gentiles shall be a Sacrament, yea iniquity shall be a Sacrament.
For in all these places the word Sacrament is used, as well as in this place to
the Ephesians by the old Interpreter, and sometimes in the good part, and
sometimes in the evil: Conc. Trid. sess. 4. decret. 2. Melch. Canus. lib. 2.
cap. 13. Andrad. lib. 4. defens. Trid.
to whom notwithstanding they cleave, and must cleave under pain of the
censure and curse of the council of Trent.

CHAP. XX. That Orders are no Sacraments.
BY Orders we must understand the offices and ministry of the Church, Lumb
sent. li. 4. did. 24 ca. 3.
as also Peter Lumbard does. We confess when Christ led captivity captive, he
gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4, 11.
and ordained, Some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and teachers for the repairing of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ. By these he declares
his will unto us, he gathers together his scattered sheep, and publishes
the glad tidings of salvation, as Ier. 7. I have sent unto you all my servants
the Prophets, rising up early every day. Ier. 7 25. Luke 10, 16.
And Christ our Savior says, He that hears you, hears me: and he that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me. And the Apostle Paul teaches that God was in Christ, 2 Cor. 5, 19, 20.
and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them, and
has committed to us the word of reconciliation: Now then are we Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's
stead to be reconciled to God. This we hold, this we believe, this we teach
touching the degrees, orders, and offices of the ministry of the Gospel.

Sentent. lib. 4. did. 24. cap 1.
But the popish orders of the popish Church, they say are seven, whereof some
are greater and higher offices, some are lower, lesser, and inferior. The
greater are three, the office of Priesthood to offer up the sacrifice of the
body and blood of Christ upon the Altar: of Deaconship, to assist the Priests
in all things which are done in the Sacraments, to bring in the oblations, to
set them upon the Altar, to cover it with clothes, to bear the Cross, and to
read the Gospel and Epistle to the people: of the Subdeacons, to bring the
chalice and patten, to bring the cruet with water and the towell to the Altar,
and to pour out water to wash their hands. These are their higher Offices
above the rest, as the higher trees among the lower shrubs. The lesser orders
are four in number. First, of doore-keepers, these receive the keys of the
Church door to open the same. Secondly of readers, to read the Bible to the
people. Thirdly of Exorcistes, to call upon the name of the Lord, over such as
have unclean spirits, adiuring and coniuring them to come out in the name of
God: which power of commanding evil spirits is ceased in the Church. Lastly,
Acolythes, to prepare and carry torches and tapers when the Gospel is read to
the people, or the sacrifice is to be offered.

These seven popish orders, or rather plain disorders and confusions, we
cannot receive Reasons rendered why orders are no Sacraments.
into the number of Sacraments of the Church. For first, orders are so
fruitful, that this Bird has hatched seven young ones. This Sacrament is so
rich, so rank, so riotous, that it has ingendered and brought forth seven
petty and pretty Sacraments, and therefore these being numbered and patched up to
the former, we should have 13. Sacraments. A goodly brood of a gallant egg.
For if every one of these orders of doore-keepers, readers, exorcistes,
Acolythes, subdeacons, deacons, and Priests be Sacraments: we should multiply
the number of Sacraments according to the number of these orders, and so indeed
of seven we should have 13. Sacraments, which were a very disorderly order,
or if you list to call it, an orderly disorder.

And so Peter Lumbard master of the Sentences, Sent lib. 4. did. 24, cap. 1.
calls not orders a Sacrament as speaking of one, but Sacraments as speaking
of many, saying, Orders are called Sacraments, because in receiving of them
grace is conferred, which is represented by those things that are there
performed. Neither can they say they all make but one Sacrament, seeing they
are distinct offices one from another, diverse in offices, in institution, in
calling, in ordination, in ceremonies, and in form of consecration: so that
they may by as good right and as great reason make baptism and the Lords
Supper one Sacrament, as all these orders, so diverse and distinct the one from
the other.

Secondly, Sacraments have their institution from Christ: Orders have not their
institution from Christ to be Sacraments of the Church: therefore Orders are
no Sacrament. Nay as they are retained and used in the Church of Rome, they are
no ordinance or institution of Christ at all. For touching the offices of
Priesthood to offer up the body of Christ for the quick and dead: of deacons
to serve these Baals Priests at their Idolatrous altars: of subdeacons, of
readers, and of the rest, they are not found in Scripture, neither were
ordained by the Apostles, neither were they received into the Church for many
years after Christ and his Apostles. The new Testament as it does acknowledge
no other sacrificer and sacrifice but Christ, so it admits no Priests, no
Priesthood, but spiritual Priests and a spiritual Priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving unto God, as appears: Revel.
1, 6. 1 Pet. 2, 5.9.
Christ has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings and
Priests unto God even his Father. And the Apostle Peter in his first Epistle,
Chap. 2. says, Ye also as lively stones be made a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And again afterward, Ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood,
an holy Nation, a people set at liberty, that ye should show forth the
virtues of him that has called you out of darkness into his maruailous
light. Whosoever brings in another Priesthood then this, and makes new
Priests, abolisheth as much as in him lies the Priesthood of Christ. Again,
what will they say of offices and dignities in the Church greater then these,
the office of Pope, of Cardinal, of Patriarch, and the rest of that unholy
hierarchy? Will they discharge and cut off these from being Sacraments, and
advance the baser orders of hedge-Priests, and dumb Deacons to so high a
dignity? What? Do they abase and disgrace those greater places, and think
their Popes and Cardinals not worthy of that honor and authority? Or do they
think this Sacrament too vile and base to agree to those Prince-like dignities
of the Church? Or dare they prefer their Priesthood, their Readers, their
Deacons, their doore-keepers, their dog-keepers, and the rest of that rabble
before the Popedom, the Cardinalship, the Patriarchship? Is not this high
treason against their holy father, and petty treason against the Cardinals and
other of that generation? Lastly, Sacraments must have an outward element and
word of institution, as has been often declared and proved: but their orders
have neither outward element, nor word of institution: therefore Orders are no
Sacraments. Seeing therefore they can show no material sign added to the
promise, nor gracious promise added to the sign: there can be no Sacrament of
orders to seal up and assure any mercy of God granted unto us. To omit that
reason, which we might press upon them, namely, that Orders are peculiar and
proper to the Ministry, and are no sanctified instrument to apply any general
and common grace of the Church. Wherefore, inasmuch as Orders have neither
outward sign, nor promise of grace, nor institution from Christ, but disgrace
the higher dignities of their Church, and overthrow their own chosen number of
seven Sacraments: we conclude necessarily from these premises, that orders are
no Sacrament.

CHAP. XXI. That extreme unction is no Sacrament.
THe last fained Sacrament is the last anointing (as they call it) performed
by the Priest in extremity, whereby they teach that Bellar. lib. 1. de extr.
vnct. cap. 2.
God assures forgiveness of sins, and promises ease of bodily disease, if
it be so expedient: if not, the salvation of the soul in the life to come.
They use this form of words, By this holy anointing and his most holy mercy,
God does forgive thee whatsoever that have offended, by seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, and touching.

This unction cannot be a Sacrament for Extreme unction can be no Sacrament.
sundry causes. First, themselves confess, that it has not his institution
from Christ. For the Rhemists in their heretical Rhem testam.
Annotations upon Mar. 6. confess, that there is only a preparation unto it.
And Peter Lumbard says, Senten. lib. 4. did. 23. cap. 2.
It was instituted by the Apostle James. By this doctrine, Christ should only
be a preparer of Sacraments, not an appointer: a beginner, not a finisher of
them. So that they deal in this Sacrament as they do in other matters of our
salvation, for they make Christ a beginner of salvation, but our selves the
finishers of it, thereby shaking the foundation of our Christian faith. Now,
these men are all accursed by the Conuenticle of Trent, Council. Trid. sess. 7.
can. 1. and 2.
If any man shall say that the Sacraments of the new law were not all
instituted by Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Again, the place of the
Apostle James, makes nothing for this forged Sacrament: for there is a great
difference and contrariety between the anointing that James speaks of, and
the popish anealing. Their Priests have not the miraculous gift of healing,
whereof this anointing was an outward sign in the primitive Church, which
custom afterward ceased when the gift of healing ceased: being for a time
granted to the Church for the credit of the Gospel. As then the gift was
temporal and for a season, so must the sign be of the same standing and
continuance: and the gift being taken from the Church, if the sign should
remain in use and practice, it should be but a lying sign. For by the same
reason, John 5, 4, and 9, 6, 7.
the brook of Siloam, the poole Bethesda, the clay and spittle which were
sometimes used in healing the diseased, the washing of feet, might be accounted
Sacraments as well as this, being all signs of healing for a certain season,
as also anointing with oil was for the first times of the Church while it was
in planting. Thirdly, the Apostle would have all sick persons anointed: these
do anoint with their greazy oil, only such bodies as are in a manner half
dead, even while they lie in extremity, and the life is striving to come forth.
The Apostle would have all the Elders called: but one Mass Priest only with
them brings the box, and annointeth the sick man. The Apostle assures
health to all that are thus anointed, Iam. 5, 14, 15. Mark. 6, 13.
The prayer of faith shall save him that is sick, and the Lord shall raise him
up. So also Mar. 6. They cast out many devils, and they anointed many that
were sick with oil, and healed them: whereby we see, that restoring and
recovering of health was certainly promised to follow the anointing. But not
one among many receives health after their popish annealing. The Apostle
speaks of bodily health, of the gift of miracles, and of common oil: they
prattle of forgiveness of sins, of a common and continual gift, of charmed and
consecrate oil, and balm, (whereof notwithstanding can none be found) of
bowing their knees and saluting it, saying, Hail holy oil, hail holy
ointment, hail holy balm; nay which is more blasphemous, their oil they call
The oil of salvation: wihch is to renounce salvation by Christ, and to deny
the holy Spirit to sanctify the people of God. Furthermore, every Sacrament
must have a word of institution: but the words which they use in annealing are
a strange salutation of a dumb and deaf creature, not warranted nor found in
Scripture, as the words of consecration in the true Sacraments are: and
therefore we cannot receive it for a Sacrament, but must account it an apish
imitation and a popish tradition. Moreover, we have proved before, chap. 8.
that the element is consecrated when the Sacrament is ministered, by praying,
thanksgiving, eating and drinking, delivering and receiving, breaking and
pouring out, blessing, and reciting the institution: therefore the oil
hallowed long before by the Bishop, heated with breathing upon it, charmed with
much murmuring, saluted with bowing of the knee, and other like trumperies,
that hallowing I say is fond, superfluous, and superstitious. Lastly, the
effect and virtue of a Sacrament is spiritual grace in Christ: but extreme
unction has no spiritual grace in Christ sealed up: for the Apostle ascribes
Iam 5, 16.
not the forgiveness of sins to the anointing with oil, but to the prayer of
faith. Acknowledge (says he) your faults one to another, and pray one for
another that ye may be healed, for the prayer of a righteous man avails much
if it be fervent: and again, The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the
Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven
him. Where we see, that the effect of pardon is ascribed to the force of
prayer: therefore extreme unction is no Sacrament; and so this greazing,
houseling, and anointing is to be abandoned of the people of God.

What then, will some say, do you leave the sick without all comfort and
consolation? No, How the sick are to be annoin^ed.
we visit the sick among us: and although we do not housle and anoint them
with material oil, we anoint them with the precious oil of the mercy of
God, we instruct them how to prepare themselves to leave the world, to depart
this mortal life, and to strengthen themselves in the assured hope of
everlasting life. We say, dear brother, God sends his messenger Death to
summon and arrest you to come into his presence. Genesis 3, 19. Job. 14, 1, 2.
All the children of Adam are dust, and to dust they must return. Man that is
borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full of trouble, he shoots
forth like a Flower and is cut down, he vanishes also as a shadow and
continues not. Death is common Psalm, 89, 48. Heb. 9, 27.
to all flesh, it is appointed to all men once to die. It is the gate through
which we must enter into heaven. If we would live for ever, we must dye: for
the way to live eternally, is here to dye. Though the time be uncertain,
where, when, or how we shall die: yet nothing so certain as that we must dye,
we know not how soon. This must not seem strange unto you, for the whole
life of a Christian should be nothing but a meditation of death, being the end
of all flesh: we should make account of every day of our life, as if it were
the instant day of our death. You must consider that nothing befalls us by
chance or fortune, al things are ruled and guided by the sovereign providence
of almighty God: all the hairs of our head are numbered: not one Sparrow
falls to the ground without the will of your heavenly Father: humble your
self therefore under his mighty hand, Heb. 12, 5, 6
he corrects every child whom he loves: as Heb. 12. My son, despise not
the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him; for
whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth: and he scourges every son whom he
receives. Hereby then God tries and proves your obedience, patience, and
faith, Iam. 5, 11. Job. 13, 15.
as we see in the example of Job, who praised the name of God in all his
miseries: and if the Lord would kill him, he would not cease to put his trust
in him. We exhort them to set their houses in order before they dye, thereby to
cut off hatred and contention, and to stay quarrels and suites after their
departure, whereby oftentimes more is spent then was left: then to forget the
world and the things of the world, and wholly to give themselves to the
meditation of the life to come, where this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15, 54
according to the exhortation of Christ and his Apostles in many places, as
Math. 6. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness and all
things shall be ministered unto you. And 1. Cor. 7. This I say brethren because
the time is short, hereafter that both they which have Wives be as though they
had none: and they which weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice
as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not:
and they that use this world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of
this world goes away. And Phil. 3, 20.21.
the same Apostle says, Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we
look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ who shall change our vile body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working,
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. So 2. Cor. 4. etc.
Therefore we faint not, 2 Cor. 4, 16.17, 18. and 5.1.2, 3.
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily. For
our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more
excellent and an eternal weight of glory: while we look not on the things
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for the things which
are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. For
we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building given of God, that is, an house made not with hands, but eternal in
the heavens: for therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house
which is from heaven, because if we be clothed, we shall not be found naked.
And the Eccl. 1, ^, 14
wiseman, Eccle. 1. Vanity of vanities says the Preacher, vanity of
vanities, all ^s vanity: I have considered all the works that are done under
the Sun, and behold all i^ vanity and vexat on of spirit. So 1. Ioh. 2. Love
not this world, 1 John 2, 15.16, 17.
neither the things that are in this world. If any man love this world, the
love of the Father is not in him: for all that is in the world (as the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the Father,
but is of this world: and this world passes away and the lust thereof: but he
that fulfilleth the will of God, Revel. 14, 13. and 7, 16, 17.
abides for ever. And the same Apostle in his Revelations, I heard a voice
from heaven, saying, Write, the dead which dye in the Lord are fully blessed:
even so says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall
the Sun light on them, neither any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst
of the throne shall govern them, and shall lead them unto the lively
fountains of Waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

Moreover, we put them in mind to examine themselves and their life's passed,
how they have offended God and their brethren, and admonish them to make an
humble and hearty confession of their sins to God, that they have not lived
as they ought to do, to be sorry and grieved for the same, and to promise
amendment of life if they recover. Thus the faithful Psalm. 51, 1.2.3, 4, 5.
and 32.3, 4. and 38.3, 4.
have done; as we see in David, Psalm. 51. Have mercy upon me O God according
to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy compassions put away
mine iniquities. I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me:
against thee, against thee, have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight, that
thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest. Behold, I
was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. And Psalm. 38.
There is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there
rest in my bones because of my sin: for mine iniquities are gone over mine
head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me. This practice we see
also in Daniel, Dan 9.7. Ezra 9, ^. N^he. 9, 16. 2 Chro. 33, 12 13.
in Nehemiah, in Manasses, and in many others. We move them to labor to be
at one with God, to be reconciled to their brethren, and to remember the poor.
Especially we stir them up to prayer, in regard of their present necessities,
and of the merciful promises of God, resting themselves on the perfect and
all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ. Gracious Psalm. 145, 18 and 50, 15.
and precious are the promises that God has made to all that come to the
throne of his mercy, as Psalm. 145. The Lord is near to all that call upon him,
yea to all that call upon him in truth: he will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him, he will also hear their cry, and will save them: and Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And our Savior, Math. 7. Mat. 7, 7, 8.
Ask and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you: for whosoever asks, receives: and he that
seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. So the Apostle
James The prayer of faith shall save the sick, Iam. 5, 15, 16.
and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him: Acknowledge your faults one to another, that ye may be healed:
for the prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent. Now when they
are sufficiently humbled for their sins, we move them to hunger and thirst
after the merits of Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 30.
who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. We allege unto them Mat. 11, 28.29. 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 Ioh. 1, 7,
and 2, 1, 2.
these and such like comfortable places of Scripture, Come unto me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. This is a true saying, and by
all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief. These things write I unto you that ye sin not:
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just,
whose blood cleanses us from all sin: he is the reconciliation of our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. He
is evermore about those that are his, he makes their bed in all their
sickness, Cant. 8, 3. Romans 14, 7, 8.
his left hand is under their heads, and with his right hand he does embrace
the^: so that whether they live, they live unto the Lord, or whether they dye,
they dye unto the Lord: whether they live or dye they are the Lords. This is
true happiness.

Furthermore, we raise them up with sweet comforts and consolations of the
word of God against 1 Cor. 15.54 55, 56, 57. Romans 8, 1, 38.39. Phil 1, 12.
Ioh. 11, 25. 2 Timothy 4, 7, 8.
all terror and fear of death, as 1 Cor. 15. Death is swallowed up in victory,
o death where is thy sting? o grave where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be unto God which
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. And Romans 8. There is no
condemnation to the^ that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit: I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels,
principalities, powers, nor things present, nor things to come, neither any
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Christ is to us advantage, whether in life or in death. Such as
believe in him, yea though they were dead, shall live. Death is to us as a
sleep, and the grave as a bed of rest. A crown of righteousness is laid up for
us, which the righteous judge shall give unto us: so that an evil death can
never follow, where a good life has gone before, forasmuch as he cannot
possible dye ill, who has lived well. Death indeed is a Scorpion or serpent:
but his sting is pulled out, he may well hiss, but he cannot hurt: he may
well threaten, but he cannot destroy, for Christ has quelled and conquered
him. Now, How sick persons may put away the tediousnes and pains of
sickness.
to put away the grief and tediousness of sickness, we will and wish them to
meditate on the things they have heard and learned by the ministry of the word
from time to time in their health: to consider with themselves how God
sometimes suffers the wicked to prosper for a time, and flourish like a
green Psalm. 37, 35.36, 37, 38.
bay tree, and how he punishes them in the end, reserving wrath and judgment
for them: how he blesses or corrects his children in this life: how he has
prepared eternal torments for the wicked, and unspeakable glory for the godly:
but above all the works of God, 1 Cor. 2, 7.8, 9. Psalm. 85, 10, 11
we teach them deeply to think upon the glorious and gracious work of our
redemption, (wherein the infinite mercy and justice of God do meet together
and kiss each other) taking delight and comfort therein with all thanksgiving.
Wherefore we persuade the^ to bear the pains and griefs of sickness with
patience and constant perseverance, because all sickness is Gods hand, who
being the God of the spirits of all flesh, 1 Samuel 2, 6, 7.
kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and raises up again.
Thereby we are indeed chastened for our sins, but they are nothing in
comparison of that anguish and agony which Christ suffered for us, neither are
they worthy of the exceeding glory which shall be showed unto us: and it is
their duty to bless God with all their hearts, that they suffer no more,
seeing their afflictions (if they were greater) are inferior to their sins, and
seeing the same Lord that has in mercy laid this gentle correction upon the^
and made them to drink of his fatherly cup for their good might justly punish
them in all the parts of their bodies, and in all the powers of their souls,
and then cast them into hell to have their portion for ever with the Devil and
his Angels. But God has predestined us 2 Timothy 2, 11, 12.
to be like the image of his son: so that the deeper we sink down in
sorrows, the more perfectly we resemble Christ: it is the great mercy of God
we are not utterly consumed, and that his loving kindness is not at an end
toward us. The sickness of the body is physic for the soul, for the striking
of the one is the healing of the other: by the Cross we must enter the
kingdom of heaven, and learn to loath the pleasures and profits of this
present life. If they fall to despair and doubting Remedies against doubting
and despair.
of Gods favor and love toward them in Christ, Ezekiel. 34, 4. Luke 19, 10.
we labor to strengthen the weak, and bind up the broken hearted: we are
ready to leave ninety and nine in the wilderness, and seek that lost one. We
bring them to God that has stricken the^ and made the wound, considering that
the son of man is come To seek and to save that which is lost. God is
merciful and his mercy endures for ever, he desires not the death of a
sinner, but that he turn unto him. His mercy is over all the works of his
hands, it is like the Ocean-sea, where no bottom can be found or sounded. It
is the express commandment of God, 1 Ioh. 3, 20.
that we should believe in Christ, who has triumphed gloriously against
sin, against Satan, against hell, against death, against damnation, against
desperation. The promises of the Gospel exclude no man, Esaias 55, 1, 2 Mat. 11,
28.
unless we exclude our selves. Infidelity, doubtfulnesse, and despair, are
very grievous sins, and strike at the very heart of God. We must under hope
believe above hope with faithful Abraham. The mercies of God and the merits
of Christ's obedience are infinite, Esaias 54, 10.
higher then the high Heavens, deeper then the earth, broader then the Sea,
stronger the^ the law; mightier then the Devil, and greater then all the
sins of all the world, combined and heaped together. Besides, God does
measure the obedience due to him, Romans 7.20.
rather by the affection then by the action, rather by the desire to obey, then
by the outward performance of it. Moreover, when one sin is forgiven, all the
rest are likewise forgiven: even as repentance of one sin, brings with it
repentance of all known sins, Romans 11, 29.
For the g^fts and call ng of God are without repentance. Last of all, we
admonish them to consider, that grace and faith (howsoever they may be
smothered) are never wholly taken away by sins of infirmity, Romans 5, 20.
but thereby are manifested and magnified.

Touching their families, we say unto them, call them before you, exhort them
to cleave How sick persons are to behave themselves in respect of their
families.
unto God with full purpose of heart, to love him, to walk before him in fear
and reverence, and to serve him in righteousness all the days of their life:
give them charge to learn, believe, and obey the true religion and doctrine of
salvation set down in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. God commended
Abraham for this, saying, Genesis 18, 19.
I know him that he will command his sons and household after him, that they
keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham that he has spoken unto him. David gave Solomon his son a
notable and right noble charge before he dyed, 1 Chr. 28, 9.
speaking thus to him standing before him and before the Princes and Peers of
the kingdom: Thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and
serve him with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be
found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever. Teach
them that child-hoode and youth are vanity, Eccl. 1, 12.
teach them to remember their creator in the days of their youth: teach them
to read the Scripture, and to practice in their lives and conuersations, what
they have read and learned. Instruct them to avoid idleness, to eschew evil
company, to give themselves to prayer, and hearing the preaching of the word.
Warn thy children to love God, to reverence their mother, and to love one
another. Warn them to speak evil of no man, and beware of taking Gods name
in vain. Put them in mind that God is their father, their creator, their
preserver, their redeemer, their sanctifier, yea, their judge that shall come
to judge the quick and the dead, and reward every man according to his works.
We must all appear before the judgment seat 2 Cor. 5, 10.
of Christ, that every one may receive the things which are done in his body,
whether good or evil. Put them in remembrance, not to oppress or defraud any
man, Psalm. 41.5.
for the Lord is an auenger of all such things, who will not bless evil
gotten goods, but send his curse upon them, and they shall not prosper.
Admonish them to show forth their faith by good works, and to show mercy
according to their powers: Lastly, to honor their Princes, parents, masters,
and all superiors. Thus we instruct men to live and to dye, that dying they may
live with God in his kingdom. Thus we anoint the sick with precious balm
that 1 These. 4, 6.
shall not break their head, and with the inward and invisible oil of Gods
grace and mercy. Thus we warn them to prepare the oil of faith in their
lamps, and to keep a good conscience toward God and man, that they may with
joy and comfort depart in peace, render up their souls into the hands of God,
cheerfully meeting the Bridegroom, and entering with him into his kingdom.
So then the people loose nothing by lack of the material oil, the want
thereof being supplied with exhortations, admonitions, reproves,
consolations, prayers, and supplications, more desired of the sick, and more
available for the sick. And thus much of extreme unction, and the other
forged Sacraments, whereof some wanting the outward sign, some the spiritual
grace signified, some the word of institution, some the promise annexed, and al
of them the commandment of Christ, the testimony of the Scriptures, and the
consent of elder times: we cannot admit them for any Sacraments; and so we
conclude, that there are only two Sacraments of the Church under the Gospel,
which are, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

THE SECOND BOOK
Of the Sacrament of Baptism, being an Honorable Badge of our Dedication to
Christ, containing the true Doctrine thereof, overthrowing the errors of the
Church of Rome, and delivering the comfortable use of this Sacrament to all the
people of GOD.
CHAP. I. Of the word Baptism, and what it is.
HItherto we have spoken of the Sacraments in general; together with the
parts, uses, and number of them: now we come to the first Sacrament, which is
Baptism, being an honorable badge whereby we are dedicated unto Jesus
Christ. The word bap^isme is taken many ways.
This word in scripture has many significations. First, in the native and
proper signification, it signifies to dippe, to diue, and plunge under water,
as Mat. 3, 16. John 3, 22, 23. Acts 8.38, 39. Secondly, to cleanse and wash any
thing with water, even when this Sacrament is not administered, as Mark 7.
where it is said, the Pharisees did not eat, except first they washed. So
Heb. 9, 10. the old tabernacle did consist in washings. Thirdly, it signifies
the Cross, afflictions, miseries, persecutions, and inward vexations of the
spirit, as Luke 12.50. where Christ says, I must be baptized, and how am I
grieved till it be finished? And Mat. 12, 22. Are ye able to drink of the cup
that I must drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that I shall be
baptized withal? Fourthly, it is taken for a liberal and plentiful
distribution of the graces and gifts of God, as Acts 15. John baptized with
water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost within these few days,
that is, ye shall receive a greater measure of the gifts of God then ye have
done before. Fifthly, the word is taken for the doctrine of John, which he
delivered before he administered the Sacrament of baptism, as Act. 18.25. Where
Apollos is said to be an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scripture, knowing
nothing but the baptism of John. Likewise Mar. 1, 4. Mar. 1, 4.
it is said, that John preached the baptism of repentance unto remission of
sins, that is, the doctrine of repentance, for otherwise how could he preach
Baptism which properly is ministered not preached? Heereunto comes the
question that Christ demanded of the chief Priests and Elders of the people;
The Baptism of John whence was it, Mat. 21, 25.
from heaven or of men? whereby he means the doctrine, as appears by the
words following, for so they understood him, when they reasoned among
themselves, saying, If we shall say from heaven, he will say, why then d^d ye
not believe him? Mar. 11, 31, 32
for all men counted John that he was a Prophet indeed. The reason why his
ministry and preaching is called by the name of Baptism, is because his
doctrine that he delivered was first of all sealed with that Sacrament, which
none of the Prophets did or could do before him; so that as his person was
called the Baptist, so his doctrine was called by the name of baptism, one
part of his ministry being put for the whole. Lastly, it is taken for the whole
work and action of the Sacrament of Baptism, as Math. 28, 19. Go unto al
Nations, teach and bapt^ze them: and in this last sense we are now to speak of
it.

Let us therefore see Wh^t b^ptis^e is.
what this Sacrament is. Baptism is the first Sacrament, whereby, by the
outward washing of the body with water once into the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, the inward clensing of the soul by the blood of
Christ is represented. This description of baptism is to be opened and further
expounded unto us: The description of baptism proved.
wherein five points are to be considered of us. First, it is called the first
Sacrament, both in respect of the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
because when the nations were converted to the faith, and believed in the name
of Christ, they were immediately baptized; as we see the practice of the
Church, Acts 2, 4. and chap. 10, 47. and chap. 8, 12. Where after embracing the
faith, we see the partaking of baptism, and the sealing up of their conversion.

Again, it is said there must be an outward washing of the body with water,
because the Ephesians. 5, 26.
Apostle declares thereby the nature of the Sacrament of baptism, calling it
the washing of water through the word; and it has a just proportion or
relation to the spiritual washing of our new birth, Tit. 3, 5. Titus 3 5. Man.
1, 4.
being also called the baptism of repentance and amendment of life for
remission of sins. Dipping into the water is not necessary to the being of a
Sacrament: sprinkling of water is not necessary to the being of a Sacrament:
but wetting and washing with water is necessary to the being of a Sacrament.
Now whether the whole body should be washed, or the face only: and whether it
should be done once or thrice, is not greatly material, but left indifferent
to the Church to decree and determine, what shall be thought fittest to be
received and practiced.

Thirdly, it is added in the former description, that baptism is once only to
be administered. For as in natural generation, man is once only borne: so it
is in spiritual regeneration. And as circumcision was once only received in
the flesh, whereby the foreskin was circumcised: so is Baptism once only to
be administered, not oftentimes to be repeated. Wherefore, the Apostle Ephesians. 4.
says, There is one Ephesians. 4, 5, 6.
baptism, one faith. Again, Christ willed the Apostles to minister Baptism,
not Baptismes. Lastly, in baptism the death of Christ is represented, and he
dyed but once: so that as his death was not to be repeated, no more is baptism
to be reiterated. Fourthly, the form and manner of doing, is said to be Into
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Whereby is
meant, that we have fellowship with God in three persons (as a wife has with
her husband, who passes into her husbands name to be subject to him, to obey
him, to acknowledge and call upon him, to worship no other God but the true
Iehoua. This therefore is not to be understood only of using the name of the
Trinity in baptizing, but by it also is meant, that the persons baptized are
received into the grace and fellowship of God, to become his people, and to be
partakers of his covenant to their spiritual comfort. Lastly, in the
description before remembered, it is affirmed that the outward washing of the
body, Represents the inward cleansing of the soul by the blood of Jesus
Christ. This appears Gal. 3, 27. Tit. 3, 5, 6. Romans 6, 4.
expressly, Gal. 3. All that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And
Titus 3, 5, 6. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new
birth, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior. So also the same Apostle, We are buried with
him by baptism into his death These testimonies ou^ of the word of truth do
evidently teach, that this is the principal scope and end of baptism, to
assure our consciences by external washing, of the inward clensing of our
souls by the blood of christ for remission of sins. This being the description
of baptism, let us see what good uses may be made thereof, and every part in
order, as they have bin laid before us. And first touching the The use of the
first part of the description.
first point mentioned before in the description, that Baptism is the first
Sacrament. This teaches that such as are gained to the faith, and children of
such as are in the profession Acts ^8, 8.
are immediately to be baptized. So was the Eunuch when he was instructed: so
was Paul when he was converted: so were the Jews when they repented. And
indeed this is a true saying, that August. cont Fa. (...) lib. 19. cap. 11.
men cannot be incorporate into any religion (whether it be true or false)
unless they be combined together by some communion and fellowship of visible
Sacraments. Again, Is baptism the first Sacrament of the new Testament? Then
it follows that he which is not baptized, is not to be admitted to the Lords
table: he that has not received the first Sacrament, is not to be made
partaker of the second. As in the old testament, circumcision was the Sacrament
of entrance and admission, and none was admitted to eat the Passover but such
as were circumcised, Exodus 12, 48
as we see in Exodus 12. So none has this right and privilege to come to the
supper of the Lord unless first they be entered, and the door opened to them
by baptism. For a man must be known to belong to our family and household,
before he presume to eat of the childrens bread, that belongs not to
strangers. Touching the use of the second point, to wit, Use of the second part
of the description.
that there must be washing with water: we learn that washing with water is
of the necessity of Baptism, Indeed ^here may be a washing without baptism,
but there can be no baptism without washing. The Ephe. 5, 26.
washing of water through the word. So that this washing is necessary, because
of the fit similitude that is between it and our regeneration or new birth.
The water is apt to cleanse us, and leaves no filth behind: so is our
justification and sanctification represented by the blood of Christ, as shall
be considered. Therefore such as used sand, or blood, or such like matter not
fit for washing, did not indeed baptize, but horribly profane the Sacrament
of baptism. The third point in the description is, Uses of the 3. part of the
description or Baptism.
that baptism is once only to be administered, which affoordeth unto us these
three uses. First, it shows a difference between it and the Lords Supper.
The apostle Paul speaking of the Supper of the Lord, 1. Corinthians. 11 says, 1
Cor. 11, 16, 25, 23.
As often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this cup: and Christ our
Savior, Do this as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me, therefore it
must be often received of the Church. But baptism once ministered, is not
again to be repeated. As we are once only borne into the world, but after our
birth are daily nourished: so we are but once baptized, but there is continual
use of the Lords Supper, whereat we are fed to eternal life. Secondly, this
teaches that all rebaptizing is unlawful, as we see by the examples of the
apostles, Act. 2, 42, and 19, 1, 5.
who baptized not the believers and members of the Church the second time. For
Acts 2. it is noted, that such as believed the Gospel, continued in the
apostles doctrine, in fellowship, in breaking of bread and prayer: but not in
baptizing again or being baptized again: and chap: 19, 4.5. the disciples
which were baptized, and had not received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Paul
instructed further in the doctrine of Christ, and does not rebaptise them but
lays his hands upon them, and they receive the visible gifts of the
Holy Ghost. The reason is plain against rebaptization, because it signifies
and seals up our once being borne again, our once setting and settling into
the body of Christ, Ezekiel. 16, 8. Hos. 2, 19, 20.
and our spiritual marriage once with him, who is the spiritual husband of
his Church. Whereby we see, that such as have been baptized Such as have been
baptized by heretics, are not to be rebaptised.
by heretics or other wicked Ministers, are not to be rebaptized. It came in
place of circumcision: but none were twice circumcised, therefore none to be
twice baptized. Again, it is a Sacrament that represents our spiritual
incorporation into the Church: but it is sufficient once to be ingrafted, and
consequently sufficient to have it once administered. This error of rebaptizing,
arose upon a corrupt understanding and interpretation of the place, Acts 19.
When they heard it, Acts 19, 5.
they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. The difficulty of this place
is taken away, if we consider they be the words of Paul continuing his speech
of John's baptism, not of Luke declaring what Paul did. But of this place we
shall have better and fitter occasion to speak further in the chapter
following, where it is at large expounded. Furthermore, if baptism be
administered once for ever, it shows that he which comes to Christ once
truly and indeed, shall never be cast away; John 13, 1. Romans 11, 29.
whom Christ Jesus loves once, he loves for ever, because his graces and
guifes are without repentance. What shall separate us from Christ, when we are
by his working adjoined unto him? Wherefore this outward washing, being not
often repeated, but once only used, does effectually feale up our once joining
unto God, who has made an everlasting covenant with us, he shall never turn
away from us, to do us good, we shall be his people, and he will be our God for
ever. Indeed if we could clean fall away from the grace of God, we should
have another regeneration, and another baptizing to be the seal thereof: but
because we are built upon the brazen pillar of Gods election, the gates of hell
shall not prevail against us; for this foundation remains sure, 2. Tim. 2,
19.20.
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his. This Psalm. 51, 10.11.
appears in David, Psalm. 51. He desires to have a clean heart, he prays
that the holy Spirit be not taken from him: thereby declaring that the Spirit
was within him, and that he had a sensible feeling thereof, howsoever the flesh
for a season had gotten the vpper-hand. Here then is a great comfort sealed to
all Christians, in all tentations, against all the terrors and fears of
conscience, wherewith they are ready to be swallowed up and overwhelmed. This
must strengthen and stay us up, that although we may fall grievously, yet we
shall not fall finally from the estate of grace. He that is once a sound and
lively member of Christ, can never be wholly cut off. True it is, sin may
lessen our conjunction and weaken our communion with Christ: but if we be
truly in him, the band shall never be dissolved, 1 Ioh. 2, 19.
we shall never be wholly severed and fall from him, as 1. Ioh. 2. They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they should have
continued with us, but this comes to pass that it might appear that they
are not all of us. Now if any man by falling into sin, were totally separated
from Christ for a time, surely in his recovery and rising from sin he were
to be baptized the second time: for baptism is the Sacrament of initiation and
ingrafting into Christ, and an universal falling would require a new
ingrafting. But it were most absurd to say, we should be as often baptized as
we fall into sin: and therefore howsoever Satan may buffet, molest, tempt,
and wound us grievously, yet he can never ouer-maister us wholly and overcome
us finally, 1 Ioh. 3, 9.
as the Apostle declares, 1 Ioh. 3. Whosoever is borne of God commits not
sin, for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is
borne of God. This assurance of our standing for ever in the covenant, is the
root of all courage and comfort in trials and tentations, it helps us to
fight manfully against sin, it preserves us from security, it nourishes us
in good works, it increases in us a care to please God: and lastly it
confuteth the popish fancy of the forged Sacrament of Penance, whereby (they
say) a Christian being clean fallen from grace is restored, finding no comfort
in his baptism: whereas the true believer never falls finally from faith,
neither needs an outward seal to assure his pertaining to Gods favor and
love. Indeed every Christian that is fallen through infirmity, must rise up,
repent unfeignedly, and show forth the fruits thereof: yet the force and
strength of his baptism is not lost, the fruit and comfort thereof remains
for ever, and is extended as well to the time to come as to the time that is
past. So many therefore as affirm that the faithful in their falls have remedy
in Penance, but no comfort by their baptism, do set up themselves, magnifying
their own dreams and devises above the holy ordinances of God. The 4. part of
the former description of baptism, is the form of baptizing into the name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The use of the fourth part of
the description of Baptism.
This teaches that whosoever is baptized, has made a solemn promise to
confess and profess the christian religion, to be the servant of Christ, to
fight his battles under his ba^ner, against all the enemies of his faith and
salvation, against sin, against Satan, against the world: he has vowed to
renounce the works of the flesh, and to serve the true God. So often then as
we are present at the administration thereof, we must consider the covenant
into which we are entered, which we made in the presence of men and Angels,
which we are bound to keep for ever. Wherefore, let us learn daily to dye unto
sin, and follow a new life by the grace of sanctification. Secondly, this form
of administration teaches us to assure our own hearts of Gods protection and
defense, Genesis 20, 16.
as a wife does of her husbands tuition and preservation of her from al
dangers. Let us look for life, salvation, government, and nourishment from him
alone in Christ. For as he calls us from the fellowship of Satan, of sin,
and of the world to have fellowship with himself: so he promises to be our
aid and defense in time of need, on who^ we are in every estate and condition
to depend. The last part of the description The use of the last part of the
description of bapti^me.
shows, The inward cleansing of the soul by the blood of Christ. This
teaches that they abuse baptism, that in the outward work seek remission of
sins, as though the force of washing away sins were found in the eleme^t of
water. Baptism therefore is not the washing away of sins: only the blood of
Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1, 7. Again, this declares the
perpetual use of it in the Church, seeing it has this effect to assure
remission and forgiveness of sins: unto this let us bring our children: of
this let us make them partakers: from this let us by no means keep them: and
in this let us continually renew our covenant with God.

CHAP. II. That the parts of Baptism are partly outward and partly inward.
HItherto we have showed how baptism is taken and what it is. In baptism we
are to consider 2. things, In baptism two things are to be considered, his
parts and his uses.
his parts and his uses. For in the former book, when we spoke of the
Sacraments in general, having showed what a Sacrament is, we descended to his
parts and uses, wherein the perfect knowledge thereof consists: so we will
observe the same in handling the doctrine of the Sacraments in particular. The
parts of baptism are first to be opened: the uses are to be reserved to their
proper place. The parts are two, 1 Pet. 3, 21. Mar. 1, 1 Act. 2, 38.
the outward and the inward parts. This appears, 1 Pet. 3. Whereof the
baptism that now is, answers that figure, which is not a putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but a confident demanding which a good conscience makes to
God, and saves us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Where the Apostle
teaches, that sin cannot be washed away by that outward water, but by
Christ's inward working, which the outward baptism does shadow. In like
manner. Mar. 1. Truth it is, I have baptized you with water, but he will
baptize you with the Holy Ghost: where the Baptist shows that he baptized
outwardly, but the force of it proceeds from Christ who baptizeth inwardly.
So Acts 2. Peter said unto them, Amend your lives, and be baptized every one
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: Where the Apostle declares, that in such
as repent and believe, the virtue of the Holy Ghost is joined with outward
baptism. Hence it is, that the Apostle writing to the Hebrews Chap. 6.2,
makes mention of the doctrine of baptismes, speaking in the plural number,
because it has two parts, the inward baptism of Christ, and the outward
baptism of the Minister. The outward parts therefore are one thing, and the
inward parts are another: that which is seen is one thing, and that which is
understood is another thing.

This division of the parts of Baptism, affoordeth diverse

Again, seeing there is such an union of the parts between themselves, we
must not contemn, or despise, or defer baptism. Wherefore the faithful,
all delays, reasons, and pretenses set apart, have speedily prepared
themselves to do that which God commands. We have a worthy example in
Abraham, Genesis 17, 22.26.
when God required him to circumcise himself, his son, and all the males of
his house, and thereby to uncover all their shames: he does not inquire why
God required this at his hands, he does not complain or consult with flesh
and blood: over all doubts faith got the victory, and subdued reason under her,
and caused him with diligence, readiness, and expedition to submit himself to
fulfill the Lords will, and perform it the same day that he commanded it. Of
this duty likewise we see Paul was Act 22.16. and 18, 8.
admonished by Ananias immediately after his conversion, Acts 22. saying, Why
tariest thou? Ar^se and be baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling on the
name of the Lord. Whereby he shows, that this tarrying and delay in the
matters of God makes us culpable in his sight. True it is, it is not Bernard.
epist. 77.
the want of Baptism simply that is damnable, (as is showed afterward) but the
contempt of the Sacraments is dangerous, and without repentance damnable, Luke
7, 30.
as appears: The Pharisees and expounders of the law despised the counsel of
God against themselves, and were not baptized of him. We know all neglect and
contempt in heavenly duties Ier. 48.10.
is evil, and brings with it a certain curse as the Prophet says, Cursed
is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. We see in humane and
worldly things, wise men will not defer the sealing of their writings and
calling of witnesses, when they have given a promise to other or made a
bargain with other (knowing that unnecessary delay may breed unrecoverable
danger) as we see by the example of Jeremy, when he had Ier. 32, 9, 10 Genesis
23, 16.17, 18.
bought a field of his uncles son, presently he weighed him the silver, and
enrolled it in a book of remembrance, he signed it, he took witnesses, and
left it written in roles or records, having an instrument or evidence fairly
drawn and sealed with the common seal, if any thing should be called in
question in time to come. The like we see in Abraham long before, when he had
bought a possession of the Hittites for the burial of his dead, he weighed out
and paid Current money among Merchants: so the field and the cave that was
therein with all the trees and appurtenances that were therein, was made sure
to him for a possession. As these men, when they had made the purchase, would
not delay the taking of assurance and security: the like delaying and
unnecessary putting off the time from Sabbath to Sabbath, from meeting to
meeting, ought to be shunned of us: otherwise, though we should be free from
contempt, we cannot excuse our selves of the neglect of an high and holy duty
to God and our children. Indeed, Baptism not precisely tied to a certain day.
we are not precisely tied to a certain day in Baptism, as the Jews were to
the 8. day in their circumcision: but that which the 8. day was to them, a
convenient and orderly time is to us. Now, what time can be more convenient,
more comely, more fit, then the Sabbath day following, when the Church is
assembled? That so it may be administered rightly, reverently, religiously, and
conveniently in the public meetings of the faithful? Again, the needless
and careless deferring of this work has a grievous threatening Genesis 17, 14.
annexed of assured punishment and judgment, as it is set down, The
uncircumcised male, in whose flesh the foreskin is not circumcised, even that
person shall be cut off from his people, because he has broken my covenant.
Whereby we see, that whosoever shall neglect circumcision, and not suffer
himself to be circumcised, or shall approve the negligence committed by his
parents, shall be none of the people of God, but shall be shut out from the
society and barred from the fellowship of the faithful, both in this world,
and in the world to come, unless he repent of this sin. And that the Exodus
4, 24.
neglect of Gods ordinance draws his wrath, appears in the example of
Moses, The Lord met him and would have killed him, because his son was not
circumcised. He had dwelt in the land of Midian an Idolatrous country 40.
years, he began to savor of the manners thereof: but having called him to be
a Governor of the people, would not be appeased toward him, until he had
reformed his own house. For if any cannot 1 Timothy 3, 5.
rule his own house, how shall he care for the Church of God? Now whereas he
had two sons borne unto him in Mid^^^ the elder no doubt was circumcised the
eight day, according to the order and ordinance of God: why then did he defer
the circumcising of the younger? No doubt he was scorned and derided among them
for circumcising his first borne, and his enemies were those of his own house,
even the wife that lay in his bosom: yea he being then weak in faith, loved
the praise of men more then the praise of God, and therefore the Lord would
have slain him. Albeit the sign of circumcision seemed base and contemptible
in outward show, and to savor of great cruelty toward little children: yet God
would not suffer the deferring and neglecting thereof to go without
punishment. Although grace be not tied to the Sacraments, and that we may be
saved without them: yet it is not left to the disposition of men, whether they
will come to them or not, God will not have the outward signs contemned of us:
for if we will be in the covenant, we must not despise the seal of the
covenant.

Furthermore, are the outward parts united to the inward? Abraham, he
commanded him to circumcise Genesis 17.12.13.27.
all his servants bond or free, as well borne in his house as bought with his
money: thereby signifiing that he adopted them for his children, and that
albeit they were Abraham's bondmen, 1 Cor. 7.22.
yet they were the Lords freemen. So unto baptism we admit and receive the
poor as well as the rich, ^he servant as well as the master, the low as well
a^ the high, without respect of persons. When the Lord instituted the
Passover, Exodus 12.3.
the Lamb was eaten of all the congregation.

So touching the Lords Supper, it is an holy banquet for all degrees and
conditions whatsoever, and therefore 1. Cor. 11.21.22.
the apostle checketh the Corinthians for this abuse, that whereas the poorest
soul eating of the bread and drinking of the cup, is as welcome to Christ the
governor of the feast as the richest, they did despise the poor and shamed
them that had not. All these things duly considered, serve to assure the very
meanest, lowest, and simplest in the Church, that they are made heirs of
eternal life as well as other, as they are partakers of the sign with other,
if they believe with faithful Abraham. This the Apostle Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.
teaches, There is neither Jew nor Grecian: there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ. And Col. 3.
There is neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
Scythian, bond, free: but Christ is all and in all things.

Fourthly, are there outward rites, signs, and persons as external parts of
baptism? And are there likewise inward parts whereby we are consecrated to
God, teaching that we have vowed to renounce the lusts of the world, and to
forsake the works of the Devil? Then this They are to be reproved that depart
out of the Church before baptism be solemnized.
condemns those that depart out of the Church before this holy and public
action be taken in hand. Baptism belongs not only to the witnesses and
parties that bring the child, but to all the members of the Church, that we may
learn by our presence thereat, to renew our faith and repentance unto God.
These men do too much disgrace and deface the dignity of this Sacrament, not
vouchsafing to remain at the administration thereof, as if it were not worthy
to be solemnized before them: whereas they should quicken their faith in the
covenant of God, by beholding the works of the Minister, and ratifying them in
their hearts, Luke. 1.58.
as we read, Luke 1. where they are said to circumcise, because they were all
present at the work, consenting to prayers and thanksgiuings of the Church: 1
Cor. 11.5.
as also the Apostle says, Women pray and prophecy in the Church, when they
sit still and are partakers of the prayers and preaching used in the public
assemblies. And as no member is cut off by excommunication, 1 Cor. 5.4.
but in presence of all, to be witnesses thereof and to ratify their grief
for the loss of a member of their body: so in Reasons rendered why the assembly
should remain altogether until Baptism be finshed.
Baptism it is required, to witness and approve the public work by their
presence, and to assure themselves thereby with joy and comfort, that a
fellow-heir is made partaker with them in the communion of Saints. Moreover,
the excellency of this Sacrament, is as great as of the other: they are of like
worthiness in themselves, and to be had equally and indifferently in like
price and estimation: they are both commanded and instituted by the same
authority of Christ: there is the same matter and substance of both, to wit,
Christ with all his benefits: there is this one and the same end of both, the
increase and strengthening of our faith: therefore why should one Sacrament be
so much extolled above the other, and preferred before the other? So that
whereas many come to the Lords Supper, few remain and abide in the Church, at
the administration of Baptism. Seeing then, as loving Sisters they go hand in
hand together, and are the dear daughters of one Father, what reason is there
that one should be magnified, and the other disgraced? The whole assembly
hears the word preached and delivered by the Minister: the Sacraments are
Instruments of our Justification by Faith, Christ is after a sort preached in
baptism.
as well as the word preached, saving that the word works by Hearing only,
the Sacraments serve by the senses of Seeing, Handling, and Tasting as well as
hearing; to strengthen and increase Faith in our hearts: and therefore it is
requisite that we join in the one, as well as in the other.

Furthermore, the excellency and worthiness of Baptism appears herein, in
that it was instituted of God sealing up his gracious covenant, in that it was
sanctified by Christ, being baptized of John, and in that it was beutified by
the heavenly revelation of the blessed Trinity appearing thereat: so great
honor, so great dignity and pre-eminence was never given to any Ceremony? Did
God institute it, and shall we contemn it. Did Jesus Christ come to John's
baptism, and shall we disdain to be at the Baptism of Christ? Was the holy
Trinity present, and will we be absent? True it is, some of the sacrifices and
burnt offerings were Genesis 4, 5. compared with Heb. 11.4.
miraculously consumed by fire from heaven: but what is this to the glorious
presence of the Majesty of God, the blessed Trinity? declaring to us thereby,
that God the Father, Judge. 13, 20. 1 King. 18.38 2 Chronicles, 7, 1.
God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, are always present at the administration
of Baptism, and truly perform that which is outwardly figured and
represented. Here heaven was open, which for our sins was shut against us:
here the Spirit descended in the visible form of a dove upon Christ, to
signify unto us, that being delivered from the terrors of sin and
judgment, we are at peace with God: Ma. 3, 16, 17
The voice of the Father is heard from heaven, saying, This is my son in whom
I am well pleased. All these things note out the special force and dignity of
this Sacrament. It is not therefore to be administered in a corner of the
Church, with three or four persons present to witness the Baptism, the rest
of the body of the Congregation being departed, but in the face and open view
thereof: forasmuch as God to deliver it from contempt, has given it visible
marks of greater honor. The Apostle 1 Cor. 12, 23
says, 1 Cor. 12. Our uncomely parts have more comeliness on: for our comely
parts need it not, but God has tempered the body together, and has given
more honor to that part which lacked. As God has dealt with our bodies, so
has he done in this Sacrament. That which is most subject to contempt,
dishonor and disgrace, God has lifted up with sundry excellent preheminences
and prerogatives, as we have seen in Christ's baptism. And albeit there may be
a difference in the person baptized, one high, another low; one noble, another
unnoble, one rich, another poor: yet there is none in the substance of the
baptism. Seeing then God so highly esteems of this ordinance: it serves to
convince, to accuse, and to condemn their carelessness and negligence that
refuse to be present at baptism, or if they vouchsafe to be present for a
while, yet they are talking and attend not unto it, and depart before the end
of the whole action, and rush out of the Church before the name of God be
praised, and the whole work finished Luke 3, 21. Act. 22.16.
and concluded with prayer, as it was Luke 3. It came to pass as all the
people were baptized, and that Jesus was baptized, and did pray, the heaven was
opened. And Act. 22. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling
on the name of the Lord. Wherefore we are not to depart before God has been
prayed unto, and praised for his benefits. The Apostle charge, that 1 Cor.
14, 26 40.
all things in the Church be done in order and comeliness. Now what can be
more comely and convenient, Ezekiel 46, 10.
then that the Churches begin the exercises of their holy religion together,
and end them together? Forasmuch as nothing is done in the assembly, which
tends not to the edification of the whole body.

John and of Christ are in nature and substance all one. Contrary to the
doctrine of the Council. Trid. sess. 7, can. 1.
Trent-cou^cel that teaches, If any shall say, that the baptism of John has
the same force with Christ's baptism, let him be accursed. Although it be no
matter of faith, nor greatly necessary in these days to dispute of John's
baptism, seeing no man or woman is now baptized by his hands: yet we will show
the truth of this point out of the scriptures The baptism of John and of
Christ are in substance one and the same.
that they are all one in substance and effect, not of any other kind and
nature. For first, John preached the baptism of repentance to remission of
sins, they have therefore the same doctrine, the same word, the same promise,
Mar 1, 4.
the same repentance, the same forgiveness of sins as they had, the same outward
element of water. And the Apostle teaches, that there is Ephesians. 4, 5.6.
One body, one spirit, one hope of the calling, one Lord, one Father, one
faith, and one baptism. Secondly, the baptism of John was consecrated and
sanctified in the person of Christ, for Christ was baptized with the baptism
of John. Thirdly, it may appear (as we will prove Chap. 4.) that John baptized
into the name of the blessed Trinity. Fourthly, neither Christ nor his Apostles
rebaptized any that were baptized by the ministry of John. Apollos did know
only the baptism of John, Acts 18, 25.26.
he is taken and instructed further in the faith and ways of the Lord, but we
read not that he was baptized again. Fifthly, if John's baptism were not the
same with our baptism, it would follow that Christ was baptized with another
baptism then we are, and that our baptism was not sanctified in the person of
Christ: which takes away our comfort and consolation, that we which are the
members of Christ have one and the same baptism with our head. Sixthly, if the
baptism of John were not one with the baptism of Christ, hereby the error of
the Anabaptists should be confirmed; for such as were baptized of John, should
be rebaptized. Seauenthly, the Apostles themselves should not be truly
baptized: for they (no doubt) were baptized of John, some of them being first
his Disciples, otherwise they should be unbaptized. For Christ with his own
hands baptized none, Ioh 4, 1, 2.
as appears Ioh. 4, 1, 2. and it is not likely that one of them baptized
another: yea they should baptize other into another baptism then themselves
had received. Last of all, Christ himself testifies, Mat. 3, 15. Luke 7, 29.
that the baptism ministered by John, pertained to the fulfilling of
righteousness, Mat. 3, 15. and Luke testifies, that the Publicans and people
being baptized of him, justified God; but the Pharisees despised the counsel
of God against themselves and were not baptized. Wherefore seeing John baptized
with water in the name of the Trinity to remission of sins, and that the
blessed Trinity was present thereat, we conclude his baptism was the same
with ours: Difference between John's baptism and Christ's wherein?
only herein lies the difference, in the circumstance of time, John baptized
in Christ that should suffer death and rise again, we baptize in the name of
Christ already dead and risen again to life. Against this evident Objections
answered.
truth directly confirmed, Bellarmine the Jesuit takes diverse except^ons, and
makes many objections: al which stumbling blocks lying in the way (whereat many
may stumble) are to be removed, before we conclude this Chapter. For he
reasons thus, Bell. lib. 1. de Bapt. cap 20.
The baptism of John was instituted by John himself, not by Christ: he was
not the minister only, but the author thereof: therefore it was no Sacrament
at all, especially of the new Testament, and consequently not the same with the
Baptism of Christ. I answer, we must consider in this reason, the base and
vile account that the Jesuits make of John's baptism, they make it an idle and
vain Ceremony without fruit or force, and no Sacrament or seal of heavenly
grace. Again, if John's Baptism were no Sacrament, then Christ which received
no other outward Baptism, received no Sacrament: and we should be baptized
with another baptism then Christ was. Furthermore, shall we hear with
patience, and hold our peace, when these Jesuits, or rather Iebusites ancient
enemies of the people of god, belch out their blasphemies, and blot John's
baptism out of the number of Sacraments: and admit their five false and forged
Sacraments of Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction?
Lastly, what intolerable boldness or blindness is there in these Bayards
that make John and not God, to be the appointer, author, and ordainer of his
Baptism, contrary to express evidence of holy Scripture? For seeing no man
Hebru. 5, 4.
takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was, shall
we think, he would usurp this office without Gods word and warrant? and does
not Christ himself pr^pound the question to the chief Priests and Elders of
the people touching John's Baptism, Mat. 21, 25.
and teach that he baptized and preached by the authority and commandment of
God? Besides, do not the Evangelists say John 1, 6.
he was sent of God, and that the word of God came to John in the wilderness,
and he came into all the coasts about Jordan preaching and baptizing? Luke 3, 2,
3. yea John himself testifies that he was sent to baptize, Ioh. 1, 33. I knew
him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, said unto me, upon whom
thou shall see that Spirit come down, and tarry still upon him, that is he
which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. Whereby appears, that John's Baptism was
instituted of God, not of John: and John was not the author, but only the
minister thereof.

Hence it is that Gaudentius says, Resp. ad Paul diacon.
That Christ came to John's Baptism, as a sinner to wash away our sins in his
body, which could not be if John's baptism did not wash away sins at all.
Again, Math 3, 11.
he obiecteth and alleges, Mat. 3, 11. where John himself says, I baptize
with water, but Christ shall baptize with the holy Ghost: Whence he Bell. lib.
1. de Bapt. cap. 21.
gathers, that Christ's baptism gave the holy Ghost, John's Baptism gave not
the holy Ghost: therefore their Baptismes are not all one. I answer, these
words were spoken to inform Luk 3, 15, 16
the people that he was not that Christ: so that they make a difference, not
between the Baptism of Christ and of John, but between the persons of Christ
and of John, between the minister of the Sacrament, and the Instituter
thereof. For this is true of all the Ministers of Baptism, to the end of the
world, that baptize in the name of the holy Trinity: they pour on the water,
they can do no more, they can go no further, Christ must give the grace of
regeneration and sanctification. Moreover, Bell. lib. 1. de Bapt. cap. 22.
another objection he takes out of Act. 19, 4, 5. where Luke speaks of
certain Disciples at Ephesus, to whom Paul said, Have ye received the holy
Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, we have not so much as heard
whether there be an holy Ghost. Act. 19, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
And he sa^de unto them, unto what were ye then baptized? And they said, unto
John's Baptism. Then Paul said, John verily baptized with the Baptism of
repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in him which shall
come after him, that is in Christ Jesus. And when they heard ^t they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. So Paul la^d his hands on them, and the
holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke the Tongues and Prophesied, and all the
men were about twelve. In these words it should seem at the first sight, that
Paul Baptized the Disciples of Ephesus, with the baptism of Christ, which
had before received the baptism of John. If then he baptized them again in
the name of Christ whom John baptized, it follows necessarily that the
baptism of John was one, and the baptism of Christ another, otherwise it
should be a needless and fruiteles repetition. Besides this, the place
seems to favor rebaptization, and is alleged by dangerous heretics to
that purpose. Wherefore, the place being difficult, the doubts diverse, and the
errors many that are gathered and sucked from hence, as poison from wholesome
herbs: let us assay by the assistance of God to open the true and natural
meaning thereof. If we shall weigh and consider the words aright according to
the true interpretation thereof, August. de doct. Christ.
agreeable to the drift of the place, to the circumstances of the text, to the
propriety of the words, to other testimonies of Scriptures and to the
proportion of faith: we shall see they favor and further neither rebaptization
maintained by the Anabaptists, neither real difference between John's baptism
and Christ's, defended by the Papists. True it is, there is in this Scripture a
double History and narration inserted, intermingled, and infolded the one
within the other, which causes some doubt and obscurity, but may easily be
cleared and expounded. For first of all, the words ver. 5. And they which heard
it were baptized: are are not the words of Luke the writer, but of Paul the
speaker, continuing his speech of John's Disciples and hearers, and are not to
be understood of the twelve Disciples, as appears by the two (...)
Greek conjunctions, which are used by the masters of that tongue to join
and to disioyne, having relation one to the other, and knitting together the
parts of the sentence answering fitly each to other, Mat. 3, 11. Mat. 1, 8, 9.
Act 1, 5, 6.
as may be seen in many places; wherefore, Luke speaks not here of Paul's
baptism, but Paul speaks of John's baptism. He sets down the office of
John, verse 3. then he prosecuteth both the parts of it, mentioning his
preaching, verse 4. and his baptizing, verse 5. Again, these twelve abiding at
Ephesus dwelling far from the land of Judea where John preached and baptized,
and living about 30. or 40. years after the death of John, could not hear his
doctrine from his own mouth, or receive baptism at his hands. Now, whereas
they are said to be baptized to John's Baptism, the meaning is, Act. 18, 25.
Mat. 21, 25. Mar. 1, 4.
they embraced and professed the same doctrine which John preached by word, and
sealed with his baptism. Thirdly, we have a like example, touching the
Samaritans baptized by Phillip, Act. 8.14.15.16.17.
The Holy Ghost was yet come down upon none of them, but they were only
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus: then laid they their hands on them,
and they received the Holy Ghost. Here we are to observe this order, Phillip
preached, the people believed, and were baptized: afterward the Apostles hands
were imposed, and so the Holy Ghost is received. They gave the gifts of the
Holy Ghost by laying on of hands without baptism, Act. 8.17. Neither do we
read, that laying on of hands was used in baptism, neither were these
baptized again, but only confirmed and strengthened by imposition of the
Apostles hands. So in this place, the twelve Ephesian Disciples had embraced
and received the doctrine that John preached, and were baptized in the name of
Christ: then the Apostle lays his hands upon them, and they receive the
Holy Ghost, they are no more rebaptized then were the Disciples at Samaria.
Fourthly, if the 4. and 5. verses were to be sundred and dismembered, contrary
to the use of the Greek particles, which serve to conioyne the whole, and to
disioyne the parts of the sentence (as though the one were spoken of Paul, the
other of Luke) why does Luke afterward ver. 6. repeat and assume the name of
Paul? What need was there to make mention of him again? Does not this show,
that in the whole speech before, he had spoken of John and his hearers that
heard him preaching in the wilderness Furthermore, the Apostle neither
accuses nor condemns the Baptism of these Ephesians, neither enquireth
whether they were Baptized or no, seeing they were in the number of the
Professors of the faith, and believers of the Gospel (for they are called
Disciples) but whether they had received the gifts of the holy Ghost? Sixthly,
if such as have been once baptized were to be rebaptized, because they are
sometimes grossly ignorant, and know not some necessary fundamental point of
religion concerning the Trinity, concerning the offices or person of Christ,
and such like holy Principles: the apostles themselves should have been
baptized again, who conuersing with Christ, hearing his Doctrine, seeing his
Miracles, and knowing his behavior, had yet tasted little of his spiritual
and heavenly kingdom, Acts 1, 6. Math. 20, 21. Luke 22, 24.
but dreamed that the Messiah should have a temporal and earthly kingdom. The
Samaritanes also should be baptized anew, because being baptized, they did not
immediately receive the holy Ghost. Likewise, Apollos should be baptized
again, who was weak in knowledge, understanding only the baptism of John,
yet he was not rebaptized, but Aquila and Priscilla took him, and instructed
him farther in the Faith of Christ, and in the ways of God: and if baptism
were so often to be repeated, as God of his mercy shows us the errors of
our mind, and faults of our life: how often should we be baptized? Should
not the faithful many times, not only in a year, but sometimes in a day,
require Baptism? Besides, we must consider, that these twelve Disciples were
not ignorant of the holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity, but of the
extraordinary and myraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, which appeared in cloven
Tongues on the apostles, Act. 8, 17, 18 19, and 10, 44, 45, 47, and 19, 6
as the words are taken. For it were unreasonable and absurd to imagine, that
such as are said to be Disciples, scholars of Christ, Professors of the
Faith, and Members of the Church, could be ignorant wholly of the holy
Ghost, which John saw come down Ioh. 1, 32, 33
upon Christ in a very visible shape, without the knowledge of which Spirit,
none can be said to be a believer, and to be faithful: such are so far from
being admitted into the Church, that they deserve not to sit in the Porch.
Neither may we think without intolerable injury done unto John, who was
filled with the holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb, that he would ever have
received to his baptism such rude and gross Disciples, as had never heard
whether there were an holy ^host. Last of all, if Paul had baptized these
twelve Disciples of Ephesus, why are they passed over in silence, and not
rehearsed; where, of set purpose he 1 Cor. 1, 13.14, 15.
reckons up such as were baptized by him? He declares how he baptized
Crispus, Gaius, and the household of Stephanas, he makes no mention at all of
this History. Nay, if he baptized these, might not the Corinthians have taken
exception against him, and accused him of falsehood or forgetfulness? and albeit
he speak properly and particularly of the Cor^nthians, yet afterward he
extends his doctrine farther, and concludes generally that he knew not
whether he had baptized any other, which he would never have spoke, if he had
baptized the xii. together, especially seeing he adds, Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the gospel. And seeing the former Epistle was written
after this history, and as some suppose from Ephesus where these disciples
dwelt, 1 Cor. 16, 8.
as it may in part be gathered out of chap. 16. when Paul says I will tarry at
Ephesus until Pentecost: how can it be, that the Apostle baptising these
Ephesians and writing his Epistle from Ephesus, should not remember them among
and above the rest, being many and also present with him before his face? Thus
we have opened the meaning of this place, which the unlearned and unstable
have wrested (as they do also other 2 Pet. 3, 16.
Scriptures) to their own destruction, and we have proved the baptism of John
to be one and the same in substance with the baptism of Christ, and therefore
to be neither imperfect nor unprofitable.

Thus we see, that the union of the outward and inward parts together,
teaches, The sum of the Chapter is ^et down.
that in baptism the outward rites are no needless ceremonies: that it must
b^^ ministered with all convenient speed, against those that defer the same
many weeks and months: that it requires our presence to the end of the
administration thereof, that prayers may be offered up by the Church for
infants to be baptized, and our selves learn what we have vowed to God. We
have also learned that God testifies his love even to the lowest in the
Church. Nothing is done in the Church but to the benefit of the whole: and if
we desire our Children should be the children of God, why do we not stay to
ask it of God? Or, how shall we better know, what our selves have vowed and
promised in our baptism to God, and how we have been answerable thereunto:
then by our continual presence when it is administered? Lastly, this division
of the parts teaches, that the baptism of John and Christ differ not in the
truth and substance thereof. Thus far we have showed that the parts of
baptism are partly outward and partly inward. Now let us see what these
outward parts are: and afterward proceed in order to the inward.

CHAP. III. Of the first outward part of baptism.
AS we declared before in the former book chap. 3. the number of outward parts
of a Sacrament: Four outward parts of Baptism.
so the outward parts of baptism are four namely, the Minister, the word of
institution, the water, and the receiver. All these though outward parts, yet
are substantial and necessary parts. The first is the Minister, as the
Ambassador of God sent out by him with commission to meddle in the matter of
the Sacraments, as appears by the ministry of John, by the commandment of
Christ, and by the examples of the Apostles. The Baptist Luke. 3.15.
when all men mused in their hearts if he were not that Christ, said to them,
Indeed I baptize you with water, but one stronger then I comes, whose shoes
latchet I am not worthy to unloose. And Ioh. 1. he says, I am come baptizing
with water, I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water said to
me, upon whom thou shall see the spirit come down and tarry still on him,
that is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And Mat. 28. Teach all nations
baptizing them. Now according to this commandment and commission, the Apostles
went forth teaching and preaching to the people, and ministering the Sacraments
to such as were converted to the faith, Act. 1.38. and 8 12.38.
as we see Act, 2.38. Notwithstanding, whereas Paul says, Christ sent me not
to baptize, 1 Cor. 1.17.
but to preach the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1.17. It is not to be understood
historically, but comparatively. For his meaning is not simply to relate and
set down his office whereunto he was called, but by conferring it with his
preaching: as if he should say, This is not the chief and principal end of
my calling and function to baptize; the high work of my ministry is to preach
the Gospel. Indeed they are both of them parts of the Ministers Office, but
this is the chiefest to labor in the word and doctrine, in regard of the
greater gifts required, and of the fruit that flows and follows from
thence to their hearers, it being the high ordinance of God to save such as
believe.

That this is the Apostles mind and meaning, appears by the words
immediately ensuing, where he reckons up some whom he had baptized, which he
would never have done or attempted without a calling. True it is, the dignity
and force of baptism depends not upon the worthiness or excellency of the
Ministers thereof, but on the authority and institution of God, who only
remitteth sins, and baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

This appears by the example of such as ca^t out devils in Christ's name, of
whom Christ says, M^t. 7 22.23
he knew them not. So Judas was sent out with the rest of the Apostles to
teach and to preach the Gospel of the kingdom, Mat. 10.1.2.3. M^t. 23.1.^.3
I^h 4.1.
and to heal every sickness and every disease among the people, yet he was
the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled: The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses his chair. For this cause Christ himself would baptize
no man, Ioh. 4. least any should esteem of baptism by the worthiness or
unworthiness of Ministers. Nevertheless, Reasons re^dred why the Minister only
may baptize.
it is required that baptism be done and delivered by a Minister ^f ^he
church, and one reputed so to be of the Church, as may be confirmed by sundry
reasons.

First, baptism is a part of the ministry, which none may undertake but such
as are thereunto lawfully called. God has joined the Mat. 28, 19. Heb. 5, 4.
Mat. 19, 6.
ministry of the word and Sacraments together: and what God has coupled
together, let no man separate, Mat. 19.6. But women or private persons may not
be admitted to teach in the public assemblies 1 Cor. 14, 34, 35.
in a true and well ordered Church, 1 Cor. 14. Let your women keep silence in
the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they ought to
be subject, as also the Law says: and if they will learn any thing, let them
ask their husbands at home, for it is a shame for women to speak in the
Church. 1 Timothy 2, 11, 12.
And 1 Timothy 2 Let your women learn in silence with all subjection, I permit
not a woman to teach, neither to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence. Likewise, Revel. 20, 20.
the Apostle reproves the Church of Thyatira, that it suffered a Woman to
teach among them, and to exercise the public ministry of the word, contrary to
Gods commandment and the practice of Gods people. I confess, Judge. 4, 4. 1 Samuel 2, 2. 2 King. 22, 14. Act 21, 9.
there have been Prophetesses in the Church, as Deborah, Huldah, Hannah, the
four daughters of Philip, with some others: but the examples are
extraordinary, and therefore cannot make an ordinary rule for imitation.

The causes hereof are direct and evident. For to teach publicly, is a token
of authority and rule over others, inasmuch as the teacher is higher in place
and authority then he that is taught, as Paul was brought up at the feet of
Act. 22, 3.
Gamaliell, and as the less is blessed of Heb. 7, 7.
the greater. Therefore, the woman should not be admitted to be a master in
Israel, a teacher of the Church, and an instructor of men, as 1 Timothy 2. where
the Apostle forbids them to teach publicly, and to usurp authority over
the man, but requires of them to be in subjection, not to challenge dominion.
Again, such is the 1 Pet. 3, 7. Eccl. 7, 29, 30.
frailenes and weakness of that sex, that they are easier to be seduced and
deceived, and so fitter to be authors of much mischief being the weaker
vessels: therefore Paul having set down the doctrine that women should not
take upon them to teach in the Church, and so preach in the assembly of men,
presently alleges this reason, 1 Timothy 2, 13 14. Genesis 3.6.
that The woman was first deceived of the devil, and was in the transgression:
he made choice of her, and made her an instrument to beguile her husband.

For albeit that women be capable of the doctrine of godliness, and many
examples of learned women are extant every where, and in every nation (which
might easily be produced) and that such were of ability sufficient to teach
the Church, yet shamfastnesse and modesty (the special ornaments of that sex)
do not suffer them to enterprise and execute that function, which requires
courage and boldness in the discharge thereof. True it is, among the Gentiles
in their sacrifices and solemnities were women-Priests (fit Priests for such
purposes, fit Ministers for such Gods) but in the Church of God, neither under
the law, nor under the Gospel, were they allowed to serve at the Altar, or to
offer the sacrifice, or to meddle with the service of holy things: and
therefore it is unlawful to have a womanish Ministry. And as Moses teaches in
the book of Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 22, 5.
that it is an abomination for a man to put on woman's apparel, so it is not
only unseemly and indecent, but unlawful and ungodly for a woman to put on
that boldness and manliness which appears in the countenance of a man, and
to put off the bashfulnesse and demureness which she ought to carry with her.
Solomon in the description of a virtuous woman among other laudable properties
as parts of her office observes, that she seeks wool and flax, and
works diligently with her hands: Prou 31, 13, 19.
she lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaffe, Prou.
31, 13, 19. It is never noted as the part of a good woman, that she stretchech
out her hand to water, and baptizeth the children that are in danger. Let her
meddle in matters of another nature; she has nothing to do to handle these
holy things. True it is, the government of the family under her husband is
committed, and the training up of her children in the fear of God, (...).
commanded unto her, 2 Timothy 1, 5.
1. Timothy 5.14. As also Lois the grandmother, and Eunice the mother of
Timothy, bestowed no small pains to plant the unfeigned faith of Christ Jesus
in him: howbeit they never presumed to baptize their children, much less the
children of others. So then, to commit the office of the ministry to women, or
any part of it, were as much as to turn the nature of things topsie turny, and
to bury and abolish the ordinance of God. For he that should be beneath, is
seated above: and he that should be in subjection is endued with sovereignty and
authority. The keys of the kingdom of heaven are committed to men, not to
women: if then they enter into the services of the Church, they do it by a
wrong key, and are no better then intruders.

Furthermore, the Minister represents Gods person in this holy work, and
therefore he only can offer and deliver with power and authority the outward
sign, which answers fitly to the inward matter. Shall private persons usurp
to be the Lords messengers, to bring his letters and seals, not called, not
allowed, not authorized? It cannot be without intruding of themselves, and
dishonor to God, and confusion in the Church. For as none can wash us from our
sins but Christ only: so none can bear his person in the outward Sacrament
of the inward washing, but he whom Christ himself has appointed, if we will
receive the benefit of the holy seal of baptism, for the assurance of our
conscience The people cannot with comfort assure themselves to receive a
Sacrament at the hands of private persons.
that we are washed from our sins. And if the will and pleasure of a Prince,
do make that only to be his seal which he has set apart to seal his grants
withal, so that albeit another may be made right of the same matter, just of
the same form and fashion, and in all points like unto it, no difference
being to be seen between them; yet the same is none of the Princes seal,
but a counterfeit stamp: then how much more ought the known and revealed will
of the eternal God (which is, that they only should minister the Sacraments,
that have a public calling and allowance thereunto) to have that authority,
that no Sacraments can be warranted to be his seals, but such as are signed
by his Officers.

Again, Beza. lib. de Quest. in sacra. quaest. 140. 141
suppose the Princes seal should be stolen away, which he has appointed to
seal his grants withal, and should be set too by him that has no authority,
not being the keeper thereof, there can by no means grow any assurance of
comfort to the party that has it applied to his writings: so if it were
possible to be the seal of God which a woman should set too, yet for that she
has stolen her patent, and used it contrary to Gods commandment, I see not
how any man can persuade his own heart by it to be partaker of a Sacrament:
but his comfort is weakened and impaired, and his conscience left in doubt and
perplexity.

Moreover, this may yet farther appear by a comparison (a form of reasoning
often used in the Scripture) comparing different actions of things done by a
calling, with such as are done without a calling, whereby we shall see that to
have a lawful calling to do a thing, gives life, liking, and allowance unto
the doing. For we must not only consider what is done; but also who is the
dooer. What is the reason that Ioab Captain of the host, 2 Samuel 3.27. and 20,
10. 1 King. 2, 5.
killing Abner and Amasa two more righteous then himself, was reserved to
judgment: Number. 6, 25.7, 8.
whereas Phineas killing Z^niri and Co^bi, it was imputed unto him for
righteousness? What is the reason that Peter is reproved for drawing his
sword, and smyting the high Priests servant, being commanded to put up the
sword, because so many as smite with the sword Mat. 26, 5^.52. Romans 13, 4.
shall perish with the sword: whereas the higher power is said to be the
Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil, and not to bear the
sword in vain? Was it not that Phineas was stirred up and called of God to do
execution: but Ioab was stirred up by the Devil, to see and to seek his own
revenge? Was it not, that Peter was a private man to whom God had said, Exodus
20, 13
Thou shall not k^ll: but the Magistrate is ordained of God, to whom he has
said, Deu. 13, 8, 9
Thine eye shall not pity him, whom I have appointed to dye? Wherefore there
is more to be marked of us then the deed that is done, seeing the same deed
performed by a person that has a calling is liked and lawful, the which done
without a calling is ungodly and unlawful. This truth is so plain and
apparent, that the heathen Terent in Adelp. act. 5. see. 3.
Poet does acknowledge it.

Duo cum idem facunt saepe vt possis dicere
Hoc licet impune facere huic, illi non licet:
Non quod dissimilis res sit, sed is qui facit.
That is.

Though two an act attempt in substance one, as does befall,
Yet one we often as lawful like, the other unlawful call:
Not that the deed is differing, the dooer is all in all.
So then to say that a woman may minister baptism in cases of necessity, is
all one, as if a man should say, that if there be no Judge or Magistrate at
hand that will do his duty in executing justice against murderers and
malefactors: that then a private man may take upon him to draw the sword out of
the sheath to strike offenders. But as a private man slaying a murderer, has
himself committed murder and not executed judgment, because he had no
calling or commission thereunto, so such as without any warrant have taken in
hand to baptize, have made a profane washing: and not administered any
Sacrament of the Lord.

Lastly, if it be not material who baptize, then if the friends or neighbors
meeting together after the birth of a child, should carry the child to the
Church to be baptized and solemnly dedicated to Christ that died on the cross;
if a private person peruenting their purpose cast water on the infant, and
withal use the words of institution; the child should by this imagination be
baptized and be^ carried no further to the Minister of God. Or if no man of
purpose pour on water, but it dash at unawares upon the face of the child, or
if a shower of rain fall from heaven, and a private person speak the words of
institution, it should likewise be baptism. Nay, which is more unreasonable
and absurd, Calu. lib. Epist Page 85.
if it were ministered by a boy playing and in sport, if it were ministered by a
fool or a mad man, if it were ministered by one that were not himself
baptized, if it were by a Turk or Infidel that is a sworn enemy by
profession to baptism and to them that are baptized, yea if it were ministered
by an Atheist that holds there is no God, no religion, no salvation: yet it
should be by this opinion a good, lawful, and perfect baptism. But seeing
this cannot be so, we are not only to observe what is the deed done, but to
consider who is the dooer, and to provide it be done by the Minister, warranted
by the Church, and called of God thereunto.

Before we come to the uses hereof, we will answer certain objections which
stand in the way, and trouble the Zipporah the wife of Moses, who in case of
necessity circumcised her son, and God departed from pursuing her husband to
the death for omitting thereof. To this we may answer,

Again, there is a difference between circumcision and baptism. For this
falling out before the law, was more lawful, when circumcision was left more
at liberty: yea under the law there was no special commandment given to the
Priests to circumcise, which should tie it unto the Priesthood only. But
Christ in the Gospel has appointed the same persons to be Preachers of the
Gospel and Ministers of the Sacraments. Moreover, inasmuch as she did it,
Exodus 4, 24.25, 26.
not in the absence, but in the presence of her husband, and inasmuch as her
heart was not upright, but filled with anger against God, with indignation
against her husband, with murmuring and fretting against the institution of
circumcision, casting the foreskin with great disdain upon the earth,
regarding nothing less then to perform a good duty to God, railing upon and
reuiling Moses; the act of an angry and testy woman cannot be lawful or
approved. Furthermore, it does not appear out of the scripture that Moses was
sick (as some pretend) but it is most probable and likely, that Zipporah
wanting discretion but not presumption, through her boldness and hastines
prevented Moses, and adventured on the work before the prophet could prepare
himself to it. Neither may we by the sequel and success conclude the
lawfulnes of her deed, Bellar. de sacra. ^ap. cap. 7.
as Bellarmine does, because the Angel ceased from vexing him, that therefore
God was pacified and appeafed toward him. For the cause why God was pleased,
was because the child was circumcised, not because she did it. Besides, the
Heathen man condemns such as measure actions Ovid. Epist. 2 coreal
successibus opto, quisquis ab cueutu f^cta notanda pu^^.
by the event, as by a false rule and deceitful measure. We see oftentimes
evil works prosper, and evil workers speed well in this world. The Assyrians
that haulted in the worship of God, and mingled his honor with Idols, were
delivered from the 2 Kin. 17, 25
Lions that devoured them, yet their corrupt and confused religion pleased not
God. Wherefore we conclude, that whereas this woman administered circumcision,
her example must not be drawn into imitation.

Peter, who when he had preached the Gospel unto Cornelius and his household,
Act^ 10.
did not baptize them himself, but commanded them to be baptized by others: and
so it is like, that Paul did not baptize always himself, 1 Cor. 1. Answer.
but commanded them to be baptized by others. I answer, the Apostles baptized
indeed by the ministry of others, but the Scripture does not teach that those
others were Laymen, and such as had no office or function in the Church. For
the apostles had Evangelists and Pastors that did accompany them whither soever
they went, as appears in sundry places of the Acts. And if as yet there were
no Pastors and Teachers appointed in the Church, nor ordinary Ministers
erected, it pertains not to the question in hand, because when we enquire
what persons are permitted to minister the Sacraments, we understand it of
the ordinary and settled government of the church: whereas that may not be
suffered in a Church planted, which is allowed in the beginning while it is
planting, and the foundation is in laying before an ordinary ministry be
erected. Again, those that did baptize at the appointment of Peter, did it not
of their own head, but by the warrant of the Apostle, who may be said to
baptize by their hand, because he that does a thing by other, may be said to
do it himself, as it is said sometimes that Christ baptized, John 3, 22.
John 3.22.
Jesus came and his Disciples into the Land of Judea, and there he tarried
with them, and Baptized. Sometimes, it is said, that he baptized not at all,
as John 4, verse 1, 2. When the Lord knevv that the Pharisees had heard, John
4, 1, 2, 2.
that Jesus made and Baptized more Disciples then John, though Jesus himself
baptized not, but his Disciples.

These things may seem contrary the one unto the other, Jesus baptized, Jesus
baptized not: yet the latter place opens and expounds the former, and
shows; that if we speak touching his practice in his own person, he
baptized not; but if we speak what he did by the hand, and by the Ministry
of his Disciples, he baptized; because when he had preached, he sealed his
Doctrine by Baptism, which the Apostles ministered.

Lastly, there is nothing which I know, to hinder, why these words thus
written, Peter commanded them to be baptized, may not be thus interpreted,
He commanded Water to be brought, wherewith they should be baptized: as
such as attend and serve the Pastor, in carrying about the Bread, or reaching
the Cup, should be said to minister the Lords Supper. For the assistant may
bear the name of doing the chief and principal work. But howsoever it was,
they are greatly, I will not say grossly deceived, that imagine the Apostle
would not vouchsafe to do it, so long as other were present that might do it.
For this should savor of Antichristian pride, which was far from the
Apostles, who bare themselves with all Christian humility, as they had learned
of their Lord and Master: besides the ministry of the holy Sacraments is of
the same nature with the preaching of the word, and therefore is of greater
worth and excellency, then any mortal man living upon the face of the earth,
is worthy to handle.

Thirdly, it may be said, what shall we do when a lawful John baptized that
preached the Gospel, so is this course to be continued and holden even unto the
end. The commandment to preach, is the commandment to baptize: the forbidding
to preach, is a restrayning to baptize: and therefore Paul joins the washing
of the Water, with the word of the Gospel, Ephe. 5. As for these that have not
the preaching of the word committed to them, Christ never said to them, Go and
Baptize. If it cannot be had for our children according to this rule, they must
be commended to God who will baptize them with the holy Ghost, and save them
by his grace, albeit they be not partakers of the outward part of the
Sacrament, and washed with the element of water. Neither let any here object
the opinion of S. Augustine, Lib. 2. contr. Epist. P^^men. ca. 13.
who writes, That if a Layman baptize in case of necessity, either it is no
sin at all, or a venial sin: for first, this place concludes nothing,
inasmuch as he speaks doubtfully whether it be lawful or unlawful. He
therefore that will ground any thing upon this authority, and practice such
Lay-baptisme from this place, must do it with a doubtful conscience, which in
him that does it is sin, albeit it were in it self lawful. Again, if this
godly Father stand in doubt whether baptism ministered by a layman be
available, or no; and consequent-whether such persons so baptized ought to be
rebaptized, it is manifest that he allows not that a layman should take
upon him to baptize; for if he had holden such ministration to be lawful,
there had been no cause or reason why he should doubt, whether that baptism
were good or not.

Let not any therefore ground upon his authority more then ever he taught
them: but rather let us stom hence infer, that seeing he was not resolved
whether baptism by a layman be auailable, doubtless he was out of doubt,
that being administered through the presumptuous intrusion of a woman, it is
void and of no effect, who is doubly barred from public charges of the
Church, more then a private man. Furthermore, we answer, that the judgment
of this learned and reverend Father, is in this cause less to be waighed and
esteemed, and indeed not at al to be allowed and followed, because he
ascribes too much to baptism and the outward washing with water, as though all
they that departed hence without it, were damned for ever. And this is that
which made him rush upon the former rock, ready to suffer shipwreck: for
rather then he would have the infant perish, he would have any means used
that were possible, to save the soul of the child: but we know that God is not
so hard to them, who has promised to be their God, nor the sentence of his
word so heavy, forasmuch as the children of the faithful are within the
Covenant, and called holy by the Apostle: of which we shall speak at large
afterward. Victor Vticensis in his second book of the persecution of the
Vandals, tells us of a miserable lamentation of the people, Lib. 2 de
persecut. Vandal.
when their Ministers were banished by the Arrian heretics, saying, Alas, who
shall baptize these Infants? And this the Rhemistes confess in their
annotations upon John 20, 23. Whereas this complaint should not have needed, if
private persons or Midwiues, in case of necessity, in time of persecution and
in the want of Ministers might have baptized as well as the ministers, and the
people withal be assured to receive a Sacrament at their hands, as well as at
the hands of the Ministers. And hence it is that Augustine also says, that in
time of necessity, August. Tom. 2. Epist. 183.
the women hasted to carry their Children unto the Church that they may be
baptized, Epist. 180 Do we not consider in what multitudes the people in such
dangers resort to the Church, some desiring they may be baptized, some that
they may be reconciled from excommunication: some that they may be admitted to
show their repentance for their open crimes; every man desiring comfort, every
man desiring the participation of the Sacrament? In which case if there be no
Minister to be had, what misery then follows them that depart this life
unbaptized or bound in their sins? Hereby he means, the lawful Minister
of the Church, inasmuch as he joins baptism and reconciliation from the
sentence of excommunication together If any man further shall ask the
question,

What is to be ^hought of ^he popish Baptism.
Hence it is, that the Baptism celebrated in the Church of Rome is true
baptism, because albeit the papacy be not the true Church, yet the true Church
is in the papacy, God preserving the remnants of it in the midst of the
bowels of Antichrist, as God continued light in the midst of the darkness
of Egypt. Baptism therefore is in the papacy, as the purse of a true man in
the hand of a thief, or as an honest man's inheritance in the possession of an
usurper. And albeit they have no ministry rightly and lawfully called, yet such
as occupy the place of Pastors and hold the public ministry, are not to be
accounted as private persons or mere laymen, and therefore the baptism
performed by them is not void or of no effect, both because they baptize in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, not in their
own name: and because their ministry is not to be esteemed according to the
persons, but as serving to the Church that yet lurketh secretly in the papacy.
What then? Whether we may bring our children to be baptized of popish Priests.
may such as profess the reformed religion lawfully and with a good conscience
offer their children to be baptized of popish Priests and Masse-mongers? I
answer, albeit it be lawful baptism which they deliver, it follows not
that they may lawfully deliver it, or we lawfully seek it at their hands: and
albeit it be available when it is done, yet neither have they warrant to do
it, nor we to go for it. True it is, they have a calling whereby they differ
from private men, but it is so faulty and corrupt, that by no means we ought
to use it. We ought not to do evil that good may come thereof, Romans 3. Romans 2,
8. 1 These. 5, 22.
but it becomes us to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5, 22.
We may not by our practice and example allow and justify the horrible
prophanations of the Sacraments, the detestable corruptions of doctrine, and
the abominable superstitions used in the worship of God, and we are bound and
straightly charged to take heed we do not make our selves partakers of other
men's sins. 1 Timothy 5, 22.
We must beware we do not offend the weak brother, for whom Christ dyed, who
may be imboldened by our example to approve of the relics of Anti Christ, and
in the end to join with that false Church. Lastly, 2 Cor. 6, 14. 1 Ioh. 5.23.
we are commanded to fly from Idols temples, and to keep our selves from
Idols: the sheep of Christ hear his voice, but the voice of a stranger they
will not hear. It is better for us to defer the baptising of our children, the^
to resort to their baptism blended and mingled with so many toys and
impieties: and though our Children in the mean season should dye, yet we must
comfort our selves in the Lord, and lay hold on his covenant, who has promised
to be both our God and the God of our seed, and remember that it is not the
want of the Sacrament that condemns, but the contempt, from which we are
free, so long as we are ready and desirous to have our children partakers of
it, when it may be had orderly, rightly, and conveniently.

Rome, labor to add force unto it, and as it were to put life into a dead
carcass. For Thomas Aquinas, the darling of the Pope, the Oracle of Schools,
and the God of the Papists, Gal. 3.27.23.
alleges the words of the Apostle, Gal. 3. As many as have been baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ, there is in Christ neither male nor female:
and therefore as well women as men may baptize. Surely the churning of milk
brings forth Butter, Prou. 30, 33.
and the wringing of the nose brings forth blood: So the forcing of wrath
brings forth strife. The popish divinity is full of such conclusions: I will
give thee a taste of them, and then come to answer the objection. They reason
on this manner, Christ walked upon the waters, therefore the body of Christ may
be shut up in a piece of bread. Peter walked upon the waters, therefore the
Bishop of Rome has authority over all Churches. The Saints in heaven are like
the Angels, therefore they hear the prayers of all men. Joseph wrapped the
body of Christ in fine linen, therefore the Priest must lay up the body of
Christ in the Altar. The women came to the Sepulcher to see Christ, therefore
we must go on pilgrimage to visit the holy Sepulcher. But I will pass over
these fooleries, and come to the place that is objected. The Apostle means
that in partaking of salvation, there is no difference between male and
female, Jew and Grecian, bond and free: but there is great difference between
man and man in the dispensation of the word and Sacraments. Again, if this
conclusion were necessary, then a man might reason against the Apostle, In
Christ is neither Male nor Female; therefore, as well women as men may teach in
the Church, contrary to the express doctrine of the Scripture, set down by
Paul himself, I permit not a woman to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 1 Timothy
2. But I will spend no more words in answering such trifles. Thus much
concerning the objections.

Now, as the truth is plain and evident: so the use is What are the actions of
the Minister.
are double: first there is required of him a sanctifying of the water:
secondly, a washing of the party. The sanctifying of the water, is the
separation and apointing of it by the word and prayer to this use, to signify
the blood of Christ. The outward washing is a certain pledge unto us of our
inward washing by the blood and spirit of Christ.

Secondly, if it be the office of the Minister to baptize, for such purpose,
that there may be no error committed in the conueyance. For whatsoever is done
and passed before him that has not his patent to warrant his practice, is held
to be void and frustrate by masters of that profession. In like manner it
stands us all upon, when a matter of an higher nature and of greater
importance is in hand, then the sealing and assuring of temporal possessions,
to look carefully to the diligent performance of this special duty, that the
signing of our infants, and sealing them in the Covenant, be made by the hands
of such Officers as are appointed by God for that purpose, and by no other.

Rome, where women, midwiues, and private persons, without any commandment of
God, nay contrary to his word, take upon them this part of the Ministers office
to baptize children; which they have received from the Heretic Marcion, Epip.
haere. 42
who gave women power to baptize, which Epiphanius Epi. con. haer. 2
teaches, the holy Mother of Christ was not permitted to do. And the fourth
Council of Carthage, Can. 100. has without exception decreed, that a woman
ought not to baptize. Such then as usurp this calling, and approve thereof,
never knew the force of our adoption in Christ, nor the strength of the
covenant, nor that the elect are saved by the good pleasure and will of God.
Therefore, there is not that absolute necessity of baptism unto salvation,
which many suppose, that for this supposed necessity, the ordinance of God
should be broken and profaned. And a man may marvel, why at such times they
did not rather commit the matter to private men to baptize then to women (whose
sex is further removed from execution of this office) not only because they
be uncalled and private men, 1 Timothy 2, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 14, 34.
but even because they are women, and thereby are wholly incapable (though
otherwise qualified) of any public charge or function in the Church, they are
commanded to sit still, and to be quiet. Besides, if in time of this
extremity and necessity which is imagined, it be permitted them to minister
baptism, why should it not be suffered in like necessity and danger of death,
that they minister the Lords Supper, and preach the Gospel, (in case they be
able, and men unable or unwilling) the dignity of the one Sacrament being no
less then the other, and the excellency of the word, being as great as of
them both? If then women may justly be condemned, when they shall presume to
sit down in the Chair of Moses, or to minister the Supper of the Lord, they
cannot be justified, if they usurp to minister baptism. For, shall we make a
shameful and double diuorcement of those things that God has coupled, between
the word and Sacraments, and likewise between the one Sacrament and the other?
This ^s too great contumely and contempt offered to baptism, to allow it in
those that may neither publicly preach, nor lawfully minister the Lords
Supper: seeing their want to practice the one, is no greater then to do the
other.

In a private Family, it is a great disorder to see the master play the
servant, and the servant to do the office of the master: the husband to loose
his authority, and the Woman to step into his place. In the Commonwealth it is
a wonderful confusion to see base persons and peasants set on horseback, Eccl.
10, 6, 7.
and Princes walking as servants upon the ground. Is this unseemly and
uncomely in the private house, and in the Common-welth, and it is not as
indecent in the Church, when the distinct parts of the same office, are
divided and parted asunder, that private persons are set in Moses his chair,
and pastors are put at the feet of the people? Or when the Ministers of the
word do occupy the place of Tea^hers, and the administration of the Sacraments
is committed, or at lest permitted to the Parishioners and people, and which is
worse, to Women? And when different offices are so shuffled and shaken
together, that it cannot be determined to whom of right they do belong?
Wherefore, let all private persons and Mid wives consider with themselves the
fearful examples recorded in the Scripture, of such as have rashly p esumed
to profane the holy offices of the Church, and how God has often visited this
great sin with grievous judgments, sometimes with fire from heaven,
sometimes the earth opening her mouth sometimes with sudden death, and
sometimes with the most filthy disease of the Leprosy, whereby as by his voice
from heaven, he thundered down on men's disobedience, and so ratifieth this law
of the necessity of a vocation and calling for ever. When the men of
Bethshemesh pried into the Arc without a calling, the Lord smote of the people
fifty thousand, threescore and ten men. 1 Samuel 6, 19. Numb. 16, 9 Ps. 106, 17,
18
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, taking upon them the Priesthood without a calling,
fire from heaven came down consuming Corah and his consortes: the earth also
opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram, that they
were swallowed up alive: none of them died the common visitation of other men,
but God wrought a strange work upon them, and altered the course of nature,
which ought to be a perpetual instruction and direction unto us, to teach us
not to pervert or euert that order which he has established to continue in his
Church. Hitherto belongs that which is written of Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6, 7.
who was smitten with sudden and unexpected death, only for that beyond the
bounds of his calling, he put forth his hand to uphold the Arc, which did
shake and was ready to fall, which was lawful for the Levites only to meddle
withal, although his intent and purpose were never so good: so that if the
unlawful intruders upon baptism pretend cases of necessity, here seemed as
great a necessity, yea his mind and meaning was as good as theirs; if they
pretend devotion, yet it displeased God because it was done without his word
and warrant. So Azariah was stricken with leprosy, that he was a Leaper to the
day of his death, for that not being content with his Kingly 2 Kings 15, 5
office, he would take upon him the priests office to burn Incense unto the
Lord.

These worthy examples of Gods most severe judgments executed upon the
breakers of this ordinance ought to strike such a fear into our hearts, that
we suffer not the sacred functions and offices of the Church to be profaned,
and to teach us that every one meddle only with the approved duties of his
own calling. And although God does not now thus execute judgment from heaven,
and work strange things in the earth in extraordinary manner, when his
ordinances are broken: yet the sin is not thereby lessened, nor the
punishment mitigated, nor the hand of God shortened, but stretched out still,
though judgment according to desert be deferred: nay rather the Nah. 1, 2.
Eccl. 8, 11.12.13.
greater wrath is reserved for his adversaries, to the great day of account,
when all flesh shall appear before the throne of his glorious presence. For if
the prophaners of the sign and Sacraments of the old Testament did not escape,
but were thus sharply and severely punished: our Sacraments established by the
Lord Jesus are not of less value and worthiness, so that the contempt of them
shall be visited with sorer judgments.

And if God did strike with his revenging hand private men when they sinned in
abusing the Sacraments, and spared not kings in the pride of their hearts: how
should women standing a degree farther off, and barred from the office by a
stronger bolt, enter into the house Ioh. 10, 10.
at a window, and not be accounted as thieves and robbers? So that we conclude,
that the necessity of a calling is as great as the necessity of baptism. And
thus much of the first outward part of baptism, namely the Minister.

CHAP. IIII. Of the second outward part of baptism.
THe second outward part of baptism is the word of institution, Word of
institution is the form of baptism.
which is as the form of the Sacrament, as Ephesians. 2. Christ loved the Church and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it by the washing
of water Ephesians. 5, 26. Mat. 28, 19.
through the word. This also is expressly set down Math. 28. Go teach all
nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. This both declares the use of the Sacrament, and promises Christ
with all his benefits. For to be baptized into the name of the blessed Trinity,
is to be made one of Gods family, which is his Church, and to be partaker of
the privileges thereof. This promise is contained under the commandment, Genesis
48, 19.
as we may see by sundry testimonies of the Scripture, as Genesis 48. Jacob says,
The Angel that has delivered me from all evil, bless the children, and let
my name be named upon them, and the names of my fathers Abraham and Isaac:
whereby he means, they should be joined to his family, and accounted in the
number of them.



Now to be baptized in the name, or into the name of the Trinity is all one,
and therefore in the Scripture they are used indifferently, without difference
or distinction. They are said to be baptized in the name of Christ, Acts 2.38.
and Chapter 10.48. they are said to be baptized into the name of Christ,
Matthew 28. Acts 8.16. and 19, 3, 4, 5. The comfort which we receive from hence,
stands upon the right understanding of these words. To be baptized into the
name of the Father, is to have assurance given unto us that God the Father
through Christ our Lord is become our Father, and that therefore we stand
bound to perform the duty of obedient children toward him. To be baptized in
the name of the Son is to have assurance given, that being baptized we are in
the number of them that are redeemed by him and reconciled to the Father
through his blood, and therefore stand bound to obey him as our mediator and
redeemer. To be baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost, is to have assurance
given, that every true believer is sealed up and sanctified by the Holy Ghost
against the day of his full redemption.

Now, we can have no greater comfort then this, to be assured that GOD the
Father, is become our Father, that GOD the Son is become our Redeemer, and
that GOD the holy Ghost, is become our Sanctifyer.

Secondly, consider on the other side, that the parties thus Son and of the
Holy Ghost: the present Church of Rome more glorious in show, but not much more
sound in faith, has defiled the whole Trinity with their Imagerie, and set up
a false Christ, partly denying him to be GOD of himself, and partly repealing
all his offices: so that howsoever they profess him in words, and leave him
the name of a Savior: yet they m^ke a mock of his sacrifice, and have turned
Christian religion into Antichristian superstition. Wherefore as we are
baptized into the most worthy name of the blessed Trinity, let us hold fast the
true profession thereof, and renounce al errors and heresies oppugning our holy
faith, and depriving us of the sweet comfort we have therein.

Act. 2.38. and chap. 10, 48. 1 Cor. 11, 23
they received of the Lord? Again, it cannot be denied, but that the Apostles
Act. 10, 47. and 15, 2.
baptized in this form, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, as Acts 10, ver. 47. Can any forbid water that these should not
be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? As if he should
say, these have received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, therefore they may be
baptized in the name of the Holy Ghost. And more plainly Act. 19. when the
Disciples had answered Paul that they knew not whether there were an
Holy Ghost, he says, Unto what were ye then baptized? Whereby he shows, it
was the manner and custom to baptize in the name of the Holy Ghost, and
consequently of the whole Trinity. The Evangelists also teach, that at the
baptism of John, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost were present. And as he
baptized with the same matter, why should we imagine he observed not the same
form that Christ commanded expressly to his Apostles? Nay, seeing in the
baptism of John we have proved there was the same promise, the same grace, the
same virtue, the same sign, the same signification, which was in the baptism
of the Apostles (as we have proved before) why should we only doubt of the words
of institution? Or why should we imagine that the form should be altered and
changed? Wherefore we conclude, that the Apostles would not alter any thing of
the direct and express words of their Lord and Master, Mat. 28.19.
prescribed Math. 28. where he charge them both what to preach and how to
baptize. For as he enioyneth them to teach the Nations to observe whatsoever he
commanded them: so he wills them to baptize in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And as they altered nothing in the matter of
teaching: no more did they in the manner of baptizing, considering that as the
doctrine they preached was the doctrine of God; so the Sacraments they
delivered were the Sacraments of God, and they had no more leave in the one,
then liberty in the other. If then any should baptize otherwise then in the
name of the Trinity, or should name the Son to be unequal to the Father, or
should deny the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, or should baptize in the name of
the Virgin Mary and the Saints, this cannot be the Sacrament of Baptism
instituted by Christ, but a ceremony made void and frustrate by our own
inventions.

CHAP. V. Of the third outward part of Baptism.
THe third outward part of Baptism Water another outward part of Baptism.
is the element of water, which is the matter whereof baptism consists. This
truth is taught in diverse places of the new Mat. 3, ^. John 1, 31, 33.
Testament, as Math. 3, 9. Indeed I baptize with water. And Ioh. 1 Because he
should be declared to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water: I knew
him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, he said unto me, upon
whom thou shall see the spirit come down, and tarry still on him, that is he
which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. So Acts 8, 36. As they went on their way,
they came unto a certain water, and the Eunuch said, See here is water, what
does let me to be baptized? Then he commanded the Chariot to stand st^ll, and
they went down both unto the water, both Phillip and the Eunuch, and he
baptized him. And Chap. 10. Can any man forbid water that these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Nothing is so apt
to set forth the blood of Christ and his merits, as water which is fit to
cleanse and wash, and leaves no filth behind upon the body: by which outward
work, Christ would have us feel the inward purging and purifying of the soul.

I answer, Romans 13, 1, 7
all power is indeed of God, Eph^s. 4, 5.
that the church has all one baptizing: not one manner of baptizing the poor,
and another of baptizing the rich. Besides, why might we not allow mixture of
water with Wine in the Lords Supper, as well as the mixture of compound Water
with common water in the Sacrament of baptism? Furthermore, if there might
lawfully be admitted a different manner of baptizing the children of rich men,
and the children of poor men, then in the other Sacrament the like distinction
might be received, and so a finer kind of bread be provided for the richer
sort by themselves, and a baser and courser sort for the poor by themselves: 1
Cor. 11.21 22.
which separation the Apostle reprooueth in the Church of Corinth, and calls
it a despising of the Church, and a shaming of the poor. For in the exercises
of religion there ought to be no difference of persons, Galath. 3, 28
for all are one in Christ Jesus, and therefore the Noble Eunuch mentioned
Acts, 8. was baptized by Philip with ordinary water. But with GOD there is no
respect of persons, Acts. 10. with him there is neither Jew, nor Greek, there
is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for we are al one
in Christ Jesus. Great men when they make their Feasts, for the most part they
inuit their rich neighbors, but God bids and banquetteth the poor as well
as the rich, and the brother of low degree, as well as he that is exalted to
the highest room, as well him that sits in the dust, as him that sits in
the throne.

Now, if no composition may be mingled, No other sign ought to be used in
baptism the^ water.
then much less may any other sign be used, and so the element clean changed,
and the ordinance of God altered: for the church of God has no liberty to bring
any other sign in place of water. If a man were baptized with sand, with
blood, with wine, with milk, with snow, with oil, and such licour, it is no
baptism at all, but a mere void and idle action: such a person must
afterward be sprinkled or washed with water, not that any should be rebaptized,
but because all persons should be once baptized, the former action being
meer^ly frustrate. Although the form of words be retained in the
administration which our Savior commands, and the body be washed in the name
of the three persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: yet if such an
error be committed in the matter that the sign be changed, and another foysted
in, contrary to the precept of Christ and practice of the Apostles, there is a
nullity of the whole work, the party be-sanded, or be-bloodied, or oyled, is
erroneously and unlawfully, not truly and effectually baptized.

Nadab and Abihu were smitten with lightning from heaven Leui. 10, 1, 2.
for bringing strange fire into the Tabernacle, whereas they should have taken
of that fire which God had appointed, though other fire would as well have
consumed the offering. And are not all other elements as strange fire that are
brought into this Sacrament, beside water? Or, have we greater liberty to
change Gods ordinance in the Gospel, then the Jews had under the law?

When GOD appointed the Leuit. 1, 3, 10 14.
burnt offering to be offered, and commanded the people to bring either
bullocks out of the heard, either Sheep or Goats out of the fold, either
Turtle-doues or young Pigeons from among the birds: being thus limited and
restrained, might they bring an Ass, or an Elephant, or a Camel unto him?
Might they cut off a dogs neck, or offer swines flesh before the Lord? So
whereas God has ordained the Sacrament of baptism to be administered, and has
willed it to be done with water, most common, most usual, most plentiful,
most fit, most significant: shall we take sand or saw-dust, oil, or other
element then God has allowed? The Lord likewise threatening a general dearth
of Corn, Wine, and Oil, (of which things many of their offerings and
oblations consisted) shows that the Priests should weep and wail, because
the Iccl. 1, 9.
Meate-offerings and Drinke-offerings should cease. But what need was there,
either that the Priests should have lamented, or the offerings to have ceased,
if they might have used other elements, other signs, or other matter then GOD
approved? If they might have taken water in stead of wine, or Milk in stead
of oil? Or if they might have taken unclean beasts in stead of clean? Or
the Fishes of the Sea in stead of the Beasts of the field? Or creeping things
for their offerings in stead of such as chewe the cudde and divide the hoof?
Now how can it be better warranted unto us to take oil for water, then it
was for them to take water for oil?

Again, hereby all popish corruptions and mixtures

True it is, if all the other parts and actions be observed, these inventions
and additions which are so many ^buses make not baptism void, neither bring a
nullity thereof: notwithstanding these beggarly ceremonies, as they are
destitute of the testimony and approbation of the first and ancient Churches,
so they corrupt the pure, simple, and sincere institution of Christ. None were
used when Christ was baptized, neither gave he any such thing in charge to his
Apostles, neither were they in use in the Apostles times, neither did they
deliver them to the Pastors and teachers which they ordained in every City.
For Peter says, Act, 10, 47.
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized? He calls not
for oil, salt, spittle, cream or any such thing, but only for plain,
common, and ordinary water. Thus in one Sacrament they find many Sacraments,
and invent types, shadows, similitudes and significations in the immediate
service of God, whereas we have the body it self, that is, Christ already.
They make these outward things able to give grace, power, and strength against
the Devil. But the Apostle teaches, that the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, 2 Cor. 10, 4 Ephesians. 6, 12.
they are spiritual, that must defend us from evil. If they refer all this
trash and trumpery not to the substance of the Sacrament but Hosij confess. de
ritib. bapt. cap. 37.
to order and comeliness: do they not thereby blasphemously accuse the baptism
of John and of the Apostles of Christ of uncomeliness and disorder? Whereas the
comeliness and dignity of the Sacraments is to be esteemed by the word of God,
by the institution of Christ, by the simplicity of the Gospel, and by the
practice of the Apostles, Nothing is more comely, decent, and orderly, then that
which Christ commands and allows; nothing is more uncomely or unseemly,
then that which man inuenteth in the service of God, and in the celebration of
the Sacraments, thereby inuerting and perverting the holy ordinances of God.

Thirdly, if washing with water be an outward part of Jews, as baptism is
unto us. But all did not perish All perished not under the law that died before
circumc^sion.
that died vncireumcised: therefore all perish not that dye unbaptized. And if
the salvation of the child did depend upon the outward Sacrament, it had been
an hard thing in the Lord (who will Ezekiel. 18, 23
not the death of a sinner) to have required the deferring of it one week, one
day, one hour, one minute? We see in Joshua, Josh. 5, 5.
it was omitted 40. years, while they were in the wilderness, through their
continual iournies and uncertain abode in every place: yet it were an hard,
cruel, and bloody conclusion to determine thereupon, that whosoever among them
during that time dying before he was circumcised, was damned. When David's child
dyed the seventh day, which was before he could be circumcised, (circumcision
being limited Leui. 12, 2, 3 Genesis 17, 12. and 21.4.
to the 8. day) he did not cry out pitifully, It is damned, it is damned: but
arose from the earth, washed himself, anointed his body, changed his
apparel, refreshed himself, cheered his wife, came into the house of the
Lord, worshipped God, praised him for all his doings, 2 Samuel 12.18, 19, 20,
21.23.
made his servants that attended on him wonder at his comfortable behavior,
and said, he should go to his child, but not his child return to him again.
But if he had thought all condemned that dye uncircumcised, his lamentation
would have exceeded, for he had cause to have sobbed and sorrowed more after
his death, then he did in the childs sickness: and if circumcision had been
of such absolute necessity, he might have said, The child being now dead,
why should I not fast? why should I not weep? why should I not afflict my
soul? seeing I cannot bring him again, or restore him to life to be
circumcised? But because he sorrowed not as one without hope, and he complained
not on this or any like manner: it appears that his faith apprehended the
salvation of the child, and feared not his damnation through untimely want of
the outward Sacrament.

Now, God is not streighter and harder to us under the Gospel, then he was to
the Israelites under the law: he is no less able and willing to save now
without baptism, then in those days he was without c^rcumcision. For the
Evangelist teaches, that of his fullness we have all received, and grace for
grace, and that he is come which is full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1, 14, 16.
Again, how foolish, vain, and unreasonable a thing is it, to put life and
death, salvation and damnation into the hands and liberty of mortal men, whose
breath is in their Nostrils, as of the parents that should bring them, or of the
Minister that should baptize them, or of others that perform other duties unto
them? whereas eternal life and salvation stands sure and settled upon the
brazen pillar of Gods election (who knows 2 Timothy 2, 19.
who are his) and upon his merciful promise in his covenant, and not upon the
lust and pleasure of any man, as we see in the example of Jacob, of whom God
said, I have loved him, before he was circumcised, nay before he was Romans 9,
11.13. Mal 1, 2.
borne, or had done either good or evil.

Furthermore, we have showed before Act 10, 47
that many believed, repented, and had the Holy Ghost before they were
baptized. Yea the thief upon the cross repented of his sins and believed in
Christ, yet was never baptized: notwithstanding he was received to mercy and
certainly saved, as Christ says, Luke 23, 42.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Besides, there is no greater
necessity of baptism then of the Lords supper: but we may be saved without the
Lords supper: therefore also without baptism. Lastly, if al persons dying
without baptism be condemned: then infinite multitudes of children should or
may perish and be damned without their own fault, through the carelesnes of
others: but none perish without their own fault: therefore al dying without
baptism are not co^demnd. To these we might adioyne the testimony and
confession of the adversaries, which is strong against themselves, to whom we
may say as Christ sometimes did to that slothful person, Luke 19, 12.
Thou evil servant, out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. These make
three sorts of baptism, of water, of blood, of the Spirit: whereby they
confess that the want of baptizing with water is not damnable in all, seeing
that want may be supplied, either with shedding of their blood for testimony of
the truth, or by spiritual regeneration and ingrafting into the body of Christ.
To conclude, do we desire the custom and practice of the Church? It is well
known, that in Thessalia Socra. lib. 5. cap. 22. Bellar. de sacra. bap. cap.
26.
the Sacrament of baptism was celebrated but once in the year, namely at
Easter. In other places thrice in the year, and sometimes not until the hour
of their death, when they were going the way of all flesh. Constantine the
great was the first christian Emperor that reformed the Church, yet he was not
baptized till Tripart. hist. lib. 3 c^p. 12.
the time of his death. And Valentinianus a christian Emperor died without
baptism: yet does Ambrose give him his due commendation, Orat. de obit.
Valent^n.
and doubted nothing of his salvation. Shall we do these good men, these worthy
Emperors, these godly Christians this wrong, as to think they were damned, who
were the chief pillars and protectors of the true Christian and Catholic
religion? Or if the Churches above mentioned had holden this hard opinion, that
the want of baptism was a sign of reprobation: would they have deferred it in
the hour of death (whereby sometimes they were prevented) or administered it at
certain times only of the year? True it is, that custom is not to be
followed, neither the negligence of those Bishops to be allowed: but it
teaches thus much, that in deferring baptism they differed in judgment from
the now-Church of Rome, and concurred in opinion with the reformed Churches,
for which causes their practice is alleged. The reasons used to maintain the
absolute necessity of this Sacrament to salvation, are weak and not worth the
answering. First they object Genesis 17, 14. Objection. Answer.
the threatening annexed to circumcision. The uncircumcised male shall be cut off
from his people. To this I answer, first God commands infants to be
circumcised the eight day, before which time they were forbidden to circumcise.
Wherefore, infants that die before the 8. day, were not bound and obliged by this
law. And seeing there Romans 5, 13.
can be no transgression where there is no law, they are not damnd because they
are uncircumcised, seeing God called many out of this life before they were
capable of this Sacrament. Again, the commination and threatening is not to be
understood generally of all, but of such as are grown up: not of children, but
of men, as appears by the reason, For he has broke my covenant. This cannot
be applied to infants, Caietan in cap. 7. Genes.
who albeit they have not actual faith, yet cannot be said to contemn grace,
to refuse the covenant, to reject the promises, or to lie in infidelity and
hardness of heart. Wherefore, it belongs unto those only that being grown
up and come to years shall approve the negligence of their parents, and will
not suffer themselves to be circumcised. Therefore the child of Moses (whose
circumcision was through negligence deferred) was not punished, but the fault
was imputed unto Mose^ himself, Exodus 4, 24. Now as to Peter, saying, Thou
shall ^^hn. 13, 8.
never wash my feet, Christ answered, If I wash thee not, thou have no part in
me: so to the Israelite that should have said, I will never be circumcised,
this threatening might fitly be applied, If thou will not be circumcised, thou
have no part in God, no portion in his blessing, no assurance of his promises
in this life, or of his kingdom in the life to come. Lastly, to be cut off
from the people, does not signify to be condemned, for even the negligence and
contempt of the Sacrament is pardonable where repentance follows: as we see
of such as came irreverently and unworthily to the Lords Supper among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11, 30 31.
who were punished with diseases and death it self, yet the soul no doubt was
saved in the day of the Lord. Sometime therefore, that phrase of speaking
signifies temporal judgments of God on men and their families Psalm. 55, 24.
for their wickedness. Sometimes it signifies the Magistrates justice inflicted
on malefactors, Deuteronomy. 13, 59
who bears not the sword in vain, which is expounded afterward, Thou shall
surely kill him. Sometimes, it signifies to be cut off from the bosom of the
Church, Exodus 12, 15 19.
which is done by the high and dreadful censure of excommunication. Whosoever
eats leauened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that person
shall be cut off from Israel: the interpretation of which words is added verse
19. That person shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel. So the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5. He which has done this thing should be 1 Cor. 5,
2.13.
put from among you, that is, from your company and fellowship, as verse 13.
Put away from among your selves that wicked man. Thus we are to understand the
threatening in this place, that such as contemn circumcision, either
themselves, or allow the same contempt and negligence of others, shall no
longer be reckoned and reputed among the people of God, but be separated from
them, and to be as an heathen and a publican.

Again, Ioh. 3, 5.
they object John 3. Unless a man be borne of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God: therefore say they, it is necessary to
salvation to be baptized. This is the reason of Bellar. lib 1 de bapt. ca. 4.
Bellarmine, and Hosij confess. cap. 35. Answer.
of others. I answer first it is not necessary in this place by water to
understand material water, but the grace of Christ purging and cleansing as
water does; which interpretation may be gathered by conference of a like place,
Math. 3.11 He shall baptize Ioh 3, 11.
with the Holy Ghost and with fire, that is, by the Spirit of God which is as
it were fire, lightening our hearts with the knowledge of God, inflaming them
with his love, and purging them from evil affections. So when we are said to
be borne again by water and the Spirit, he means, by the Spirit showing
forth in us the force, power, and property of water, as if he should say, we
are borne of water which is the Spirit, Ioh. 7, 38, 39 and 4.21.
as Ioh. 7, 38, 39. Again, if it were meant of water in baptism, it must be
understood according to a like Ioh. 6, 53.
sentence, Ioh. 6. Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, ye shall not have life in you: which must be understood of such as
are of years and grown in age. And thus Innocentius the third in the Decret
Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 42 c. 3.
decrees expounds it: so does Peter Lumbard Lumb sent. lib. 4. did. 4.
master of the Sentences. So then, if they will be tried either by their own
Pope, which is their holy father: or by Peter Lumbard, which is their
grand-maister: this place cannot be enforced against infants that dye before
they be baptized, but must be re^erred to men of greater years.

We reason not thus far, to justify and allow the sluggishnesse and neglect
of careless parents, under color and pretense of this, that the salvation of
the child depends not upon the participation of the Sacrament: but to show,
that if it cannot be obtained as it ought to be desired or if by godless
parents it be deferred and neglected: yet salvation is not tied and glued to
the outward water. The neglect of the Sacrament is a notable mark of a
despiser, and therefore the Pharisees are said to have rejected the counsel
of God against themselves, being not baptized of him. Luke 7, 30. It is
strange to consider, what childish excuses and pretenses parents use to
justify their negligence in performing this good duty to their Children. For
baptism is necessary in respect of God that has commanded it; in respect of
the Church, the lawful use of it being a note of the true Church: and in
respect of the promise annexed unto it. Nevertheless, it is not simply
necessary to salvation, as though without the washing of water one could not be
a member of Christ. True it is, to every one that believes, baptism must
necessarily be either actually received, or earnestly desired: received, if it
may be had: desired, if it cannot be had. For as the true desire of grace is
grace indeed in Gods acceptance: so the desire of baptism is accepted of God
as baptism. And therefore simply the want of it without neglect cannot bring
danger of damnation. Away then with the doctrine of the Church of Rome touching
the absolute necessity of baptism, and touching Children that dye without it:
a beastly and bloody Let none object the opinion of Augustine, for he thought
it necessary to salvation, that children should receive the Lords Supper, as
well as baptism De pecc^tor me^t. lib. 1. cap. 24.
doctrine joined with rigor and cruelty, full of terror and fear, uncharitable
in it self, presumptuous by entering into Gods secret judgments, impious by
binding him to second causes and ordinary means, injurious to thousands of
poor infants, discomfortable to all good parents, and blasphemous against the
bottomless mercy of a gracious God, who has said, Genesis 17, 7.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed: where he makes a covenant of
salvation with us and our children, not adding any condition of baptism, if it
cannot be had as it ought to be. If it cannot be had by the infant, the Spirit
of God does work the effectual knitting of them to the body of Christ by a
secret working (as pleases him) in stead of ordinary means. For when our
Savior had said, Mar. 16. He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be
saved: he does not add contrariwise, he that is not baptized shall be damned,
Man. 16, 16.
but annexeth only, He that believes not, shall be condemned. Thus we have
showed the malice and madness of Satan against poor infants, and how he has
used proud and pestilent instruments to effect his purpose: partly the
Anabaptists, who deny baptism to their bodies: and partly the Papists, who
deny salvation to their souls for want of baptism.

CHAP. VI. Of the fourth outward part of Baptism.
THe last outward part of baptism is The last outward part of baptism is the
body washed.
the body that is washed. For we have showed before, that the Sacraments
without their use are no Sacraments. And albeit the word joined to the sign
make a Sacrament, yet this presupposes a Minister to administer it, and a
receiver to take it: and then the rule is most certainly to be admitted. Now
whether the whole body should be washed, or a part of the body: whether it
should be washed once, or oftener: whether it should be dipped, or sprinkled: we
are neither curiously to enquire, nor seriously to contend, nor rashly to
determine: but rest in practice of the Church, and in the custom of the
country, as in a thing in it own nature indifferent. The dipping and plunging
into the water used by John Baptist, and the Apostles in Judea and such hot
regions, are not a necessary rule to be drawn into imitation, especially in
these cold quarters and countries.

For the word does not only signify to diue, to put and plunge into the
water, but to dip, to sprinkle, and to wash. This sprinkling does very fitly
answer to the signification of water. For the apostle Peter teaches that we
are elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through the
sanctification of the Spirit unto, obedience and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, as 1. Epistle of Peter, chap. 1. 1 Pet. 1.2.
verse 2. which is signified by outward baptism, and was shaddowed by
sprinkling of blood under the law. Neither may we imagine that the efficacy of
baptism depends upon the quantity of water that is used and employed; no
more then the force and virtue of the Lords Supper depends upon the quantity
of the bread and wine which we receive. They then are much deceived, that
would bring in an absolute necessity of dipping Children into the water, as if
without it they were not lawfully baptized. For as we noted before, the word
imports even simply any washing of what sort soever, as Mark 7. It is said
of the Pharisees, that coming from the market they eat not except they wash.
(...).
And this outward washing of the body from filth, represents the inward
clensing of the soul from sin. Heereunto the Apostle alludeth when he
affirms, that we are saved according to the mercy of God our Savior, by the
washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 5,
25, 26.
Titus 3, verse 5. And elsewhere he says, Ehesians 5. verses 25, 26, Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. So then, the ceremony used
among us, to sprinkle water upon the face of the child cannot be reproved or
condemned, but stands with the ordinance of God, as well as dipping in the
water: and therefore the Apostle says to the Hebrews, Chap. 10.22. Let us
draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, Heb. 10, 22.
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed
with pure water. Hence it is, that Cyprian writing of this argument in his
Epistles teaches, Cyprian. lib. 4. epist. 7.
that such as are sprinkled with water being sick, are no less truly
baptized then such as are otherwise washed.

But let us see who they are that have right and interest in baptism, and who
are capable of this Sacrament. For not every one without respect, without
difference, without distinction, is to be admitted to this privilege, because
they are not fit receivers thereof. If a Minister should take the outward
element, and use the word of institution, baptizing in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: yet it can be no Sacrament, unless
the deliverer have authority to administer it, and the party baptized have
warrant to receive it. If he should baptize a stone, or an Image, or a bruit
beast without reason and understanding, these are no fit receivers, here is an
apparent and flat nullity: whereby appears farther, the truth of the former
rule, that besides the joining of the word to the outward sign, there is
necessarily required a fitted person to be partaker of the Sacrament, as is
more at large expressed, Book 3. Chap. 3.

To proceed, Who are in the covenant.
we must know that the receivers are such as are within the covenant, and such
as profess the truth, whether in truth or not, we leave to GOD, that
searches the hearts and reins: Romans 14, 4.
let us not judge another man's servant, he stands or falls to his own
master. Again, such as are borne in the covenant are of two sorts. First, men
and women of years: Secondly, infants that are the seed of the faithful. For
the faithful do believe for themselves and for others: as in bargains they
couena^^ and contract for themselves and their heirs after them for ever.
Although children cannot be said to be saved by their fathers faith, no more
then to live by the fathers soul inasmuch as the Prophet Hab. 2, 4. Romans 1,
17. Gal. 3, 11. Heb. 10, 38.
teaches, That the just shall live by his own faith: yet the faith of the
parents makes their children to be counted in the covenant, who by reason of
their age cannot yet actually believe, as they that want all knowledge and
understanding, Jonah. 4, 11.
not discerning the right hand from the left. Every man lives this temporal
life by his own soul: so every man lives the eternal life by his own
faith. True it is, baptism is a common seal. But as all have not interest to
the pasture, herbage, and privileges of a Commons, but only such as are
tenants according to the custom of the manor: so all have not title to
baptism, being a Sacrament of the Church, but only such as are the Lords
people according to the tenor of the covenant.

Touching the first sort of such as are to be baptized, they are men and women
of riper years, who adioyne themselves to the Church, testify their
repentance, hold the foundation of religion, Acts 8.36.
and confess their faith, as Acts 8. If thou beleeuest, thou may be
baptized. The second sort are infants within the covenant, 1 Cor. 7, 14.
which have both their parents, or one at the least faithful, as 1, Cor. 7,
14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified to the wife, and the unbelieving wife
is sanctified to the husband, else were your children unclean, but now they
are holy. Where the Apostle shows, that albeit a believer be unequally
yoaked and matched with an unbeliever: yet he is not to be forsaken, nor the
marriage bed to be accounted polluted, inasmuch as their children are
sanctified to God and the Church, as well as if they were borne of both parents
faithful. For so the children of the Israelites being of the posterity of
Abraham, are included in the covenant of God. We are not curiously to enquire
into the secret counsel and election of God: we must We must hope well of the
seed of the faithful, and therefor we baptize them.
hold all the seed of the faithful holy, until they cut off themselves, and
in process of time openly declare themselves to be strangers from the promises
of salvation. Again, the same Apostle Romans 11, 16, Genesis 17, 7.
says, Romans (...) If the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump: if the
root be holy, so are the branches. So likewise God testifies, Genesis 17. I
will establ sh my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God to thee and to thy
seed after thee. Such only were circumcised as were within the covenant.

Notwithstanding, they which were borne of unbelieving parents, and were
strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, and aliants from the promises of
salvation: if they acknowledged the errors in which they lived, and sought
forgiveness of their former sins, were accounted the children of faithful
Abraham, were admitted into the Church, and received circumcision, as the
apostles said to the Iailer, Act. 16, 30.31.
humbled under the mighty hand of God, and desiring to be instructed in the way
of salvation: Believe in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and thou shall be saved, and
thy whole household. So the Evangelist testifies the like of Zacheus, when he
had once received CHRIST into his house, nay which is more, into his heart:
Luke 19, 9.
then Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come unto this house,
forasmuch as he is also become the son of Abraham. Thus when the Sun of
righteousness shines upon the head and master of the family, the beams
thereof by a gracious influence begin to comfort and conserve Act. 16, 14, 3,
15. 1 Cor. 1, 16. Ioh. 4, 53. 2 Ioh verse 1.
all the rest in the house: like the precious ointment upon the head of Aaron,
that ran down upon the beard, and descended upon the borders of his
garments: or like the dew that falls from heaven upon Hermon and the
Mountains of Sion, Psalm. 133.2.
which goes down into the valleys, and makes all the plain country fertile.

The knowledge of this point offers diverse profitable Act. 8, 36. and 22 16.
let them demand to be baptized, according to the example of the Eunuch, Acts
8. So soon as he was instructed in the faith of Christ by the preaching of
Philip, as he came to a certain water, he said of his own accord, See, here
is water, what does let me to be baptized? So to the same purpose, Act. 22.
Ananias stirs up Paul to this duty saying, Why tariest thou? Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins.

Secondly, this condemns sundry corruptions and abuses: The church of Rome
prophaneth baptism by baptizing belles.
practiced in the Church of Rome, whereof now they begin to be ashamed, and
seeking figge-leaues to cover their shame, they say they were not baptizd, but
only hallowed and consecrated to holy uses, as Bellarmine betaketh himself to
this shift, as to a place of refuge, Lib. 4. de pon. Romans cap. 12. Where the
Cardinal confesses, that the people call their solemn blessing and
sprinkling with holy water, the baptism of belles. And indeed what can it
else be called and accounted? For they baptize them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. They give names unto them as to their
children: they have Godfathers appointed unto them as children have when they
are baptized and confirmed: Bellar. de sacra bapt. lib. 1. cap. 27.
they have new garments put upon them, as the persons baptized among them
likewise have: it is also permitted only to the Bishops suffragan, who
exacteth great sums of money for the baptizing of belles: they ascribe to
them a spiritual power against storms and tempests, against thunder and
lightening, against winds and evil spirits: Lastly, they sprinkle them with
holy water, bless them, cross them, and so horribly corrupt this Sacrament of
baptism. Yea Durand a principal schooleman, not in the schools of the
Prophets but of the Papists (a fit teacher of such scholars) sets out
solemnly Durand lib. 1 Ench rid. cap. 4.
the praises of belles, making them public Preachers and driuers away of
devils. But the devils are not feared and fraied away by sight of crosses, by
sprinkling of water, by sound of belles and babies: Mat. 17, 2.
This kind goes not out but by fasting and prayer, as our Savior teaches.
And the Apostle wills every christian to take unto him the whole armor of
God, that he may be able to resist in the evil day. Stand therefore having
your loins girded about with verity, Ephesians. 6, 13, 14.15.16.
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the
sword of the Spirit, the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and the grace of
prayer in the Spirit. Here is the universal armor of God: here is the
complete furnishing of a Christian Soldiour: here is perfect direction given
to understand, and to withstand the assaults of the devil: but among these, we
have neither the sign of the Cross, nor the hallowing of belles, nor the
sound of such Preachers, and therefore they are no part nor parcel of
spiritual armor, to furnish us to go into the field against the enemies of
our salvation. For evil spirits which fight against the soul are not driven
away by hallowing of belles. If then, there were ever profanation of Baptism,
this may justly be judged to be one of the most vile and miserable corruptions
thereof, to be detested of all true hearted Christians that groan under the
burden of them. For this is a general and certain rule, that none are to be
baptized but such as are men, to other creatures the Sacrament of baptism may
not be administered: forasmuch as the Sacrament of regeneration belongs to
none but to such as in their nature are capable of regeneration, neither the
sign but to those that may be partakers of the thing signified. Baptism is
the Sacrament of repentance, Mark. 1, 4.
none therefore can receive it but such as in time may repent, or already have
repented, for there must be at least a possibility of repenting. It belongs
not therefore to the damned spirits, who are so fallen away, that it is
impossible for them to be renewed again by repentance. It was instituted only
for the use of man, for whom also Christ came into the world, and shed his
blood upon the Cross. He took not upon him the angels nature, but the seed
of Abraham, Heb. 2. Heb. 2, 16.
He is the Mediator to his Father, not for the apostate angels, but for
mankind, 1 Timothy 2. 1 Timothy 2, 5.
How wicked then and wretched are they that make a mock of this Sacrament
representing the blood of Christ, and undertake to baptize belles without sense
and life, and that with greater pomp and solemnity, and use many more
ceremonies then when men are baptized? For none may of right baptize belles but
their Bishops (a fit work for such workmen) whereas they allow and license
not only every inferior Priest, but even women to baptize their children.
Secondly, The second abuse.
it reprooueth the superstition of such as baptize the dead, or any one that is
living in stead or in place of another that is dead. For this is another rule
to be holden of us, that baptism belongs only to the living. Not indeed to
all living creatures, but only to living creatures: as likewise not to all
that are reasonable, howbeit only to them that are reasonable. Faith and
repentance are required of al such as being of years are baptized: but the
dead can neither believe the Gospel, nor repent from dead works. And if
baptism be the Sacrament of regeneration, and the end thereof salvation and
remission of sins, what do these, or what can these things belong unto the
dead? Again, it is the greatest folly that may be, to baptize one for another,
because Christ never requires, and the Scripture never teaches, that one
should repent for another, or believe for another, or be baptized for another,
but every one must repent, and believe, and be baptized for himself; and
therefore the Lord says, Mar. 16, 16. Mar. 16, 16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. We can no more be
benefited by another man's baptism, while we remain unbaptized our selves,
then we can be saved by another man's faith, while we remain Infidels.
Besides, it is a vain thing to receive the outward sign for him which is not
capable of the thing signified, in which number the dead are,

Hence then is condemned the error of the Marcion^tes, among which heretics
this was a custom, as Theophylact notes, Theoph. in 1 Cor. 15. enarrat.
that if any died with them unbaptized, they hide a living man under the bed of
him that was dead, and coming to the bed they ask the dead man whether he
would be baptized? Now he that lies under the bed answers that he desires
it, and then they baptize him for the other that is dead. Whenever they are
accused for this folly, they go about to defend themselves by the place of the
Apostle, 1. Corinthians, chap. 15. verse 29. What shall they do that are
baptized for dead? 1 Cor. 15, 29.
If the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead? This
testimony makes nothing to their purpose, which proves the resurrection from
the dead. For whether Paul reasons from the custom of the Jews that washed
the bodies of the dead, as appears in the Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 9,
Act. 9, 37
verse 37. when Tabithae a woman full of good works and almsdeeds was dead,
They washed her, and laid her in an upper Chamber: or whether he mean it of
the grievous afflictions which the faithful suffered for the Gospels sake unto
death: as if he had said, Why do we suffer adversity unto death? Or why am I in
ieopardy every hour? Or wherefore do I fight with beasts at Ephesus, if there
be no resurrection? What shall all these advantage me, if the dead rise not?
Let us rather eat and drink, for to morrow we dye. Both these
interpretations are good and godly, and in both these senses and significations
the word is taken, as we have showed in the first chapter of this book.
Wherefore to conclude this point, it is no doctrine nor determination of the
Apostle, either that dead men should be b^ptized, any more then they should be
taught and instructed, or that any of the living should undertake the Sacrament
of baptism for the dead: Conc. Carth. 3. can. 6.
and the counsel of Carthage has decreed accordingly, that the weak brethren
must beware they do not believe that such as are dead and departed hence may
be baptized.

Thirdly, The third abuse.
they are reproved that admit such to be partakers of baptism as are
Infidels and do not profess the faith nor repentance toward God. The apostle
Peter preaching unto the Jews, says, Repent and he baptized every one of you
^n the name of Jesus Christ, Acts 2. verses 38.41. And afterward Luke adds,
Act. 2, 38, 41.
They that gladly received his word were baptized. And Christ our Savior
says in the first place, He that believes, Mar. 16, 16.
and then adds in the second, and is baptized. So that both faith and
repentance are required in all those of years that are to be baptized. And
the reason is evident, because without repentance the old man is not put off,
and without faith the new man is not put on. Now the Sacrament of Baptism is
a Sacrament of regeneration through the blood of Christ.

Wherefore, to admit such as are unbelievers and unrepentant sinners, what is
it but even to tread under foot the blood of Christ, and to make a mock of
the new Testament? This barreth out very strongly from this privilege of the
Church all Turks, Jews, Infidels, and all savage nations whatsoever, that
have not the knowledge of true religion, but remain in blindness and
ignorance of Jesus Christ and his Gospel: and on the other side it teaches,
that baptism is by no means to be denied unto them which make profession of
faith and repentance. Here before we do proceed any further, we will answer
a few questions that may be demanded touching diverse persons, whether they may
be bap^ized or not.

The first question shall be, whether the infants of Turks, Jews, Whether the
Children of Jews and Turks may be baptized.
and such like barbarous nations may be baptized? I answer, that either their
parents or such are in stead of parents give consent to have them baptized, or
they will not give their consent. If they will not agree that their children
should be baptized, they ought not to be baptized against the liking and good
will of their parents: but if they be content and desirous, they may be
admitted and received unto Baptism. This determining of the question holds
touching infants, and infants only. For all such as are of full age and are
come to years of discretion to desire baptism, may not nor ought not to
depend upon the consent of parents, but whether they be willing or unwilling,
they must believe in Christ, profess the faith, practice repentance, and
desire to be entered into the Church, saying with the converted Eunuch, Acts
8.36.
Act. 8. See, here is water, what hinders me to be baptized? And Philip said,
If thou beleeuest with all thine heart, thou may. For every man should
follow Christ his master, albeit his parents should dissuade him, or forbid
him. Howbeit for infants the case is otherwise, they are under the jurisdiction
of their parents, and they rule over them, so that they cannot without wrong
and injustice be taken from them, to whom by the law of nature they do properly
belong. And therefore Christ commanded not the widows son whom he raised
from the dead to follow him, Luke 7, 15.
but delivered him to his mother: neither could he be compelled to follow him
against the good will of his mother, for that had been to abrogate and abolish
the authority of the parents over their children. But if they can be persuaded,
and will be contented to have them baptized, then they have no wrong at all
done unto them, for injury cannot be offered to them that are willing. Such
fathers give some hope that in time themselves will profess the faith: and in
this case the Church is as a tender mother over such infants, and therefore may
justly and rightly baptize them. Thus much touching their children that are out
of the bosom of the Church. The next question is touching the children of
those which indeed live within the doors of the Church, but yet are profane
and ungodly, who are in the Church, Whether the children of profane and
impenitent persons may be baptized.
but not of the Church: whether they may be baptized or not? I answer, if the
infants of such impenitent persons be brought and offered to be baptized, they
cannot nor ought not to be barred and excluded from it. For albeit their
parents be wicked men, and unworthy of any grace or privilege of the Church
either for themselves or their posterity, yet it is no reason that their
impiety should any way hurt or hinder the salvation of their Children that are
borne in the Church, or shut them from the means of furthering their
salvation. Heereunto comes the saying of the Prophet Ezekiell, The soul that
sins shall dye: Ezekiel. 18, 20.
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father
bear the iniquity of the son, etc. If any object and say, Paul says, If the
first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy, Romans
11, 16.
so are the branches, Romans 11. By the name of root in that nation of the Jews,
he does not understand the next parents who peradventure were profane and
ungodly, but those first parents of that people, to wit, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, to whom the promise was made and the covenant confirmed, that God would
be their God and the God of their seed by an everlasting covenant, and therefore
al their posterity which did not wholly forsake and renounce the true God of
Israel, and cleave to the false Gods of the Gentiles (which are no Gods but the
works of men's hands) are within the compass of the covenant, and rightly
judged to be holy in regard of the holiness of the covenant. Among Gods own
people the Jews, we know that many were wicked persons, yet was not
circumcision the sign of the covenant ever denied to their children: In like
manner the Sacrament of Baptism may not be taken away from the children of
such as are counterfeit Christians which profess Christ in words, but deny him
in their deeds, forasmuch as even they are in the Covenant in regard of the
Elders of whom they descend, and in regard of the whole Church in which they
are borne and do live. Whether children born in adultery may be baptized.
This point being duly waighed and considered, serves to answer another
question, to wit, whether children borne in fornication and adultery may be
baptized? I answer, as such were circumcised in the Church of the Jews, so
they may be baptized and ought to be baptized in the Churches of the
Christians. And as the children of wicked Christians, who hold true religion in
judgment, but deny it in their practice, are to be partakers of baptism, as
we have already proved in the former question: so may the children of the
adulterer and of the whore, provided that there be some to answer and to
undertake for them besides their parents. For it skilleth not what the next
parents were, out of whose loins immediately they proceed, neither is it
material in this case, whether the parents do repent or not, forasmuch as
their children being presented by other then the parents themselves and brought
unto baptism, may not be rejected from the Church. It pleases God in mercy to
call some of them to believe, and to bring them to salvation, as we see in the
example of Iepthah, who was the son of an harlot and borne in fornication,
Judge. 11, 1. Heb. 11 32.
yet he is commended in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and registered among the
cloud of faithful witnesses, who through faith wrought righteousness, out of
weakness was made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the
armies of the Aliens, Heb. 11.34. So then, albeit the children of harlots bear
the brand of their parents shame, and are oftentimes given over to follow the
sin of their parents, yet if they hate their wicked ways, God has grace in
store for them. If then salvation belong to them so that they repent and
believe: how should any deny the outward washing with water unto the^, and
bar them from the outward part, which is the least part of the Sacrament? And
this does Austine teach at large in his 75. epistle, reproving a certain
Bishop, August. epist. 75.
who for the wickedness of the father excommunicated the whole family, thereby
punishing the son for the sin of the father, the wife for the sin of the
husband, and the servant for the sin of the master: contrary to the equal
law of God, that the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, Ezekiel.
18, 20. Whether the children of professed papists and Recusants be to be
baptized.
Ezekiel. 18 The next question to be discussed and decided, is, whether the
children of Recusants and professed Papists have right to be baptized or not? I
answer two things; first that their parents are such as were baptized in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and they have
received true baptism, albeit corrupted with sundry superstitions. Secondly,
albeit the papacy be not the true Church, yet the true Church is in the papacy,
and to be gathered out of it, and for this cause baptism yet remains in the
essential part of it: so that such children as are baptized in the Church of
Rome ought not to be rebaptized, because the true form of baptism is
observed; and likewise their children may be baptized in our Churches, provided
that their parents desire this baptism, or consent unto it, as we noted before
in disputing about the baptizing of the children of Turks and Infidels: and
again, there be such sureties as will undertake the education and training up
of the child in the true knowledge of God, and faith in Christ Jesus.

The last question which now I will stand upon is, Whether the children of
excommunicate persons may be baptized.
whether the children of excommunicate persons, which are cast out of the
Church, and not holde^ as members of it, may be baptized or not? I answer,
they cannot nor ought not to be kept from partaking of baptism. For first
touching the parents that are excommunicate, it lies not in the power of the
Church to cut them off from the body of Christ: for albeit they be separated
from the Church for some grievous offense, Beza epist. 10.
yet they are not open apostataes and backsliders that combine themselves with
the enemies of the Church, and seek the ruin of the Church, and plot the
overthrow of the Gospel. Albeit for a season they be put out of the visible
Church, it is not to their destruction, but their conversion: and in the
judgment of charity we must hold them to be as decayed members, which are as
plants engrafted into Christ, albeit for the present time they have not any
lively and sensible feeling of the power of Christ's Spirit in them. They are
as an arm that has a dead palsy, which though for a while it remain without
sense, so that the body has no use of it, nor benefit by it: yet by the virtue
of some strong medicine it may be recovered and restored to the former
strength, and so made as whole and sound as the other. A freeman belonging to
any incorporation, that is imprisoned for some crime, remains a freeman
still, although for the time he be restrained, and have lost the use of his
liberty. Again, parents are banished out of the Church for their own
personal sins: but it is against the light of reason and common equity that
the personal sins of the father should interrupt and intercept the blessing
of God from the Child; for then the proverb should be true, that the fathers
have eaten sour grapes, Ezekiel. 18, 2.
and the childrens teeth are set on edge, Ezekiel. 18. which the Lord would have
no more used in Israel. Besides, we are taught, that the Lord is so gracious
and merciful, that he will show mercy to a thousand generations, and therefore
why should we shrink in the sinews of it, and pen it up in a narrow room,
as if the covenant did not belong to such infants, nor the seal of it? Or by
what law are they to bear part of the punishment, that are no way guilty of
the crime? It is the rule that God has left in his word, that the soul which
sins shall dye. They then are greatly deceived that hold opinion that when
once the parents are cut off from the Church, their children have right to no
benefit or privilege of the Church. Beza handling this question in his 10.
Epistle, declares at large, that all such as are not called and accounted the
members of the Church, must not be held in the same rank, Beza epist. 10.
nor have equal judgment given of them. Of such persons there are four kinds
far differing the one from the other. The first is, of those who neither
according to election, neither in themselves are any way members of Christ, who
are no better then reprobates and vessels of wrath ordained of old to
condemnation, Iud 4.
albeit through outward show and profession, and through a temporary faith
(whereby they deceive both themselves and others) they are reputed to be among
the members of the Church. Such was Esau, whom God determined to hate, Romans 9.
Romans 9, 13. Ioh. 17, 12. 1 Ioh. 2, 19.
and such was Judas the son of perdition, Ioh. 17. and of such speaks the
apostle John, If they had been of us, doubtless they would have continued
with us. The second sort is of those, who according to eternal election are
elected in Christ, and consequently are the members of Christ, albeit they be
not yet called or converted. These are not members actually, but in the
eternal counsel of God. In this sense, Paul says that God had separated him
from his mothers womb, Gal. 1, 15.
and called him by his grace, Gal. 1. Whereas a long time he was after a sort
a member of Satan persecuting the Church. And in another place he says, Grace
was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 2 Timothy 1, 9.
Likewise he speaks in his own person and in the person of the believers,
that when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
Romans 5, 10. Romans 5, 10.
The third sort is of such as both according to election and their present
condition, are really and actually the Sons of God, united to Christ by
faith, being iust^fied and sanctified by his Spirit, and expressing the power
of it, Romans 8.14.
as the Apostle says, Romans 8. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the Sons of God, The fourth and last so^te is of such as do most
properly belong to the matter we have in hand, who being elect of God, and
ingrafted into Christ, yet falling through infirmity, and giving offense unto
others are delivered unto Satan, that godly sorrow may work in them
repentance. Such cannot be cut off from Christ, forasmuch as the seed of faith
remains in them, albeit the sense of faith be lost until they renew their
repentance. Our Savior says, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me:
and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, Ioh. 6, 37. Heereunto
comes the saying of John, 1 Ioh. 1, 19.
If they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. And Paul
says, The foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2, 1^.
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his, 2. Tim. 2. The application
of all this we heard before, that we must be ruled by the law of charity, to
hope well and to judge the best even of such as are holden captives in the
snare of the devil, and therefore far be it from us to conclude, that
because the parents are excommunicated, the children pertain not to the
kingdom of God.

Genesis 17, 1.2.7.
promises to Abraham, Genesis 17, I will make my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations, I will be their God: walk before
me, and be thou upright. And ought we not to walk in the uprightness of our
heart, before this merciful and all-sufficient God, Who thus abounds in
kindness toward us, and the fruit of our body? Let us return unto him love
for his love, who loved us first.

Anabaptists and other heretics that condemn the same.

CHAP. VII. That Infants are to be baptized.
ALthough it cannot appear unto us, that infants and newborn babes brought
to be baptized, have actual faith, but rather is like they want the habit of
faith which hue Deuteronomy. 1, 39. Luke 1, 15, 44.
not the use of understanding, unless God extraordinarily work it, which
lies not in us to judge of: yet we baptize them and admit them to this
Sacrament, which we do upon very good grounds and sufficient reasons.

First therefore, we will prove by evident demonstration out of the Scriptures,
the doctrine of childrens baptism to be conformable to the Jews circumcision,
agreeable to the practice of the Apostles, allowable by the words of Christ,
answerable to the custom of the primitive Church, reasonable in it self,
profitable to the infants, available by the ordinance of God, and very
comfortable to all Christian parents. Secondly, we will maintain this
assertion against the objections and arguments of the Anabaptists and other
adversaries, that have crossed and contradicted this truth. Lastly, we will
show what evident and necessary uses may be gathered from hence, for the
strength of faith, and the increase of our obedience.

Touching the first, that the baptizing of infants is warranted by the word
Reasons warranting the baptizing of children.
of God, I will make it appear by sundry reasons. We see in the old
Testament, that all males by express commandment were willed to be
circumcised the Genesis 17, 12. Phil. 3, 5.
eight day. If God made infants partakers of circumcision: why should we not
hold the same of baptism, being instituted for us in stead of circumcision,
Col. 2, 11.
there being the same promises in both, and there being the same ends of both?
If then the covenant made with Abraham remain stable and steadfast, it does no
less belong to the children of Christians at this day, then it did appertain
to the children of the Jews under the old Testament: unless peradventure we
will say, that our Savior Christ by his coming has restrained or diminished
the grace and love of his Father, which were detestable blasphemy against the
Father, and an horrible reproach against the Son of God. From hence then, we
reason thus: If the infants of the Jews were circumcised, then the children of
Christians are to be baptized: but the infants of the Jews were circumcised:
therefore also the children of Christians are to be baptized.

Against this reason, sundry exceptions are taken by the adversaries of this
doctrine, Wherein circumcision and baptism agree.
agree, first, in one author of them both, that is, God himself, who first
appointed the Minister of circumcision, which was Abraham, and John the
Minister of baptism, whereof he was called the Baptist. Secondly, in the
chief and principal ends for which they were instituted, namely, to seal up
the promises of grace by Christ. Thirdly, by both of them is wrought our
visible receiving into the Church: the Jews were received by circumcision, the
Christians are entered by baptism. Lastly, by both of them our mortification,
regeneration, newness of life, and justification are signified. So then they
fully agree in the ends which they respect, and in the things which they
signify, to wit, in the substance and nature of the things themselves. The
same Christ is promised in circumcision, and given in baptism.

Again, circumcision and baptism differ Wherein circumcision and baptism
differ.
only in certain circumstances: first, in the form and manner of doing, as
circumcision was administered by cutting away of the foreskin and effusion of
blood, but baptism by washing and sprinkling with water. Secondly, in the
outward sign, which is indifferent in both. Thirdly, in the circumstance of
time: for circumcision promised from God grace and mercy in the Messiah to
come, baptism in the Messiah already exhibited. Fourthly, in the subjects or
persons that are partakers of them: circumcision belongs only to the male
children, but baptism is common to male and female. Notwithstanding, How women
were after a sort circumcised.
howsoever the bodies of the men children alone were imprinted, yet through
them the women were after a sort made partakers and companions of circumcision,
so that albeit God commanded only the males to have this sign in their flesh,
yet the females were not excluded from being members of the Church, nor
accounted strangers from the Covenants of promise. For as the man is the 1 Cor.
11, 8.
head of the woman, so they were accounted as circumcised in the man, yea they
were reckoned and numbered with the men, namely, the unmarried with their
father, and the married with their husbands. Now that their circumcision was
thus comprehended in the men, so that it was unto the^ in stead of circumcision
to be borne of the circumcised, may be gathered by many places, as Luke 13.
Where the woman which Christ healed of a spirit of infirmity bound together, is
called Luke 13, 11.
the daughter of Abraham, to signify that the privilege of his posterity
belonged no less to her and all women that were faithful, then to the males;
and that she was as well his daughter, as they his sons. Likewise Genesis 34.
the sons of Jacob communing with Hamor after their sister was humbled and
abused, said unto them, Genesis 34, 14.15, 16.
We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to an uncircumcised man, for that
were a reproof unto us: but in this we will consent unto you, if ye will be as
we are, that every man-ch^ld among you be circumcised, then we will give our
daughters to you, etc. where these two are set as contrary one to another, our
sister, and the uncircumcised, which teaches that they were accounted as
circumcised in the males, so that it was enough to them to be born of parents
that were circumcised.

Fifthly, they differ in the settled time which is limited for circumcision,
being precisely and necessarily tied to the 8. day: but in baptism it is not
so, there is greater liberty left to the church: yet the Sabbath following
would not without urgent cause be omitted. Sixthly, circumcision was instituted
for the Israelites that were the seed of Abraham: but Baptism was instituted
for all Nations that are willing to join themselves to the fellowshippe of the
Churches of Christ that profess his name, of whatsoever Land and language they
be. Lastly, circumcision was to endure only till the coming of the Messiah,
but the body being come, the figure must cease, whereas baptism is to continue
unto the end of the world Mat. 28, 20.
as our Savior teaches, Mat. 28. Teach and baptize, and lo I am with you
until the end of the world. Wherefore, the circumcision of the Turks and
Tartars which live in infidelity, and of the Moors which profess christianity
used at this day, is nothing worth, albeit they retain the outward sign and
ceremony: because the institution of it was only to endure until the blessed
times of the Gospel. Thus we see, that notwithstanding the differences
between circumcision and baptism in circumstances of time and manner of
doing: yet being in substance and effect the same, the argument stands strong
and invincible as a brazen wall, proving the baptizing of infants in the time
of the Gospel, from the commandment of circumcising infants in the time of
the Law.

Again, The practice of the Apostles.
let us consider the practice of the Apostles and ages succeeding in this
point. For albeit it be not expressed, that any infant was baptized by the
hands of the Apostles: yet we find in diverse places, that whole families and
households have been baptized, in which no doubt were many infants and
sucklings, Act. 16, 13.33. 1 Cor. 1, 14, 16. Acts 18, 8. and 2.37, 38.39.
as Act. 16, 15. Lidia being converted to the faith, was baptized and all her
household. And again, verse 33, of the same Chapter, the Iaylor was baptized
and all that were with him. So was Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue
and his household baptized, and the household of Stephanus.

Furthermore, when Peter commanded the Jews, newly converted to the faith of
Christ, and hungring after salvation in him whom before they had crucified, to
be baptized: he adds this as a reason. For the promise is made to you, and
to your children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our
God shall call.

shut out women from the Lords Supper, (if any were as great an enemy to the
communicating of women, as many are to the baptizing of Children) seeing we do
not expressly read, that they were admitted to the Lords table in the Apostles
times. Besides, by like reason we may say, that the Apostles were not baptized,
because we do not read it. But the argument is weak and nothing worth, to
argue from not written, to not done; forasmuch as many things were done, which
are not written, John 20.30. and 21, 25. Wherefore, childrens baptism is no
humane tradition, no apish imitation, no ancient corruption of this Sacrament:
but is grounded on the unblameable practice of the Apostles, which has the
force and strength of a commandment.

Thirdly, Christ by his own example allows and approves their baptism as
we see, Mar. 10. when the Disciples rebuked those that brought little children
to Christ that he might touch them, he said, Mar. 10, 13, 14, 15.
Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is
the kingdom of God: verily I say unto y^u, whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. Where we are to
observe, that he says not, of these only is the kingdom of heaven, but of
such like infants, which shall be in all ages and times of the Church. In this
act of Christ embracing the Infants brought unto him, and sharply rebuking his
Disciples that forbad them: we are to consider that he commands children to
be brought unto him, and adds a reason, To such belongs the kingdom of
heaven. If any object, The kingdom of heaven is theirs. All this is a great
deal more then to give them the outward sign. For if reason require, they
should be brought to Christ: why should they not be received to baptism,
which is a sign of our union with Christ? If the kingdom of heaven belong
unto them: why should the sign be denied unto them, whereby the door of
entrance into the church is opened? Why should we drive them away from Christ,
whom Christ calls himself? Neither let any say, these children were of
years and grown up in age, able of themselves to come and repair to Christ:
For the Evangelist uses such (...).
words as signify such young Infants as are babes and hang upon their mothers
breasts, Luk 2, 12.16, and 1.44.
therefore by coming in this place he means to draw near or to have
access. Again, they were such as were brought to Christ by Luke 18, 15.
others, Luke 18.15. they were carried in their arms, they walked not on their
feet, and Christ also took them in his own arms.

Besides, heereto agrees the practice and custom of the primitive church: for
no Teacher so profound, no Doctor so learned, no Writer so ancient, which does
not refer the beginning hereof to the Orig. lib. 5. comment. ad Romans Hieron in
fine lib. 3. contra. Pelag. August. de bap. paruu^. and cap. 20. libri de
Origin. animae.
precise times of the Apostles. Let the Anabaptists and adversaries of this
truth tell us, who was the first author and inuenter of childrens baptism, if
they refer it not to Christ? who first administered it? What was his name? if
they can tell let them not hide it. Let them declare the time when it began?
Let them show the place where it was devised? Let them name the child first
baptized, and in what assembly or church it was? If they cannot do these or any
of them, let them acknowledge the baptism of children to be the ordinance of
God, and not of man: warranted both by doctrine of the Scripture and practice
of the church.

Moreover, if there were no writer to avouch this ancient truth, yet is it in
it self very right and reasonable. For do we not see and behold daily very
babes and infants Children admitted to c^ppi holds by custo^e of the M^nour
among men.
oftentimes among men admitted to their inheritance, have they not livery and
season of land, and have they not the wand or turfe taken into their hands,
according to the use of the country, or custom of the Manor of which they
hold? They know not what is done: they perceive nothing what the Lord of the
Manor or steward speaks unto them: yet we see among the wisest men in this
world, this is not thought foolish, neither is such an admission called into
question, but they are afterward instructed what they have done, what they have
undertaken and taken upon them, what services and duties they owe, what their
Lord requires of them, and how they hold their lands.

Thus they are admitted in their infancy to a temporal inheritance and
possession: this they hold to the end of their life: and of the validity of
such entrance no tenant makes doubt. Why then should it seem unreasonable to
give them baptism, the sign of the covenant, being borne heirs of the
promise, that after they come to discretion they may make use of it as the rest
of the members of the Church? They shall understand afterward that which they
understand not for the present: and yet if it please God to take them in mercy
to himself from the miseries of the world, before they know the mystery of
their baptism, he works extraordinarily by ways best known to himself the
force of their baptism in their hearts, and seals up their engrafting into
Christ Jesus. If then children have the white wand delivered unto them to
assure them of the inheritance which they hold: let none deny unto them the
partaking of this Sacrament, whereby they are assured of an eternal inheritance
howsoever for the present time they are not capable of the knowledge thereof.

Lastly, the privileges and prerogatives of children are no less then those
of elder years. For infants are a part of the Church of God, Children are
Christ's sheep and members of his body.
they are the sheep of Christ, they are the children of the heavenly Father,
they are inheritors of the kingdom of heaven, they are redeemed with the blood
of Christ, and engrafted into his body: why then should they not bear the
mark of Christ, seeing they are a principal part of his possession? If they
be a part of the household, they ought to have entrance into the house: if they
belong to the City of God, who shall dare to shut the gates against them? Or
if they be in the number of the sheep of Christ, who shall presume to keep
them from the sheepefold? Or if they be sound members of the body of Christ,
who shall cut them off as rotten members? Wherefore then, Genesis 17, 7. Acts 2,
39. 1. Cor 7, 14.
should they not receive the seal whereby the promise is confirmed unto them,
seeing they have the promise it self of salvation? Why should they not be
partakers of the outward sign, Mat. 19, 14.
seeing they are partakers of the thing signified? Why should they be put back
from the figure, seeing they have the truth it self? Why should they not be
partakers of the Sacrament with the faithful, seeing they are enrolled in the
fellowship of the faithful? And who shall deprive them of the seal of the
covenant, seeing they are partakers of regeneration and remission of sins?

Hereupon thus we reason, whosoever are in the covenant and Church of God,
unto them belongs baptism, which is the seal of the covenant: but Infants
are in the Covenant and of the Church: therefore to them belongs baptism
which is the seal of the Covenant. Again, to whom the promise appertains,
they may and ought to be baptized: but the promise was made even to Infants:
therefore they may and ought to be baptized.

Furthermore, to whom forgiveness of sins and the Holy Ghost are promised
and given, they ought by no means to be denied the outward sign: but
forgiveness of sins and the Holy Ghost are promised to Infants and given
unto them: therefore infants ought not to be kept from the element of water, no
more then such as are of years of discretion. Thus much of the first point,
putting Children into the right and possession of Baptism, as if it were the
right heirs into their inheritance, from which they have been wrongfully and
unjustly dispossessed.

Having now sufficiently proved by the Scripture, that children are to be
baptized: it remains that we should maintain this assertion against
Objections of Anabaptists, impugning childrens baptism, an^wered.
the cauils of the Anabaptists. For as the former reasons, grounded upon the
evident demonstration of the word, as upon a pillar that cannot be shaken, may
persuade us to embrace the truth: so the weakness and sophistry which
appears in the Objections of the adversaries, serves to confirm us in this
persuasion. But let us examine what is the strength of them.

First, they object, Col. 2, 11.12
in that it came in place of circumcision, Baptism is our circumcision.
Besides, we Mat. 28, 19. 1 Cor. 10, 1, 2.
have a general commandment, Go teach all nations and baptize them. And the
apostle says, all were baptized in the cloud and in the sea: and he
comprehends the whole Church, when he says, it was cleansed with the washing
of water, Ephesians 5. verse 26. Christ says, all nations, the Apostle says,
all the Israelites: let them show where infants are excepted and exempted: for
we hold this as a certain principle, that a general commandment includes the
particular, and comprehends the same under it, as well as if it were by name
expressed.

Secondly, they object, if infants may be baptized,

Again, sundry conditions and considerations are required in the supper which
debar young infants, that although they are to be baptized, yet they ought not
to be admitted to the Lords supper, seeing by their young years they are
excluded. For it is required of all those that come to this supper, 1 Cor.
11.26 28, 29.
to show forth the Lords death, to discern the body and blood of Christ, and
try themselves whether they have faith and repentance. But infants cannot do
these things, they cannot show forth the Lords death, they are not apt to
discern his body and blood, they are not able to examine themselves, and
therefore infants for good causes are excluded from this Supper.

If any say, Is this a good reason, the promise does belong to infants, and
therefore the Sacrament of Baptism? Then why may not the Lords Supper be as
well given unto them upon the same ground? This will not follow howsoever some
of the ancient Fathers were of that opinion, Cyprian Ser. 5. de laps. August.
de eccl. dogm. cap. 52. Ioh. 6, 6, 5^.
applying this Scripture to their purpose, Ioh. 6, 53. Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. But this
place is to be understood of spiritual eating by faith, not of the
Sacramental eating, as we shall show in the next book. They were therefore
deceived that thought the Supper of the Lord did belong to infants. And
touching this consequence, The promise of grace belongs to children,
Therefore the outward sign of the Sacrament: it is true being rightly
understood, to wit, according to the limitation, and the appointment of God,
proper to every Sacrament, who has ordained that the Sacrament of entrance
should be received both of men and children, Genesis 17.
howbeit only the males in the old Testament and not before the eight day: but
in the new Testament both of male and female without restraint of time. And
touching the Supper of the Lord, which is the Sacrament of our norishment, it
can appertain to those only that are come to years of discretion, first,
because the end thereof is to show the Lords death until he come. 1 Cor. 11,
26. 1 Cor. 11, 28.
Secondly, because every one that comes unto it, is commanded to examine
himself. Mat. 26, 26.
Thirdly, the peculiar actions and external rites of eating and drinking do
not agree to babes and sucklings. Thus likewise in the old Testament
circumcision was ordained for infants; but the Passover for such as were of
that age, that they might enquire of their parents touching the substance and
signification thereof, Exodus 12, 26. Exodus 12, 26.


Thirdly, they object, Mar. 16, 16. Mat. 28, 19.
that it is said, Teach and baptize: He that shall believe and be baptized
shall be saved: whereupon they conclude, that such as believe not, are not to
be baptized; inasmuch as Christ before baptism commands teaching, and
afterward joins baptizing with believing. But infants are not capable of
doctrine, neither do they actually believe: therefore they are not to be
baptized. Again, Act. 2, 38.
if repentance be necessarily joined as Act. 2. Amend your lives and be
baptized: then infants must be separated and secluded, who cannot repent. But
repentance is necessarily required: therefore infants are to be barred from the
Sacrament of baptism. 1 These. 3, 10
but such as labor, were he not worthy to be spitted at or hissed out of the
schools, because he carries that indifferently to all ages, which is limited
and restrained to a certain age? So must we not rack and rent asunder the
Luke 13, 3, 5. Romans 10, 17. Mar. 16, 16. Heb 11, 6.
general sentences of Scripture, Except ye repent, ye shall all perish: faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. These belong only to men of discretion, and are not
to be applied to Infants, whom they do not concern. Again, Christ in those
words instructs his Apostles, what order they should observe in the
conversion of the Gentiles: first, they must instruct the^ in faith; then
baptize them being instructed; and lastly guide them in true obedience being
baptized: when he adds, Mat. 28, 20.
Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you. Besides, if they
strictly urge and stiffly stand upon the words, as they literally lie in order:
why may we not first baptize them before we teach them, because it is said,
baptizing them in the name of the Trinity, and teaching them to observe what I
command? But he entreats in this place of such as are grown up, which must
first have knowledge in the Gospel, faith in Christ, and repentance from dead
works before they be baptized: but infants are baptized by reason of the
promise made to their parents. Moreover, we might oppose unto these the example
of circumcision, which we know, and they are not ignorant was given to infants,
who could not yet believe: so that such as bar them from baptism, because
they are not capable of faith and repentance, might in like manner exclude the
infants of the Israelites from circumcision. Baptism is the Sacrament of
repentance and faith, though neither of these be in infancy, yet they are
baptized to the repentance and faith to come, which albeit they be not actually
formed in them, yet by the fruits afterward they shall appear to be in them.

Lastly, if baptism should be given only to those that truly believe, it
should likewise be denied to such as are of understanding; for we are not able
to pronounce of these that they do truly believe, and certainly apprehend the
promises of the Gospel. Wherefore, if infants are not to be baptized, because
they have not faith and want repentance: neither are they of sufficient age to
be baptized, of whom it cannot be directly and undoubtedly said, they do
believe. S mon the sorcerer mentioned Act. 8, 13, 20.
in the Acts of the Apostles was baptized, and yet remained an hipocrite. If
they say, profession of faith is sufficient to make members of ^he visible
Church: I answer, our Savior speaks not of a bare profession of faith, when
he says, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, for then all that
profess faith should receive 1 Pet. 1, 9.
The reward of their faith, which is the salvation of their souls. Again,
profession of faith is for such as are capable of it, which agrees not to the
age of infants: as they cannot deny the faith before men, which they have not
acknowledged: no more can they confess the truth of doctrine, which they never
learned. Now to be borne in the Church and in the covenant, is to infants in
place and stead of an actual confession and real profession. Such as are
grown up must believe with the heart, Romans 10, 10
and confess with the mouth the Gospel of salvation: it is sufficient for
others to be the children of such as have confessed the faith.

Fourthly, they object in this manner, Adam. Albeit therefore infants have not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, in their own persons, yet
they have sinned in him, and in his loins, in whom all are dead. This the holy
man Job. 14 4.
teaches, Job. 14. Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? There is
not one. Likewise the Prophet Psalm. 51, 5. Romans 5, 14, 19
David confesses this truth, Psalm. 51. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in
sin my mother conceived me. So the apostle Paul, Romans 5. Death reigned from
Adam to Moses, even over them also that sinned not after the manner of the
transgression of Adam, which was the figure of him that was to come: for as by
one man's disobed^ence many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous. Wherefore such as hold infants without all guilt of
sin, never knew the greatness of Adams fall, of Gods justice, of man's misery,
and of Christ's endless mercy.

Lastly, (...)
no younger Scholar, none lately come to the profession, and gathered
immediately from heathenish religion to the fellowship of the Gospel: yet the
office of teaching is not tied to 30. years, the age may be less if the
gifts be great, and fit for that calling. Again, Christ stood not in need to
be baptized in respect of himself, being without original or actual sin to
be washed away, and therefore John at the first put him back: Mat. 3, 15.
yet he would be baptized for our sakes, to fulfill all righteousness, to
sanctify our baptism in himself, and that thereby we might know he was
installed into his office. But we stand in need to be baptized, to seal up the
washing away of our sins, and therefore there is great difference in this
respect between Christ and us. Besides, the Evangelist does testify, that
albeit our Savior were baptized at thirty years of age, yet he was
circumcised at eight days old. Now we have proved before, that the same which
circumcision was to the Jews, baptism is to all Christians. If then he in his
infancy were circumcised, then children in their infancy may be baptized, and
are not commanded to wait thirty years: for baptism is our circumcision, as
the Apostle teaches: but Christ in his infancy was circumcised, Luke 2, 21.
when the eight days were accomplished: therefore children in their infancy
may be baptized.

Furthermore, baptism was not hitherto as yet in use, it was not commanded to
be used when he was a child, and therefore he could not possibly be baptized,
unless we will imagine he might be baptized, before baptism was. So that we
see, as he would not have his circumcision deferred one day beyond the time
appointed: so he was presently baptized, so soon as baptism was instituted
of God, and administered by John. Fifthly, we are no more tied to this
circumstance of time in Christ's baptism, then we are to other circumstances of
time, place, and persons in the Supper: he ministered it in an upper Chamber,
and before his passion: we in Churches, before dinner, and after his
resurrection. Lastly, when the time appointed came, that the promised Savior
and redeem of mankind should manifest himself to the world, then he showed
himself openly, then he came to the preaching and baptism of John, and began
to publish the glad tidings of salvation, Mar. 1, 15.
and to exhort men to repent and believe the Gospel. These are the chiefest
objections against childrens baptism, that ca ^y any show and probability of
reason, which hitherto we have dissolved and discussed. And this is the second
point before propounded.

Now as we have seen the truth proved by the Scripture, and maintained it
against all the ignorant cauils of the Anabaptists and other Arrians of
Transiluania, that have Ministri. Transiluan. contra Trinit. and incarnationem
domini.
oppugned this truth: so let us come to see the benefit of this doctrine, and
what profit comes by baptism of children that are without knowledge,
without understanding, without faith, and without repentance. What use can
there be of this? Much every way, as well as by circumcising an infant of eight
days old. First, consider from Rome, Lindan. lib. 4. panopl. Bellar. de verbo
dei. lib. 4. cap. 9.
that teach that the baptism of children is by tradition, not by divine
institution, from their word unwritten, not in the word of God written. But we
have confuted the Anabaptists by the Scriptures, and convinced them by the
institution of circumcision, by the tenor of the covenant, by the holiness of
their birth, by their redemption through the blood of Christ, and by the
practice of the Apostles. This is better armor, these are stronger weapons,
this is a sharper sword to cut in sunder the corrupt heresy of the
Anabaptists, then the wooden dagger of humane tradition which the Church of
Rome draws out against them. The Scripture is all-sufficient 2 Timothy 3, 16.
to prove all truth, and to beat down all false doctrine that lifts up it
self against God. Wherefore, we hold their traditions to be superstitions: and
their unwritten verities are written lies. As we retain the baptism of
children, so we have always bin ready to maintain it by the old and new
testament, as by the sword of the Spirit against all the adversaries thereof.

Secondly, let us learn from hence to acknowledge a difference

Thirdly, if infants have interest in baptism, then hence Ioh 3, 6. 1 Cor 15,
22. Romans 3, 23, 24. Ephesians. 2, 1, 2.
and whatsoever is of the flesh is flesh. So the apostle says, As in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. There is no difference, all have
sinned, and are deprived of the glorious kingdom of God: we must be justified
freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: by nature
all are the children of wrath, and borne dead in sins and trespasses, infants
not excepted. We learn therefore that whatsoever is begotten of man, is
sinful and corrupt, it must be cut and pared away, we must be renewed and
borne again by the Spirit of God, cleansing us from our sins: yea the
children of the faithful parents, whose corruptions are mortified, whose lusts
are subdued, whose flesh is tamed, and brought under the obedience of the will
of God, are notwithstanding brought forth in sin, because they are borne by
carnal generation, and not by spiritual regeneration: as corn winnowed from
the chafe August. de poenit. merit. and remiss. li. 3. c. 18
yet grows up again with it, and as the foreskin cut off from the parents
returns in the child.

Again, have infants of the faithful right to be baptized? Jews, Pagans,
and Turks. As the children of the Jews being heirs of the covenant, were
separated and distinguished from other children of the wicked Idolatrous
nations, and were therefore accounted the holy seed: so for the same cause and
reason the children of Christians 1 Cor. 7, 14.
are called holy, borne of either party and parent being faithful and a
beleeeuer, and do differ from the profane seed of Idolatrous people. Indeed
whosoever makes a true profession of the faith which he holds, and is ready
to lead his life according to that confession, though he be not the seed or
child of the faithful, yet is to be baptized, though he came of the race of
Turks or Pagans, Acts 8, 37.
as appears by the speech of Philip to the Eunuch, Acts 8. If thou beleeuest,
thou may. Thus we see, that the children of those that profess the faith,
belong to the Church of God: the children of Pagans belong not to the Church of
God: lo how great a difference there is between them. Hereby then the
children of the faithful are discerned and distinguished from the profane
multitude of Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, Arrians, Anabaptists, Turks,
Sarazens, Persians, and other barbarous nations, Ephesians. 2, 1^.
which are without Christ, without hope, without God in the world: whereas the
holy seed of all the faithful belong to the Church of God, and are reckoned
in the company of the Church. For this Romans 11, 6.
cause, the Apostle calls the whole posterity of Abraham holy, that is,
consecrated and hallowed to God, If the root be holy, the branches are also
holy. Not that the children of the faithful do want original sin, or that
they gather any actual holiness or inherent righteousness by carnal
generation and propagation from their parents, but because by benefit of the
covenant of God, and by force of his gracious promise, they are separated from
profane Infidels, and brought into the bosom of the Church, as Noah was into
the Arc.

Fifthly, this doctrine that children are commended to Deuteronomy. 7, 9.
for a thousand generations? And is not occasion offered unto us continually to
glorify him? Can we deserve that God should be our God? Nay do we not deserve
that he should not be our God? And yet behold he will be the God of our
children also? Let us therefore never forget his mercies: let us fill our
mouths or rather our hearts with his praises: let us confess before the Lord
his loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men.

Sixthly, all parents are hereby wonderfully comforted, Genesis 17, 7.
faith, Genesis 17. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee; I will
establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee. A sentence
to be written, not only in Gold, but in the tables of our hearts to dwell with
us for ever. When we must leave the world and our families in poor estate
behind us, and go unto the Father: let us not be dismayed, discouraged, or
discomfited: this is the stay of our hope, this is the staff of our comfort,
this is our anker-hold, that he will not shut up his mercy toward our children,
but be a gracious God to them as he has been to our selves: so that we may
assuredly say unto them with faithful Abraham, Genesis 22.8.
My son, God will provide. Let us be content with those things that we have,
for he has said, Heb. 13, 5.6, 7. Josh. 1, 5. H^g. 2, 9.
I will not fail thee neither forsake thee, so that we may boldly say, The
Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me. Godliness is
great gain, and he that is truly godly, is truly rich. He that has Christ,
has all things: he that wants him, wants all things. Heaven and earth are
the Lords: all the gold and silver are his, who has promised to be an husband
to the widow, eyes to the blind, a covering to the naked, a father to the
fatherless, and he will not forget his kindness toward us for ever.

Wherefore, let us lift up Heb. 12, 12.13.
our hands and our hearts which hang down, let us strengthen our weak knees,
and make straight steps unto our feet, God is able to work contentednes in all
his servants, whose power is best seen in our weakness, and whose glory
shines brightest in our greatest wants, Remember Psalm. 37.25 and 34, 8, 9, 10.
what the Prophet says, Psalm. 37. I was young and now am old, yet I never saw
the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. And again, Taste ye and
see, how gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in him. Fear
the Lord ye his Saints: for nothing wants to them that fear him. The Lions do
lack, and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord shall want nothing that
is good. Lo, how the man shall be blessed that fears God, not only in his
own person, but in his children: Psalm. 115, 13 14. Ier. 32, 38, 39.
inasmuch as our seed is no less dear to him then we are, as Psalm. 115. He
will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great: the Lord will
increase his graces toward you and toward your children. And to the same
purpose the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 32. says. They shall be my people, and I will
be their God, and I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear
me for ever for the wealth of the^ and of their children after them. Let us al
rest in his words, and rely upon his merciful promises. He is not as man that
he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should deceive. He has said, he
will be our God, and the God of our seed that we leave behind us. Behold, O
Lord, the words of thine own lips, consider the promises that are gone out of
thine own mouth. We know thou art true and faithful in all thy sayings, thou will not alter the things which thou have written with thine own finger: on
thee we wait, and in thee we put our trust, let it be unto thy servants
according to thy free promise, and according to thy gracious covenant, that we
may feel the accomplishment thereof in our souls.

Seventhly, al parents are hereby to be warned and admonished, Ephesians. 6, 4.
in the true knowledge and fear of God, as Ephesians. 6. Fathers provoke not your
children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of the
Lord. So Moses teaches, Exodus 12. Exodus 12, 26.27.
When their children should ask them touching the Paschal Lamb, that then it
is their duty to declare and deliver to them the true cause and occasion
thereof.

Likewise, so often as we consider how our children are by grace accepted, by
baptism consecrated unto God, and so made heirs of life and salvation: it
stands us upon to plant and water the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus in
them. For what should it profit us to leave them great riches and large
possessions, and make them for want of instruction and information in the ways
of God the children of hell? If we do no more but feed them, and give them
meat and drink: what do we for them, which we do not for the Ox and Ass? Or
if our chiefest care be to cloth the^ well, and to apparel them warm: what do
we 1 Timothy 5, 8.
which the Turks and Infidels do not, as well as we? Have not they as great a
portion in this as we? but our obedience to the will of God, and duty to our
children must exceed theirs, if we will enter Mat 5, 20.
into the kingdom of heaven. Whereby we see, that they are greatly deceived,
who when they have made honest provision for the sustenance and sustentation of
their children in this world, will say they have done their part, although they
have not taught them to know God; these have the greatest and chiefest account
to make for their souls. Now if this be a grievous sin to neglect the
teaching of our children the fear of God: then they increase and double their
iniquity, who by their corrupt example do lead them into evil, and so murder
their souls. For children in stead of godly and religious instruction, do
oftentimes hear their fathers swear, swagger, lie, tail, blaspheme, and
slander: see them deal deceitfully and unjustly, and mark their walking in
every evil way, making their houses as it were an image and representation of
Hell it self, by practice of all manner of abominations leading thereunto.

Lastly, this doctrine is very comfortable unto children A laudable custom^ of
the Church whom God-fath^rs and God mothers
of ancient time a laudable custom in the Church to have special witnesses
(men of credit and estimation) of every childs and infants baptism, whom
commonly we call Godfathers and Godmothers. The steps of this truth may be
traced out, if we consider (...) ^. 1.^.^
what the Prophet Esaias says, Chap. 8. where he declares that so soon as his
wife had borne him a son. he gave him his name (which was done at circumcision)
and took two Par^nts no (...) witnesses of th^^ own^ ch^ldrens baptism.
faithful witnesses Vriah and Zechariah to testify the circumcision of his
son, and the solemn giving to him of that name in the presence of the
congregation. And howsoever Vriah walked not with a right foot, but turned
aside from the pure worship of God to set up the Idolatrous Altar after the
fashion of Damascus, to feed the fancy of Ahaz: yet he was a man of
reputation, whose testimony was sufficient to assure the naming of the Prophets
Son: because the times to come would be troublesome and full of many
calamities. For their children were named, when they were Gen 21, ^. Luke 1,
59. and 2, 21.
circumcised: as now our children are named when they are baptized.

So likewise the Church oftentimes lies under the cross, and is subject to
persecution, as Revel. 11, 6.
the woman driven into the Wilderness, Revelations 12, 6. and so the baptism
of many members might many times be doubted off and called into question,
(forasmuch as no impression abides in the flesh, as there did in circumcision)
the Churches have thought it sit and convenient to require certain men to be
as special witnesses of infants their bringing to Christ and to the Church by
baptism, and of their names given them in their baptism.

True it is, there is no express commandment in the Scripture, neither is it
a thing in it self necessary to have chosen witnesses, which they call
Godfathers, to undertake for the child. Nevertheless, it is commendable, and
not rashly to be rejected and refused: For first, it is not contrary to the
Scriptures, and the doctrine contained therein. Secondly, it has bin a very
ancient custom in the Church, which seems to have sprung from the baptism
of those that were called Catechumeni, being as it were nouices and newly
taught in the principles of christian religion. These being asked concerning
their faith, did not only make answer themselves, but gave witnesses and
sureties of their faith: in imitation of whom it is now extended generally to
the baptism of every one, even of infants. Thirdly, it contains and
commands nothing unjust, or dishonest, or unlawful, or any way inconvenient.
Fourthly, it proceeds from charity, both of the fathers which choose such
Godfathers to be an help unto them in bringing up their children, and of
such also as promise for them, and in their name. Last of all, it tends unto
the good of the child and of the whole Church. Of the Child, when beside the
parents (who may depart out of this life and leave their children young,) there
are others as guardians and assistants to have an eye over them, who should not
cease to call upon them to learn true religion, and to cleave unto it to the
end. Of the Church, because by this means they that belong unto it are better
provided for, touching their education and instruction in the fear of God, and
their young years are more easily seasoned with the best things betimes. So
then we see, that this custom is good and lawdable in it self, so that there
be no abuse of it, nor superstition in it, nor matter of necessity urged upon
it.

Seeing therefore children are baptized, and have by this means an assurance
given them of their baptism: they have a maruailous benefit bestowed upon
them, that they so soon obtain the partaking of Christ and all his benefits.
God works in the Children of the faithful belonging to his covenant by ways
unknown to us, as Luke 1, 15.41
John Baptist is said to be filled with the Holy Ghost from his mothers womb:
and they are called 1 Cor. 7, 14.
holy by the Apostle, insomuch that they cannot perish: whom God calls, some
sooner and some later, all in his own appointed time, as seems good to his
heavenly pleasure. The remembrance whereof, when children come to age, greatly
comfort them in the love and fear of God, when they call to mind that they
are so greatly esteemed and highly regarded of God, from the first coming into
the world, before they had the use of speech, of reason, and of understanding.
Christ Jesus shed his blood for them, he dyed for all the Children of God,
Ioh. 11, 52. Revel. 20, 12.
he redeemed them whether they be old or young, small or great, as Ioh. 11. He
must dye, not for that nation only, but should gather together in one the
children of God which are scattered. And the same apostle Revel. 20. says, I
saw the dead both great and small stand before God, and the books were opened,
and another book was opened which is the book of life, and the dead were
judged of those things written in those books according to their works.
Wherefore, when children shall come to years of discretion and understanding,
they must hereby be pricked forward to an earnest care and endeavor to walk
in the fear of God, and to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days
of their life, by whom they were received for sons and adopted for his
children by a solemn pledge of their adoption, before they were able through
their age, to know and acknowledge him for their father.

This must serve as a strong confirmation of their faith, both in life and
death, to assure them that God will never leave them nor forsake them, who so
soon begins to give them pledges of his love, and to show himself to be
their God. We see by common experience, that a little child coming into the
world, is one of the miserablest and filliest creatures that can be devised,
the very lively picture of the greatest infirmity that can be imagined: more
weak in body, and less able to help himself, or shift for himself, then
any of the beasts of the field. The other creatures (which are also the work
of his hands) by the secret instinct of nature so soon as they are come
forth, seek about for succor and sustenance. It is not so with children,
they can neither seek their own good, nor defend themselves from evil. They
are ready to fall into fire and water, or any other danger; they cannot take
one bit of bread to feed themselves, they cannot cover their own nakedness;
they must be carried in our arms, swadled in clothes, attired in apparel,
washed with water, nourished with milk, and afterward with meat, and have all
things supplied unto them. They would starve for cold sooner then come to the
fire to warm themselves, they can do nothing to save or to serve themselves.
Thus mankind lifted up into the highest seat of honor, and made little
inferior to the Angels is through sin and their revolt from God fallen down
into the greatest misery, and lowest degree of all wretchedness.
Nevertheless, in respect of the life to come, God has provided much better
for the sons of men then for others: for they are no sooner come into the
world, but he takes care for them, he declares himself a father unto them,
he has commanded them to be brought unto him, and to be baptized in his name,
to the end that so soon as they begin to breathe, they might also begin to
breathe and live anew or second life: so soon as they begin to suck the milk
of their mothers breasts, they might also suck both the breasts of the Church,
and so find the food of everlasting life. He gives his Angels charge over
them and receives them unto mercy; he reserueth them for his heavenly
kingdom, and in the mean season offers unto them many tokens and assurances
of his good will toward them.

Let them therefore give the Prou. 3, 9. Lam. 3, 27, Psalm. 119, 9. Eccle. 12, 1.
first fruits of their life to God: let them learn to bear the yoke of
obedience from their youth, let them redress and reform their ways by taking
heed to the word of truth: and seeing God has remembered them in their
baptism, let them also remember their Creator in the days of their youth, and
begin to be wise betimes, least death come suddenly and cut them off, as the
sluggard that fore-sloweth the seasons of plowing and reaping, wishes for them
in vain at another time of the year. Thus we have showed the baptism of
children: the certain truth thereof has been evidently prooved: the
objections against this truth alleged, have been sufficiently answered: and
the uses of it to the great comfort of all faithful parents and Children have
been particularly remembered.

CHAP. VIII. Of the first inward part of baptism.
HItherto we have handled all the outward parts of baptism, now we are orderly
to proceed to the inward parts. The inward parts of baptism are such as are
represented by the outward. Those are Mat. 2^, 19.20 Mark. 16, 16.
four in number: first, God the Father: secondly, the Spirit: thirdly, Christ:
fourthly, the soul cleansed, as we see Mat. 28. Teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: he
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Here we see these four inward
parts Four inward parts of bapti^me.
are named and expressed. This is also evidently proved Mat 3, 11.
in the baptism of Christ, where the Trinity of persons was manifested.

These inward parts do directly and fitly answer to the outward. The Father is
represented by the Minister: the Spirit works by the word: Christ is sealed
by the water: and the soul cleansed is signified by the body that is washed.
Now, The agreement between the outward and inward parts.
there is a notable agreement, a singular union, and fit proportion between
these parts, where the Minister has relation and reference to the Father, the
word to the Spirit, the water to Christ, and the body dipped to the faithful
cleansed. For even as the Minister by the word of institution, takes and
applies the water to the washing of the body: so God the Father through the
working of the Spirit offers and applies the blood of Christ, to the
clensing of the faithful.

Having seen the proportion of the parts between themselves, let us consider
of them particularly and in order. The The first inward part of baptism is God
the Father.
first inward part is God the Father, represented by the Minister. The Minister
calling upon the name of God, uses the water to wash and washes the party
baptized with the element of water, which seals up Gods incorporating and
ingrafting Gal. 3, 27.
of the baptized into Christ, and our spiritual regeneration. Hence it is,
that when John baptized, the Father was present, as president of the work,
when lo, his voice came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased. Now let us come to the uses.

This serves first of all, to strengthen our faith in the remission make this
use of the Churches baptism to the comfort of our own hearts, so often as we
see it administered: let us not rest in it, as in a work done to another, and
nothing concerning our selves, but evermore help our inward affection by the
outward action: and always as the eye of the body beholds the Minister, let
the eye of our faith be fastened ^i^mely upon the Father, who makes the
Sacramental rites available, which are openly done before us for our
edification.



The Minister takes the water and washes the body, which is a pledge of a
farther thing; for then does the Father apply the promise of remission of
sins and life everlasting to the person baptized, as if he should speak with
a loud voice and call the party by his name, while the outward sign is powered
on the body: I freely wash away thy sins, and give unto thee the pardon of
them, and bestow upon thee eternal life, so that thou turn unto me and
believe in Christ thy Savior. Let us then as true believers by a spe^iall
faith re^eiue and apprehend his merciful promises, and rest in them. Let this
cause us to turn unto him by unfeigned repentance, and to walk with all
obedience in his ways. Seeing therefore he does so gra^iously assure us of his
great mercies with his own hand and seal, woe unto us if we be not much moved
and affected with it.

no further: he medleth not with sanctification of the conscience from dead
works, which is not in the power of mortal man to do: so that God gives the
thing, and men give the sign; yea while the Minister of^^eth the one, God the
Father gives the other.

CHAP. IX. Of the second inward part of Baptism.
THe second inward part of baptism The second inward part of baptism i^ the
holy Spirit.
is the Spirit of God, having relation to the word and promise of God. Thi^
Mat. 3, 11.10.
appears Mat. 3, 11. He bapti^eth with the Holy Ghost and with fire: And
verse 10. When Christ wa^ baptized, the heauen^ were opened unto him, and he
saw the Spirit descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. So the apostle, 1
Cor. 6. says, Ye are washed, ye are san^tified, ye are iust^fied in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And chap. 12. of the same
Epistle, By one Spirit we are all bapti^ed into one body, whether we be Jews
or Gr^e^ian^, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink
into one Spirit. And Tit. 3. According to his mercy he saved us, by the
washing of the new both, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on
us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. All these testimony: teach
us, that the holy Spirit of God i^ a necessary inward part of this Sacrament,
and that the baptism of the Spirit joined to the word, gives force unto it,
who works in our soule^ that which water does in our bodies, so that without
the Spirit it is nothing.

From hence we learn, that it is not the dipping of us

Again, we learn hereby, that the Spirit is true God,

Seeing then this is the proper work of the Holy Ghost, to open the heart, to
teach the conscience, to seal up to the day of redemption, and to help our
infirmities in hearing, in praying, and receiving the Sacraments: he must
needs be acknowledged to be true God the 1 Cor. 12, 4.5, 8, 9, 10, 11. Revel.
1, 4.
giver of these graces. So we see, that in the form of the administration of
this Sacrament, the blessed Spirit is named and rehearsed, Mat. 28, 19.
and has his order together with the Father and the Son, This therefore is a
principle of our faith, to be learned, confessed, and believed.



1 Ioh. 5, 7.
and to assure us of Gods endless favor in Christ Jesus, as 1. Ioh. 5. There
be three which bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Sp
rit: and these three are one. The Holy Ghost by his grace and virtue works in
us steadfastly to believe the truth of Gods word, and the gracious promises of
salvation: as he is the author, beginner, and begetter of faith in us, so he
increases it, and makes us fit to receive Christ, and to apply him with all
his gifts unto our souls, and sends us into the full fruition and
possession of Christ. He is our comforter to certify us of our reconciliation
to God, and to make us rejoice under the Cross, knowing that Ro^. 5, 3, 4, 5.
tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. He is the earnest and
seal of our inheritance, by whom we are sealed up to everlasting life.

Thus we see, that howsoever the increase and strength of faith is assigned to
the Sacraments: yet this grace proceeds from the Holy-Gkost, who is unto our
faith as marow unto the bones, as moisture unto the tree, and as a comfortable
rain unto the fruits of the earth. If this inward master and teacher be
wanting, the Sacraments The Sacraments profit not without the Spirit.
can work no more in our minds, then if the bright Sun should shine to the
blind eyes, or a loud voice sound in deaf ears, or fruitful corn fall
into the barren wilderness, or a shower of rain fall upon the hard stones.
Wherefore, least the word of salvation should sound in our ears in vain, and
Sacraments joined to the word should be present before our eyes in vain; the
Spirit works in us whenever we come unto them aright, he mollifieth the
hardness of our hearts, he frames us to new obedience, and assures us that
God offers to us his own Son for our justification and salvation. For even
as the seed that falls into a barren soil dies and rotteth, yet if it be
sown in fruitful ground well tilled and manured, it brings forth good
increase with gain and advantage: so likewise the word and the Sacraments, if
they hit upon an hard neck, and fall into a barren heart, become unprofitable
and unfruitful: but if the effectual work of the Spirit accompanies the
hearing of the one, and receiving of the other, they are profitable,
available, and comfortable. Thus much of the second part.

CHAP. X. Of the third inward part of baptism.
THe third inward part of baptism The third inward part of baptism is Christ
Jesus.
is Christ, represented and signified by the water. For, as the Apostle
teaches Heb. 10, 4.
That the blood of bulls and calves cannot take away sin: so the water in
baptism cannot wash away sins. It touches the body, washes it, cleanses
and purges it, but it can proceed no further. Nay all the water in the rivers
and in the Sea cannot scowre and make clean the conscience; it is another
water, even the Spirit, that must do it. Hence it is, Ier. 2, 22,
that the Lord says by his Prophet Jeremy, chap. 2. Though thou wash thee with
nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says
the Lord. To this purpose speaks Job, Job. 9, 30.31.
chap. 9. If I wash my self with snow-water, and make my hands never so
clean: yet shall thou plunge me in the Ditch, and mine own clothes shall
abhor me. It is not therefore the outward water, but the inward water that
avails us. For this Act. 2, 38. and 10, ^8. and 19, 5
cause the believers are said to be baptized in the name of Christ, as Act. 2,
38. Be baptized every one of you in the name of Christ. So chap. 19, 5. They
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Not meaning hereby the form and
manner of baptizing, but the fruit, foundation, and end of baptism. Likewise,
1 Pet. 3, 21.
the Apostle shows the same, 1. Pet. 3, 21. Baptism answering to the figure
of the Arc, saves us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. There is no force
in outward baptism to save, the whole virtue and force flows from the
stream of Christ's blood, as the true material cause thereof, wherein the
power of inward baptism does consist. The truth being evident, that the
pouring out of the blood of CHRIST is one of the inward parts of Baptism, let
us see the uses.

Acts 8.22.
which is otherwise, as we see Acts 8, 22. Also, they should not, and could not
be Christians and eternally saved, which are not outwardly washed, but
departing this life without baptism, they should perish in the next world
without redress or redemption; and so our condition were worse then the Jews
their condition in times past, and the grace of God more restrained under the
Gospel, then it was under the law, Moses offering more mercy then Christ
himself. So then, the washing with water serves to ratify the shedding of
Christ's blood for the remission of our sins, and the imputation of his
righteousness to our justification, 1 Ioh. 1, 7.
as 1. Ioh. 1, 7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son does cleanse us from all
sin. So Revel. 1, 5. He has loved us and washed us from our sins in his
blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father. And Col. 1, 14.
the apostle says, In him we have redemption by h^s blood that is, forgiveness
of sins.

Again, when we see with our bodily eyes the water

Lastly, it teaches us not to be led by the outward senses

So in the Lords Supper, to the unbeliever appears nothing but Bread and
Wine, because we see with our eyes, we receive with our hands, we taste with
our mouth no more: but the believer knows, that together with these signs,
God the Father offers the body and blood of his Son to be spiritually
received and digested, Even as he that is unlettered and unlearned, if he look
Esa. 29, 11, 12.
upon the face of a book, beholds only black colors and spots upon the
Paper, sees certain figures and characters of Letters differing each from
other, but cannot read the writing or comprehend the meaning: but he that has
learned his Letters and is able to read them, reapeth great profit and
instruction thereby: So is it in the Sacraments. He that rests in the outward
sign, deceives himself: but he that respects the thing signified
receives the profit and advantage.

The Cross of Christ and preaching of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1, 23.24.
are a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Graecians. For
the Infidel hearing that Christ was crucified and nailed upon the Cross, is
offended at him, accounting it a foolish and weak means to save mankind,
that life should spring out of death, glory come out of shame, power proceed
out of weakness, and triumphant victory arise out of his contemptible
sufferings: but the faithful soul acknowledges in this mystery of godliness,
the high hand and unsearchable wisdom of God. It may seem ridiculous unto
some men, Genesis 17, 10.
that God should require circumcision of Abraham and of his household, young and
old, bond and free, master and servants to uncover all their shames, and to
open the hidden parts of nature: yet Abraham submitted himself to the
ordinance of God. Naaman the Syrian thought it a toyish precept and prescript,
when he was bidden to wash himself seven times in Jordan, having many Rivers
in his own country as good as that: yet by 2 Kings 5, 11 12, 14.
obeying the Prophet, he was cleansed of his leprosy. The inhabitants of
Jericho scorned Joshua and the men of Israel, when they saw them compass
their City strong and walled, Josh. 6.20.
and to blow with their Rams horns: yet by this weak means the wall fell
down, the enemies were destroyed, the City was sacked, and the people of GOD
prevailed. Christ seeing a blind man and willing to heal him, he spat on the
ground, Ioh. 9, 6.
and made clay of spittle, and anointed the eyes of the blind with the clay,
and said unto him, Go wash in the poole of Siloam: he obeyed, he went, he
washed, he returned seeing.

Thus does God by simple, base, and weak things, oftentimes confound the
mighty, strong, and wise of the world, that no flesh should rejoice in his
presence, and crosses all the high conceits and proud imaginations of man's will
and wit. Wherefore, we must not follow our own understanding, nor measure the
matters of God by the crooked rule of our carnal reason. Whosoever will yield
obedience to God must deny himself, and renounce his own wisdom, 1 Cor. 3,
18.19.
and become a fool that he may be wise in God, as 1. cor. 3. Let no man
deceive himself, if any man among you seem to be wise in this world, let him
be a fool that he may be wise, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness
with God.

Thus we see, that in the Sacraments we must understand more then we see, and
believe more then we can behold. Such as are without knowledge and faith,
comprehend no more of baptism then the bodily eye directs them unto: but the
faithful conceive the blood of Christ to be offered, to purge the soul and
conscience from all sin, Genesis 2, 10.
as the river watered the garden of Eden.

CHAP. XI. Of the fourth inward part of baptism.
THe last inward part of baptism is the soul The soul cleansed is the last
inward part of baptism.
cleansed, most lively represented by the body that is washed. For as the
outward receiver gives his body to be washed, so the faithful receiver does
consecrate himself to God with joy, and forsake the flesh, the world, and the
Devil, and feels the inward washing of the Spirit, as Titus 3, 5. According
to his Tit. 3, 5. Ephesians. 2, 26, 27
mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost. And the same apostle Ephesians. 5. Christ gave himself for the Church,
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by washing of water through the
word, that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle. Wherefore, this outward washing of the body commanded by Christ,
signifies unto me, that I am no less assuredly cleansed in his blood by the
working of his Spirit from the spots of my soul, that is, from all my sins,
then I am outwardly washed by water, whereby the stains of the body use to be
washed away: and it binds us that we ought ever afterward by our works and
deeds to declare newnes of life and fruits of repentance.

Adam, Romans 5, 10. and 7, 23, 24.
as Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the world: and chapter 7. I see another law
in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive
unto the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? Hereunto also comes that which the
Ioh 3, 5, 6, 7.
Evangelist sets down in the conference between Christ and Nicodemus, Ioh.
3. That which is born of flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the Spirit
is Spirit: marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must be borne again. For this
cause are infants baptized, because they are conceived in sin and borne in
iniquity, and cannot become spiritual, but by a new birth wrought by the
Spirit, which is sealed up by the water in baptism.

the allurements of the world, and to the corruptions of the flesh. For
baptism is the Baptism is a Christian man's ensign to fight under it the
battles of the Lord.
Christian man's ensign given of God to us, that we should fight as it were
under it against all the enemies of our salvation, and overcome. It is the badge
and banner of our Captain, that we shrouding our selves under his colors,
should not cowardly turn our back in the skirmish, but courageously look the
enemy in the face, nay tread him under our feet for ever. For we must learn,
that when we are once baptized (whereby we put on the profession of Jesus
Christ and receive his cognizance) we declare our selves to be his servants,
and vow our selves to be his soldiers; and therefore be sure of this, and set
it down as an infallible truth, that Satan will be our professed enemy, both
alluring of us unto himself and his service, and discouraging of us from
resting under the banner of our chief Captain Christ Jesus our Lord. This
then ought to be the continual use of our baptism throughout the whole course
of our life, so often as we think upon it, or see the same Sacrament
administered unto others, to remember what place we are called unto, and what a
strong enemy we are to encounter withal, that his threatenings do not
discourage us, nor his allurements entise us, nor his subtilties deceive us,
nor his roarings devour us: and by all these (which are so many baits and
snares to entrap us) let us be made more wary and watchful, that we may know
both his policy and our own infirmity: his strength and our own weakness.
Christ our Savior was no sooner baptized of John, but by and by he was tempted
in the wilderness, as appears Math. 3, 16. compared with Math. 4, 1. Mat. 3,
10. and 4, 1. Acts 7, 23.
When it came into the heart of Moses to visit his brethren, then his trouble
began, and he was driven out of the Land of Egypt. Paul lived in great credit
among the Pharisees, and in much favor with the Jews; Acts 9, 23.
but when he was once baptized and made a Preacher of the Gospel, he was never
free from trouble, but was vexed with injuries and laden with all kind of
slanderous accusations. This is a meditation most needful to be thought upon.
When we are baptized, we renounce the Devil and all his works, we receive
the Pressemony of Jesus Christ, and give our names to be enrolled in his muster
book: we are thereby become his soldiers and fight his battles against sin.
We have bound our selves to become his servants, to do that which is acceptable
to God, profitable to our brethren, and comfortable to our own conscience, and
to adorn our lives with a godly conversation. But if we fight under the banner
of Satan, Who are reuolters from their baptism.
and swarm with loose and ungodly practices, we revolt from our baptism,
albeit our names are registered in the number of the baptized. Moreover, have
thou through weakness and infirmity fallen into some sin, to the dishonor of thy
God, to the wounding of thine own conscience, to the slander of the Gospel, or
to the scandal and offense of thy weak brother? Have recourse to thy baptism,
as unto a board after shipwreck, as unto a medicine after sickness, as unto a
plaster after wounding, or as unto a staff after falling: that thou may
receive strength, courage, and comfort to thy soul. For albeit baptism be
once only administered for the reasons before alleged, chap. 1. of this
present book: yet it being once delivered and received, testifies that all
our sins past, present, and to come are washed away and shall be forgiven.
The fruit or efficacy of the Sacrament is not to be restrained and tied to the
present time of personal receiving, but extends it self to the whole course
of our life afterward.

Even as that voice which said in the beginning, Genesis 1. Increase and multiply,
and replenish the earth, was spoken indeed but once, howbeit it has always
his effect and operation, Chrysostom. homil. de prod. Iud.
nature working to generation: so the words in baptism which are once only
pronounced, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, are effectual, forcible, and available all the days of our
life, and sound aloud continually in our ears, as if they were uttered afresh,
and as if we heard Christ say particularly unto every one of us as he did to
the man sick of the palsy, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven
thee, Mat. 9, 2. Mat. 9, 2.


the cleansing of the soul, it teaches that baptism is not to be handled in
sport. It is a serious action of the Church to be administered in the presence
of God the author of it, it is not as a stage-like gesture that may be
counterfeited and represented for a show only. To this purpose there is
required a clear, plain, and evident rehearsal of the words of institution,
that the promise made of God may be understood of the hearers, and especially a
calling upon the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. True it
is, what manner of element is to be applied, and what form of baptizing is to
be used, is limited and expressed in the Scriptures: but what admonitions and
exhortations, or what prayers and supplications are to be made, the Scripture
does not determine nor deliver, but leaves it free, as shall be thought fit
for the edification of the Church of Christ. By the virtue of this invocation
of the name of God and using the words of institution according to the
commandment of Christ, it comes to pass, that the sprinkling of water is
made a certain pledge of the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 1
Pet 1, 2. Titus 3, 5.
a sign of our regeneration and of remission of sins. For what folly were it
to imagine that the power of God is weaker in one Sacrament then in the other?
That his word should be operative in the one, and idle or of no force in the
other? Hence it is, that the Fathers of the Church do oftentimes reason from
baptism unto the Supper of the Lord. Epiphanius says, Epiph. contra. haer.
lib. 3. ca. 52 Eusebius. Emissen.
The strength of the bread and the virtue of the water are made powerful in
Christ, etc. Eusebius Emissenus, applying himself to declare what manner of
change is made in the bread and wine of the Supper, lays it out by a familiar
comparison with that which is wrought in the regeneration of man; he
continues one and the same, to wit, in substance, and yet is become quite
another manner of man through the growth and increase of faith. Wherefore it
must be ministered with great reverence, and we should attend religiously unto
it, no less then we ought to do to the word of God, and to the Supper of the
Lord: forasmuch as one Christ is offered, yea eaten and drunken in them all.

The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, it is the immortal seed of
regeneration, Romans 1, 16.
it offers us the forgiveness of our sins, and works in us the same that
baptism and the Lords Supper, and it makes us one with Christ who is the
substance of the word and Sacraments, and he is communicated to us in them
both. Wherefore whenever we come to be partakers of baptism and to be
present at it, we must come with a reverent and religious consideration of
those holy actions, and set our selves with all care before the Lord, of whom
we ought earnestly to beg and desire his Spirit to teach us the truth of our
Baptism, the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, and the purging of
our consciences from dead works. We come oftentimes and ordinarily to this
Sacrament, we see children incorporated into the Church, and sealed up to be
members of Christ, and yet sildome or never remember what vow we have made to
God, and whose we are by our profession: no not in the present work does any
such cogitation or consideration enter into the hearts of many, yea the most
sort see the water sprinkled, and hear the words pronounced, but esteem it
little, as a matter belonging nothing at all unto them. There is none that come
to hear the word and to receive the Lords Supper, but they think it
pertains no less (if not more) to them then it does unto others: but
touching baptism and making any use at all of it, they put it far from them,
they know they are already baptized, and are to be baptized no more; they turn
it and pass it over slightly to the infant that is brought, and to the
well-beloued friends and neighbors that bring it, saying to themselves as the
Pharisees did in another case to Judas, Mat. 27, 4.
what is that to us? see thou to that. But we cannot so shift over the matter,
our baptism will cleave more closely unto us, it has made such an impression
in us and sticks so near unto us, that it can never be blotted out, nor
wiped away, it summoneth us to God, and tells us that we are not our own,
but he challenges us wholly to himself, and will not let us no from him.

by the washing of the body? Then from hence arises unto us great comfort in
baptism, namely that it is no idle, no needless, nor superfluous thing, but
of great power, force, and virtue. For the water is not bare water, but the
water of regeneration, being rightly used, and administered by those only that
are lawfully called to the office, and have a warrant from God and commission
from the Church to that purpose. It belongs not to any private persons, men
or women, much less to children to make a toy or sport of it, as it is said of
Athanasius, that being yet a child and not knowing what he did, Ruffin. lib.
1. cap 14. 1, Cor. 13, 11.
or with what he meddled, he baptized. Of whom we may say as Paul does, 1. Cor.
13. When I was a child, I spoke as a ch^lde, I understood as a child, I
thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things. Or as
the wise man does, Eccl. 11. Eccl. 11.10. Baptism admi^istred in sport, is no
baptism.
Childhood and youth are vanity. Hereby can come no sanctification nor
cleansing of the soul, and therefore are they deceived that receive it for
good, and ratify it for authentical: forasmuch as every such baptism
undertaken by private persons in case of necessity, or by children after an
apish imitation, is no baptism at all, neither is that water consecrated water
but common and profane, and therefore consequently that washing or sprinkling
is to be accounted as common and profane also. If a Child should take upon
him to minister the Supper of the Lord, that knows not what it means, and
charge the people to examine themselves, that has not learned as yet to
examine himself, all men must confess this were a great profanation of this
Sacrament by no means to be suffered: or if he should step up into the chair
of Moses, and offer fondly and childishly to utter the word of God, who would
regard it? Or who would care for it? Shall we say, this were to administer the
Supper of the Lord, or to preach the Gospel of Christ? Or shall we imagine
that any fruit or benefit can come hereby? So may we say of Baptism, it is
profaned by unfit persons, and not profitably administered. But to leave these
abuses, which we have touched and convinced before, let us see what are the
comforts that arise from this inward part of this Sacrament, which are of
diverse sorts; for hence flows as from a plentiful spring comfort to the
whole Church, comfort to the parents of the persons baptized, and comfort to
the infants themselves. Comfort to the wh^le Church.
It reaches to the whole Church, because when it beholds water sanctified
and set apart for baptism and spiritual washing of the soul represented by
the outward cleansing of the body, they may see as it were Christ crucified and
his blood poured out before their eyes. When we feel our hearts at any time
cast down by the sight of our sins, and find the burden of the^ to be
intolerable unto us, we must lift up our eyes to heaven, and in a sweet
meditation of this holy sprinkling of the blood of Christ assure our
consciences thereby, that he has washed them all away, that they shall not be
imputed unto us, nor be able to work our condemnation. We are also put in
mind hereby, that we are fellow members of one and the same body, forasmuch
as we have all one baptism, Ephe. 4. Ephesians. 4, 5.
as we have all one Lord and Father, all one faith and hope of eternal life.
Hence it is, that at the birth of John the Church rejoiced, coming together to
have him circumcised. Let us therefore be ready to join together in this work,
in prayer and thanksgiving, let us address our selves to be as witnesses and
approuers of it, that we may receive comfort by it, being evermore taught and
confirmed in the truth of our baptism, and remembering what we have promised to
God, that we may be careful to perform our promise, and fearful to break
covenant with him. In this respect the Church is said to circumcise, Luke 1,
59. 1 Cor. 11, 5.
and to prophecy and make prayer, because it joins together in these holy
actions. We have all of us one entrance into the Church, whereby we profess to
go al one way, to walk one course, to lead one manner of life, and to serve
the same God. Comfort to parents.
Secondly, this comfort extends more principally and particularly toward the
parents themselves, then it does in general to the whole Church. For they see
their seed together with themselves joined to the Church, and washed with the
blood of Christ: they have the ancient promise of God verified unto them, I
will be thy God and the God of thy seed, Ge^. 17. which ministers great matter
of joy unto the^, so that they should rejoice more in this mercy showed toward
them, then if they could make the^ heirs of the world, and leave them owners
of a kingdom. Howbeit this comfort carries with it sundry duties, and puts
them in mind to be thankful to God, who has verified his covenant to them
and their seed; to remember the ordinance of God, that baptism is the seal of
his covenant: and lastly, to make them diligent in nurtering and instructing
them in true religion, that so their children may learn betimes to become the
children of God. For what can more inslame us and set an edge upon us to bestow
pains and labor in the teaching and training of them up in the fear of God
and the knowledge of his ways, then to consider that God loves them and us,
and shows himself the God both of them and of us. Lastly, this comfort
reaches to the infants themselves that are baptized, Comfort to infants
baptized.
when they shall mark that they are solemnly set into Christ, and received
into the bosom of the Church. For they have this lauer of regeneration, as it
were a pawn of Gods love always lying by them, and committed unto their
trust, to apply it in time of need, to the assurance of their justification and
sanctification, and to the strengthening and confirmation of them in all
tentations against terrors and fears of conscience. Jonathan Saul's son took
comfort from hence, and an occasion to rest and trust in God, and to assure
himself of his help, when he spoke to his armor bearer, Come and let us go
over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised, 1 Samuel 14, 6.
it may be that the Lord will work for us, for there is no restraint to the Lord
to save by many or by few. The like we see in David when he was to encounter
with Goliath, and to deliver the host of Israel from that blasphemous enemy, Thy
servant slew the Lion and the Bear that took a Lamb out of the flock, 1 Samuel
17.26.
now this uncircumcised Phil^stim shall be as one of them, seeing he has
defied the army of the living God. Where we see how they comfort themselus in
that which they went about, because themselves were circumcised and bare a sign
of the covenant in their flesh, and because they had to do with those that were
uncircumcised. Thus ought our baptism, whereby we have put on Christ as a
garment, to be as a shield and buckler to defend us in the hour of tentation,
and as armor of proof against the assaults and fiery darts of the Devil;
assuring our selves that our engrafting into his body is not an idle ceremony,
but serves to make us strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, who
will be near unto us and stand round about us in the day of trouble. Thus
much touching the fourth and last inward part of Baptism.

CHAP. XII. Of the first use of baptism.
HItherto we have handled the parts of baptism both outward and inward: now
let us proceed to the uses, the last point to be observed in this Sacrament.
The uses of baptism are in number Three uses of baptism.
three: first to show our planting, ingrafting, and incorporating into the body
of Christ: Secondly, to seal up the remission and forgiveness of all our
sins: Thirdly, to teach us to dye unto sin and live unto righteousness and
true sanctification. These ends Romans 6, 3, 4.5, 6.
appear evidently by the words of the Apostle, Romans 6. Know ye not that all we
which have been baptized into JESUS CHRIST, have been baptized into his
death? We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead to the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life. For if we be planted with him to the
similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the similitude of his
resurrection, knowing this, that our old Man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. In
this place the Apostle seteth before us the former ends of baptism expressly.

Touching the first use, The first use o^ baptism is to show our ingrafting
into Christ.
he shows that by it is signified and sealed our uniting, setting, 1 Cor 12,
13.
and inserting into the body of Christ, to remain in him for ever, as branches
in the vine, as 1. Cor. 12. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be bond or free: where he teaches that by baptism we become one
body with Christ. And Gal. 3. All ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. This conjunction with Christ is not bodily or natural, it is not by
bands in the flesh, it is not by neerenes of blood, for such we see may be
separated, as the father from the son, the husband from the wife, the brother
from the sister: but this is wholly mystical and spiritual, above reason and
above sense, because it is wrought not by natural ways as by joints, sinews
arteries, ligaments, and such like, but by spiritual means, to wit, by the
power of the Spirit, and by virtue of faith: he sends down his Spirit, we
send up our faith. First, he must send down his Spirit, because all goodness is
of him. Indeed we love him, but it is because he loved us first, giving us Romans
8, 15.
the Spirit of adoption to cry Abba father: Indeed we come unto Christ to be
eased and refreshed as he commands, but it is because Ioh. 6, 44.
the father draws us. Indeed we persevere in faith and love, but this is
because he perseuereth in loving of us. Indeed we repent and turn unto God,
but this is because he Ezekiel. 36, 26 27.
takes away our stony heart, and gives unto us an heart of flesh.

Secondly, as he puts his Spirit within us, so our faith mounteth up to the
heavens, and apprehends Christ sitting at the right hand of the Father. And
thus his Spirit descending, our faith ascending, and both of them joining the
members to the head, the branches to the vine, us to Christ, being once
ingrafted, Ioh. 15, 5, 6.
we are never separated, as Ioh. 15. He that abides in me and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. If a man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withers, and men gather
them, and cast them into the fire and they burn. No man can be partaker of
Christ's benefits to salvation, which is We are joined to Christ in spiritual
marriage.
not made one with him. As a woman cannot be partaker of the riches and honor
of some great man, and have interest in his person, except she be joined to him
in marriage, that they become one body and one flesh: and as the members cannot
draw life from the head except they be joined with it: so there is no
partaking of Christ, except there be an union and communion with him, Ioh. 6,
53.
as himself teaches us, Ioh. 6. Ver^ly, verily I say unto you, except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you. If Christ be present to us, life and all things accompanying salvation are
present to us. If Christ be absent from us, death is present, wrath lies at
the door, life and salvation are absent: so that we are never partakers of
his graces, except we be as nearly coupled to his humanity, as meat and
drink are coupled with our body, which of all other is a most near union and
inward conjunction.

Thus we see, we are severed from the world to have fellowship with Christ, and
are set once in him for ever; 1 Ioh. 2 19. Rom 8, 33, 34 35, 37, 38, 39.
because he that comes to Christ once, he casts him not away, he shall
never hunger, he shall never thirst, he shall not be lost but live for ever,
as the Apostle says, 1. John 2. If they had been of us, doubtless they had
continued with us. And Paul to this purpose says, Romans 8. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? In all
these we are more then Conquerours through him that loved us: for I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. If once we be joined to him in spiritual marriage,
notwithstanding the difference and disparagement between him and us, nothing
shall be able to work our diuorcement from him.

True it is, God finds us wallowing Ezekiel. 16, 4.5, 6.
in our own filthiness, polluted in our own blood, defiled by our own
uncleanness, he has made an eternal covenant with us, he has spoken peace
unto our souls, saying, Thou shall live, even when we were sunk down in
sin to death, he said unto us, Thou shall live: so that he will never turn
from us to do us good, but we shall be his people, and he will be our God, he
will give us one heart and one way, that we may fear him for ever, and that
it may be well with us and with our children.

This made the Apostle to write, Ephesians. 5, 30, 32. We are members of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bones: this is a great mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and concerning the church: Where he seems to allude to the Genesis 2, 21.
first creation of the woman made of one of the ribs of the man, shaddowing and
showing our knitting and conjunction with Christ, which we have by faith, not
by nature: by virtue of the Spirit, not of the flesh.

Now as we have showed that this conjunction is made by Gods Spirit and by our
faith which he has given us: so the means and instruments to work it, are
the word and Sacraments. This is a dignity peculiar and proper to the elect, to
have perpetual fellowship with Christ, and to grow up into one body with him,
as he teaches, Ioh. 17, 20, 21. I pray for all them which shall believe in me
through their word, that they all may be one as thou O Father art in me and I
in thee, even that they may be one with us, that the world may believe that
thou have sent me. If then there be not an union between Christ and us, we
have no access to God the Father, being quite cut off from all hope of life
and salvation. As then all the substance and nourishment of the tree comes
from the root, and all the vital powers of a true natural body, come from
the head: so it is between the Son of God and us, we have not so much as one
drop of the heavenly life in us of our selves, Ioh. 14, 6.
Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the Father but
by him.

To conclude this first use, seeing such as come to this sacrament Mar. 16, 16.
must be Christians before, it appears to be a very corrupt custom of the
people, when they require baptism of the Pastor for their children, to say,
God has given me a Pagan, I desire you to make him a Christian. For Baptism
cannot make a Christian, but signify: the Sacraments cannot make that which is
not, but assure that which is already made, as seals do not give the right,
but confirm it. Thus much of the first use of Baptism: the second follows.

CHAP. XIII. Of the second use of Baptism.
BEing made one with Christ, we are partakerss of the benefits of his death,
to wit, The second use of baptism is to assure forgiveness of sins.
of forgiveness of sins, and of regeneration or new birth. So then the second
use of Baptism is to assure us of the remission and pardon of our sins, that
we may be unblameable and acceptable to God. This is signified by the outward
ceremony of washing and sprinkling, to wit, the sprinkling of our souls with
the blood of Christ for the forgiveness of all sins, Acts 2, 38, and 22, 16.
as appears, Acts 2. Then Peter said unto them, Amend your lives, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins.
And Act. 22. Ananias said unto Paul immediately after his conversion, Arise and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling on the name of the Lord. So the
Evangelist witnesses, Mark 1, 4. that John did baptize in the wilderness,
and preach the baptism of amendment of life for the remission of sins. And the
apostle makes this use, Col. 2, 12. Ye are buried with him through baptism,
in whom ye are also raised up together through the faith of the operation of
God, which raised him up from the dead: and you which are dead in sins, and in
the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him,
forgiving you all your trespasses. The meaning of these places is not that
baptism Baptism does not of it self confer grace.
bestows or gives forgiveness, but only signeth, seals, and assures our
pardon: even as remission of sins and the righteousness of faith were not in the
old Testament by circumcision conferred, but confirmed unto the faithful. The
grace of pardon and forgiveness of sins, is not attained but by faith in Christ,
so that the work of baptism will not effect it. Moreover we have proved, that
it is not lawful to baptize such as are in years, unless they make open
profession of their faith in Christ, and repentance from the works of the old
man: wherefore they obtain them not by the outward washing with water in
baptism. So then we are no less assuredly washed by the blood of Christ from
the spots of our souls, then outwardly we are washed with water from the filth
of the body. For the force of his death has that effectual working in
cleansing our souls from the corruption and filthiness of sin, which
natural water has in washing our bodies. By the merit of his death we have
full forgiveness of all our sins, not only original but actual, not only
past but present and to come, whose blood is never drawn dry, but is ever
fresh and full of efficacy. Therefore, the words delivered by the minister in
baptism at the commandment of Christ, namely, Mat. 28, 19.
I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, should be always in our ears, even until the last gasp, and by
them we ought to be assured of the full forgiveness of our offenses against
God. For the blood of christ by which we are once washed, can never be drawn
dry, but is ever fresh full of force and strength, to the continual clensing of
our filthiness and iniquities, so that they never come into the sight of God,
neither are imputed unto us. Wherefore it is like unto a sealed charter, whereby
is confirmed that all our sins are blotted out. We are all taught by our
baptism, that none of the enemies of our salvation shall be able to lay any sin
to our charge. Art thou tempted to think that Christ's blood was not shed for
thee? That thy transgressions are not pardoned? That thou shall be brought to
judgment for them? Does Satan tempt thy tender conscience with the^? Thou
may as well doubt that thou wast not baptized and washed with water, as doubt
thy sins are not blotted out: thou may as well surmize thou perishedst in
the water, as suppose thou shall perish in thy wickedness, the floods whereof
howsoever they go over thy head: yet shall not be able to prevail against thee
fully, and overcome thee finally.

This serves to convince diverse heretics that are altogether ignorant of the
right use of Baptism. The Messal^ans believed that baptism was only
available to take away former sins. De divine. decre. ca. de bapt.
But Theodoret teaches that baptism is the earnest of future graces, not as a
razor to cut away only the sins that went before.

The Papists suppose no sin forgiven by baptism in infants but one sin only,
which is original. In those that are baptized being of age (whereof there is
small or rare use in these days) they enlarge and extend it thus far, as
that it takes away both original and actual sins before baptism only:
wherein although they would seem to open the Lords hand very wide toward us,
yet they are indeed notable Church-robbers, who to maintain their bellies and
their lusts, do utterly spoil us, not of a piece, but of our whole salvation
in Jesus Christ, whilst they send us to our own satisfactions, by prayers,
fastings, whippings, and such like. Note therefore that our Savior says, He
that believes and is baptized, Mar. 16, 16. Tit. 3, 5. 1 Pet. 3, 21.
shall be saved. Saint Paul says, Tit. 3, 5, that baptism has saved us, and
Peter affirms that it does save us, 1 Pet. 3, 21. Where the salvation that we
have (through faith) in baptism, being applied to the time past, present, and
to come, that is, to all times; it is evident that baptism does as well seal
up unto us the remission of the sins that we commit at the last hour of
death, as the in-borne sin wherein we were first conceived in our mothers
womb. This Saint Austine saw, and therefore teaches, Aust. de nuptijs and
concup. lib. 1. cap. 33.
that by the lauer of regeneration and word of sanctification all the evils of
regenerate men are cleansed, not only sins past, but such as are committed
afterward by ignorance or infirmity, so that great is the pardon of baptism.

This then overthrows the false Council. Trid. sess. 5.
doctrine of the false Church of Rome, the Mother of abominations, which
teaches that by the grace of Christ received in baptism, all our sins going
before it, are razed and blotted out, and leaves nothing in the party baptized
Bellar. lib. 1. de bapt. cap. 13.
that has the name and nature of sin. But albeit our sins be freely and
fully forgiven for Christ's sake, pardoned and not imputed, covered and
remembered no more: yet the stain, blot, and remnants of sin remain (though
not reign) in our flesh, so long as we live in this world, which in the end of
our days together with the mortality and corruption of our bodies shall be
taken away and abolished. Indeed the Scripture teaches, that Christ's blood
cleanses, washes, Job. 1.29. Psalm. 32.1.
and takes away sin, Ioh. 1. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin
of the world: but this is not by an actual purging of us from all corruption,
but in freely acquiting and truly discharging us from the guilt, offense, and
punishment before God, as Psalm. 32, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are lightened, blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not sin. Therefore, though they be forgiven, yet they remain, 1 Ioh.
1, 8.
as appears, John 1, 29. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and
there is no truth in us. And Solomon in his worthy prayer says, If any sin
against thee, 1 Kings 8, 46. Rom 7, 23. Ephesians. 4, 23. Col. 3, 3. Esaias 64, 6.
for there is no man that sins not. So the Apostle teaches and touches
this truth by his own experience. Romans 7. I see another law in my members,
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of
sin which is in my members. We are all as a filthy cloth, the flesh rebelleth
against the Spirit, and in nothing we can do the things we would, so that if
God enter into judgment with us, we cannot stand in his sight. And if
original sin were extinguished and utterly abolished in baptism, then they
which are baptized, should sin no more: but we see they sin again after their
baptism. To conclude, baptism is available not only for sins before, but it
is a seal for confirmation of faith touching the remission of those sins that
are committed after baptism, as well as done before, as our blessed Savior
teaches, Mark 16, 16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be
saved, but he that will not believe, shall be damned. Faith then believes the
forgiveness of all sins past and to come, inasmuch as the blood of Christ
cleanses from all sins. And the apostle accords heereunto, Titus 3, 5, 7.
According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost: that we being justified by his grace should be made
heirs according to the hope of everlasting life. Where we see that the promise
of justification is general against all sins. Thus much of the second use.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the third use of Baptism.
THe third use of baptism is to kill and bury The third vs^ o^ ba^ti^^^ ^^to
t^^ us our d^^^g to sin, and ^^si^^ to ^^wn i^e of life.
our natural corruption by the power of Christ's death and burial, and to
raise us again to sanctification of our nature and newnes of life by his
resurrection. Hence it is, that sin has his deaths wound and is st^icken to
the heart, so that it cannot live and reign in the children of God. Hence it
is, that baptism is often Luke 3, 3.
called the Sacrament of repentance, as Luke 3. John came into all the parts
and coasts about Jordan, preaching the Baptism of repentance for the rem ss^on
of sins. So likewise Mark 1, 4. John did baptize in the Wilderness and preach
the baptism of amendment of life. And the apostle affirms as much, Col. 2,
12, 13. declaring that one end of baptism is the death and burial of the old
man by the almighty power of God.

This also was taught in those 1 Pet. 3, 20.21.
lively types answering our baptism, to wit, the flood that drowned the old
world, while Noah and his family were preserved in the Arc. Also the red sea
in which Pharaoh and his host perished, but the people of God were delivered.
For as God destroyed in the waters and as it were buried in the flood the old
world, but saved a remnant of grace: so does God through Christ mortify the
old man, raise again the new man, and seal them both in our baptism.
Likewise as God delivered his people out of the hands of Pharaoh, and opened
them a way through the red sea, and drowned their enemies that they saw them no
more alive: so by baptism he assures our deliverance from the thraldom and
bondage of sin (which brings greater slavery and captivity then any slave
is in under his earthly master) and the destruction of the flesh, that it
shall not hurt or condemn us. We are all Psalm. 51, 7. Romans 5, 12.
borne in sins and trespasses: we have need of repentance and regeneration.

We see then what use we are to make of our baptism, even labor to attain to
the efficacy and fruit of it, that it may not be a bare and barren sign.
Moses and the Prophets earnestly exhort the people of Israel to show forth the
force and effect of their circumcision, Deuteronomy. 10, 16. and 30, 6.
to cut away the foreskin of their hearts, and harden their necks no more, as
we see, Deuteronomy. 10, 16. The Lord did set his delight in thy fathers to love them,
and did choose their seed after them, even you above all people, Circumcise
therefore the foreskin of your hearts, and harden your necks no more: and in
another place, The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of
thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, that thou may live. So the Prophet Ier. 4, 4.
Jeremy says, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns: be
circumcised to the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your hearts, ye men of
Judah, and inhab tants of Jerusalem, least my wrath come forth like fire, and
burn, but none can quench it, because of the wickedness of your inuent^ons.

Circumcision was the thing wherein they boasted above all things: it was their
glory whereof they bragged, to be a crcumcised people, peculiar to God. Now the
Prophets recall and reclaim them from trusting in outward signs and lying
words, Ier. 7, 8.
that shall not profit: and stir them up to consider the power and effect
thereof, not to rest in cutting off a thin piece of skin, but to cut off quite
and clean their lusts and corruptions which rebel against the Spirit. This
the Apostle teaches Romans 2 28.29.
evidently, Romans 2. He is not a Jew which is one outward, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one
within, and the c^rcumcision is of the heart in the Spirit, not in the Letter,
whose praise is not of men, but of God.

The outward Letter is of no moment with God, it must be the circumcision of
the heart, otherwise the circumcising of the flesh is nothing. So if we would
have God to take us for his people and heritage, We must a^^ be baptized in
heart.
we must be all baptized in our hearts and our souls. What will some say,
baptized in soul, and in heart? What is that? Or how can this be? Can the
water wash the soul? Surely the water cast upon our bodies is nothing, if we
have not the truth of it. As then the apostle Paul makes a difference between
inward circumcision of the spirit, and outward circumcision of the letter,
insomuch that if they would have the true circumcision indeed, they must have
that which is within: so is there a great difference between the baptism of
the spirit and of the letter, between that of the soul and the other of the
body, between that which is outward, and that which is inward. Whosoever would
have the true baptism indeed, he must be cleansed within, repent of his
wickedness, mortify his imaginations, deny himself, renounce his affections,
and offer up his soul and body in sacrifice to God, that he may renew and
regenerate us: otherwise, it is a certain thing, we were never indeed and in
truth baptized. For as the Jews were charged to be uncircumcised, though the
foreskin of the flesh were cut off, and so they were circumcised in body: so
we may in like manner be charged to be unbaptized, albeit we have bin
outwardly washed with water.

The Jews chosen above all Nations to be the people of God, were oftentimes
condemned of forgery and falsehood for breaking the covenant of God, and not
answering to the truth thereof, Esaias 2, 4. and 57, 3.
and were vpbraided with the vncircumcisednesse of their hearts, that they were
worse then the heathen themselves, a bastard brood, witches children, and
unworthy to be accounted Abraham's seed, to the end they should brag no more
of their circumcision, as Act. 7. Acts 7, 51.
Stephen a faithful witness of God, obiecteth against them. Ye stiff-necked
and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always re^^sted the
Holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do you: they slew the Prophets which showed
before of the coming of that just, of whom ye are now the betrayers and
murderers: where we see he discovers their hypocrisy, and sets their
sins before their faces, telling the^ that as their fathers rebelled against
God, so the children followed their fathers footsteps. Do not th^se things
concern us? Though we have not circumcision in action and practice, belong
they not to us now a days? Yes even to us. For we shall be condemned for our
vnclensed and unsanctified hearts, not answering to the truth of our baptism.
For so much we profit by baptism, as we profit in mortification. If then we
be once baptized and washed with water: we shall pay dearly for our defiling
that sacred water, which God has appointed to so holy an use.

True it is, the water of it self is as nothing, no other in substance and
nature then that wherewith we wash our hands: but when once it is joined to
the word, and applied to an holy end, it is as it were an authentical seal
which God has engraven in it. Now he that counterfeiteth the seal of a
Prince, shall he not be punished? Behold, baptism is the seal of God, which
serves not to seal conueyances of earthly possessions as house and lands: but
to assure us, that we are called to the heavenly life: and brings good
assurance and warrant with it, that we be washed from our sins by the blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and borne again by his holy Spirit. Shall we break
all and escape unpunished? Let us not then boast of our baptism, and
Christianity, to say, oh, we are baptized: we are christened: we wear the
badge of God: these things, these things I say, will cost us dear, if we make
not our baptism available to our selves and our own souls by killing our
corruptions: for thereby Eccl. 5, 3.
we show our selves like unto the fool that makes a vow, and immediately
after breaks it.

For what a misery is this, that scarce one of an hundred knows the right end
of his baptism, and whereunto it avails? So that albeit they boast of the
outward sign, yet they are no more sound Christians indeed, then Turks and
Pagans, Infidels and miscreants, inasmuch as they are no way mortified or
renewed by repentance, no way changed in the inward man, but lie rotting in
their sins and remain in the condemnation of Adam. These shall one day find
by woeful experience, what a costly thing it is to take so dear a pawn of
salvation at the hands of God in vain. Indeed we bear the name of Christ, and
we profess the Gospel: yet you shall find a great number that know not this
use of baptism, nor to what end it was ordained. They do call it indeed
their Christendom, but are altogether ignorant of the nature thereof, and are
unacquainted with the effect of it: yea they bring their children to no other
purpose to be baptized, then because it is the usual manner and common custom
so to do, being led thereunto not by the commandment of Christ, but by the
example of others, forasmuch as they can give no reason at all of that they do.
This will cost them dearly, for abusing such a pledge-token at Gods hands,
seeing it is a means whereby we are united to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
ingrafted into his death and resurrection. Wherefore, whereas many have
received baptism in their infancy, and have lived forty or fifty years in the
world, without knowing to what end they were baptized: it had been better for
them that they had been borne dead, or perished in their mothers womb as an
untimely fruit, then to have unhallowed so holy and precious a thing. Thus much
of the third and last use of baptism, as also of the parts thereof, and
generally touching this whole Sacrament.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK
of the Lords Supper, being Christ's farewel-token to his Church, and a sweet
pledge of his wonderful kindness toward mankind: wherein the truth of this
Sacrament is manifested, the parts are delivered, the uses are showed, the
Doctrine of the reformed Churches is cleared, the errors of the Church of Rome
are evidently convinced, and the means set down, how every one is to be
prepared to the worthy receiving thereof with fruit and comfort.
CHAP. I. Of the names and titles of this Sacrament, together with the reasons
and uses thereof.
IN the former Book we have spoken of baptism, the first Sacrament of the
church, together with the parts and uses thereof. Now we are to set down the
doctrine of the Lords Supper, which is the second Sacrament. For after that God
has brought us into his Church by baptism, and made us as it were of his
household servants: then as a good father of the family, he feeds us
spiritually with the flesh of his Son, applying unto us the merit of his
death and passion. This The Sacrament of the body and blood o^ christ called by
diverse names.
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ is declared in the Scripture by
diverse names, to deliver the nature thereof unto us. Sometimes it is called the
communion, as 1 Cor. 10. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the 1
Cor 10.16
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? Sometimes it is called the Lords Supper, as 1
Cor. 11, 20. When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat 1 Cor.
11, 20
the Lords Supper.

Thirdly, sometimes it is called the breaking of bread, as Acts 2. They
continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship Act. 2, 42. and 20 7.
and breaking of bread and prayers: and cha. 20. The first day of the week the
D^sciples being come together to break bread, Paul preached unto them ready to
depart on the morrow. Fourthly, sometimes it is called the table of the Lord,
as we see 1 cor. 10. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of
Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords 1 Cor. 10 21
table, and of the table of devils. Moreover, we shall nothing offend if we
call it the testament or will of Christ, This cup is the 1 Cor. 11, ^5 Mat. 26,
2^.
new Testament in my blood, this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of
me: and our Savior thus speaks, Mat. 26. This is my blood of the new
testament, that is shed for many, for the remission of sins. These are the
chief and principal names given to this Sacrament in the Scriptures. I am not
ignorant that the ancient fathers and times succeeding, have given unto it
other names, and not unfitly: but my purpose being not so much to allege the
counsels or Doctors of the Church, as to instruct the simple and unlearned, I
will content my self with expounding such terms and titles as are penned in
the word of God, and pointed out by the Spirit of God.

Now then, let us render Reasons rendered of the former names.
the reasons of such names, as this Sacrament is entitled withal. It is
called the communion because we have a communion and fellowship with Christ,
and 1 Cor. 10.17
he with us: both which are sealed up in this Sacrament, It is called the Lords
Supper, both because it was instituted by the Lord Jesus at his last Supper,
(which circumstance of time the Church has changed) and because therein is
offered to us a spiritual banquet, in which the faithful are spiritually fed
and nourished. It is called the breaking of bread, both because this is a
necessary action used of Christ not to be omitted, and because it represents
the crucifying of Christ and tormenting of his body: so that we should never be
present at this significant ceremony, but we must call to remembrance the
sorrows and sufferings of Christ: now if Christ were thus tormented for us,
surely we ought greatly to be griped and grieved for our own sins, which was
also showed by the Exodus 12, 8.
sower herbs of the Passover, Exodus 12. It is called the table of the Lord,
because he does feed us at it, as this we know is the end and use of tables in
our houses, to set our meats and drinks upon them prepared for our nourishment,
and this is the scope and end of the Lords table: only here lies a plain
and maine difference, our tables serve for bodily nourishment, but the Lords
Table is prepared for the spiritual nourishment of our souls. Lastly, it may
be called the testament or will of Christ because it sets forth unto us a
solemn covenant between God and us, touching forgiveness of sins and eternal
life: which covenant is ratified and established by the Heb. 9, 15.
death of the Son of God: so that herein we find all things belonging to a
full and perfect testament, as we shall see afterward.

Out of these several names and titles thus interpreted, arise most aptly and
fitly sundry uses, which in order as they have been propounded we will
consider. The first title is the Communion: from whence we deduct The uses of
calling this Sacrament the Communion.
these necessary conclusions. First of all, is the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ called a communion? And so called of our communicating
together? Then hereby all the faithful openly testify, that they be all one
body coupled together in Christ Jesus, we profess him and all his benefits, 1
Cor. 6, 17. 1 Ioh. 3, 24.
but by one and the same Spirit dwelling in Christ and in all the members of
Christ, as 1 Cor. 6. He that cleaves to the Lord, is one spirit. And the
Apostle John testifies, that Christ dwells in us and we in Christ by the
Spirit; He that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: and
hereby we know that he ab^deth in us, even by the Spirit which he has g^uen
us: so that the spirits of just and perfect men in heaven, and all believers
upon the earth (how far soever sundred in place) having one and the same Spirit
of Christ dwelling in them, are all one in Christ their head. God has given
his own Son unto us freely and fully: our faith receives Christ Ioh. 1, 12.
by believing him and all his gracious benefits to be ours, as Ioh. 1, 12. As
many as received him, to them he gave prerogative to be the sons of God, even
to them that believe in his name. Thus we see we are one with Christ, and
Christ with us.

Rome, where one partaketh all and the rest of the Church nothing at all. There
is a flat opposition between these two: so that the Communion cannot be a
private Mass, and private Mass cannot be a Communion. That which is ordained
and prepared for many, delivered unto many, and received of many, cannot stand
with the Mass, where the Priest prepares for himself, not for the people: he
speaks to himself, not to the Church: he receives himself alone, not with
his brethren: all which are directly contrary to the Apostles 1 Cor. 11, 33
rule, Tarry one for another.

1 Cor. 11, 18, 20.
as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 11, 18, 20. When ye come together in the
Church, I hear that there are dissentions among you, this is not to eat the
Lords Supper. Wherefore, in that the people communicate of one and the same
bread, of one and the same wine, it signifies the union and agreement between
all the faithful in one body, whereof Christ Jesus is the head: who loved us
dearly, and spared not his life for us. Let us join our selves together in
love, according to the exhortation Romans 15, 5, 6
of the Apostle, Romans 15. The God of patience and consolation give you that ye
be like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, that ye with
one mind and with one mouth may praise God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. All believers must be of one heart and mind, the Wolf and the Lamb,
the Lion and the Calfe must dwell together in the kingdom of Christ, for all
are one in Christ Jesus. For the Apostle having taught that the cup which we
bless, and the bread which we break, are the communion of the body and blood
of Christ, he adds, We that are many, are one bread and one body, because we
are all partakers of one bread: and therefore he says, 1 Cor. 11. When ye come
together to eat, tarry one for another.

This title then must teach us all to embrace true love and the fruits
thereof, whereby we think well one of another, speak well one of another, and
do well one to another, cutting off all occasions of contentions, and
testifying our selves to be of the holy Communion that is between the Saints.
For this sacred feast must be a loue-feast, because it shows our love one to
another, The Communion must be a love feast. Mat. 18, 22. Objection.
and our willingness to forgive one another, as Christ says to Peter, not
seven times, but even seauenty t^mes seven times. But peradventure some will
say, what if my neighbor will not be reconciled unto me, nor be friends with
me, what then am I to do? Or how shall I behave my self? May I not in this
case lawfully abstain from the holy Communion? I answer, Luke 17, 4.
If thy brother trespass against thee seven times in a day and seven times
in a day turn again to thee, say^ng, I repent, thou shall forgive him. But if
he hate us and will not forgive us, yet are not we discharged or dispensed
withal, either to hate him again, or to refuse the partaking of the divine
ordinances of God; but we must freely forgive him, and publicly profess love
to him and all others, and then we may with a sound heart and a safe conscience
come to this Sacrament. But it may be further objected, Damascene teaches,
Damas. lib. 4. cap 14. de orthodox fide
not only because we communicate with Christ and be partakers of his flesh and
divinity, but likewise because by it we do communicate and are united one with
another, so that we all profess to be at unity and in charity among our selves
as members of the same body, and so bear our selves as if we would never live
in malice one with another again. Howbeit we do rather lay it down, then
shake it off: we do rather cunningly suppress it for a time, then utterly pull
it up by the roots: and therefore we are no sooner departed, but by and by we
are ready to break out into our former evil courses, and show our selves to be
as full of envy and debate as ever we were before. Many that come to the holy
Communion are like to Serpents.
Thus we are like to that serpent, which when she goes to drink lays away
her poison, and takes it again when she has done. If we deal thus with our
brethren, discontinuing our dissension with the^ for a small season, rather
then destroying it: what are we better then a generation of Vipers unworthy to
be called Gods children, and unfit to be accounted his guests.

The second title given to this Sacrament, is The uses of calling this
Sacrament the Lords Supper.
the Lords Supper: by which name it is now most usually and commonly called,
both because it was so instituted by Christ after his last Supper, and is
celebrated in the remembrance of Christ. Hereby we learn, first who is the
author of this Peter, not Paul, not any of the apostles, not any man, not any
angel, but Christ Jesus God and man: and therefore it is not called the Supper
of the apostles or of any man, but of Christ himself, as the apostle speaks
of baptism, 1 Cor. 1, 13.15.
Was Paul crucified for you? Either were ye baptized into the name of Paul? I
baptized none into mine own name. Wherefore, this title serves to teach us
and to put us in mind of the author of this Sacrament.

Secondly, seeing this Sacrament is not a common supper, Ioh. 6, 27.
Bread of life which came down from heaven, which the Father has promised to
give unto us.

Lastly, it condemns our Rh^^^. Test. annot. in 1 cor. 11.
English Rhomists, and other Bellar. de Messa. lib. 2. ca. 10.
romish readers of popish divinity, that wholly condemn this name and title as
improper and unfit for this Sacrament, and understand the Apostle to speak of
the loue-feasts, when he speaks of the Lords Supper. Indeed, in the Apostles
times they used to meet together in one common place, not only for the
hearing of the word, for the receiving of the Sacraments, and for prayer to
God, but to keep certain feasts, which of their end or use were called Jude
Verse 22. 2. Pet. 2.13.
feasts of charity, as Jude speaks. But of these the apostle speaks not,
when he named the Lords Supper. For first, let them show us the place, where
ever these loue-feasts are called the Lords Supper, and then they may warrant
their exposition by some color? otherwise we cannot receive their
interpretation, being of p^iuate motion. Secondly, if this title were meant of
loue-feast, to what purpose should the apostle bring in the institution of the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and largely handle the doctrine
thereof? Whereas their abuses in their loue-feasts might be reformed and
redressed without this mention and remembrance of the Supper. Thirdly, to what
end should these solemn feasts and bankets be called the Lords Supper, which
were not instituted in the honor of Christ, but to testify the mutual love
of those that were members of the same body, having God for their merciful
Father, the Church for their tender Mother, and Christ for their elder brother.
These might rather be called the supper of men, then of the Lord, being feasts
of charity, not of piety. Fourthly, the Apostles drift and purpose in this
place is to teach, that such as nourish dssention and division pa^take the
Lords Supper unworthily, and therefore wills them when they come to
communicate with the Lord, to shake out of their minds all uncharitable
affections, as chafe from good corn, that so they may assemble together with
profit and not with hurt. Fifthly, this Supper was administered by the Lord and
instituted by him, and therefore is fitly called the Supper of the Lord:
whereas these loue-feasts the Lord neither administered nor instituted. This
then shows the folly of our adversaries, that love any kind of names better
then such as are used in the holy Scriptures. Last of all, to call this
Sacrament by the name of the Lords Supper usually among the ancient Fathers
Cipri. in sacr^m. de caena der^n.
of the Church, grounding themselves from the authority of the Scripture, and
example of the Apostle: yea thus some of their own writers Schol. Ioh. Gag^.
in 1 Cor. 11. H^ij conse^^e ^th^^^^m. 2 cap. 30. and ^im 1. (...). 40.
call this Sacrament, and expound the words of Saint Paul to the Corinthians. If
therefore they will rest themselves either in the true interpretation of the
Scripture, or in the exposition of the ancient fathers, or in the confession of
their own Writers: we cannot doubt but the Apostle naming the Lords Supper,
understands the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. As for those that
suppose these loue-feasts and bankets of charity were called the Lords Supper,
because they were celebrated in the Church of our Lord, it is avouched both
falsely and absurdly. Falsely, because there were the^ no churches builded, nor
any where to be found, nor in many years after. Absurdly, because it will
follow by this reason, if the place may always give denomination to the thing,
that any error or heresy and false doctrine preached in the Church may be
called the heresy of our Lord, or the false doctrine of our Lord, forasmuch as
it is preached in the Church of our Lord.

The next title given to this Sacrament is the breaking of bread: which
offers to our considerations, these uses not The uses of calling this
Sacrament the b^eaking of bread.
to be passed over. First* it shows that the substance of bread remains
after the words of consecration, and is not altered by any strange
transubstantiation. For when the Apostle says, This is my body 1 Cor. 11, 23
which is broken for you, properly it cannot be understood of the body of
Christ which Ioh 19, 30.
not broken, but of his crucifying and death, by a figurative speech taken from
the substance of the bread, which Christ brake to distribute it among his
Disciples, and to represent effectually his suffering for us. The accidents of
bread cannot be broken, as we shall see afterward, no more then they can feed
and nourish.

Besides, we learn hereby that tropes and figures are used Rome, as we make
plain by the institution and as we constrain the adversaries themselves to
confess, as when it is said, his body was broken, where the litterall sense
cannot be retained, seeing a bone of him could not be broken. Likewise when it
is said, The cup is the new testament: the rock was Christ: the bread is the
communion of the body of Christ, these and such like cannot be interpreted
without a figure.

Lastly, seeing of this one action the whole Sacrament has his denomination,
Acts 2, 42. and 20, 7.
as appears in many places, Act. commended, the Apostles have practiced, and
the Ministers afterward observed the same, 1 Cor. 10, 16.
as the apostle witnesses, The bread which we break* is it not the communion
of the body of Christ? speaking of himself and the rest of the Ministers of
the Church. Besides, it is an effectual expressing and representation of the
passion and crucifying of Christ, as also the pouring out of the wine into the
cup of the Lord. Wherefore, they are to be accused and convinced as heinous
breakers of the high ordinance of Christ, as we see in the Church of Rome, who
omit this breaking of the bread as impertinent and unnecessary, and as not
significant. For Christ Jesus commanded his Disciples to eat that bread which
he had broken, and this breaking pertains to the end of the Sacrament: so
that it cannot be passed over, without neglect of the institution of Christ,
and of the essence of the Supper, of which we will speak afterward. The next
title given to this sacrament, is the table of the Lord: and it is rightly so
called, as by a very fit name. For seeing it is a Supper, and a most heavenly
banquet, it is requisite there should be a table answerable unto it, that as it
is the Supper of the Lord, so there may be a table for the administration of
it. From hence we conclude diverse good uses The uses of calling this Sacram^nt
the table of the Lord.
for our further instruction.

First of all, it shows that Christ and his Apostles in the celebration of
the Supper used a table, not an altar. For albeit the apostle Paul speaks
improperly of the table, and does thereby understand the heavenly meat and
drink which was set upon the table for all the Lords guests: yet withal he
insinuates and signifies the place whereon they were put, to wit, upon a
table. In like manner our Savior Christ at the first institution of this
Sacrament remained at the table with his Disciples, he stood not with the^ at
the altar. Now according to the example of Christ and his Disciples, must be
the practice of all Churches, inasmuch as Christ shedding his blood on the
Cross, had abolished all altars: and therefore the Infidels did oftentimss
reprove and reproach the Christians because they had no altars, who on the
other side defended themselves, that their Altars are the congregations of such
as bow themselves in prayers, and the spirits of just men, which smell as sweet
incense in the nostrils of God, other Altars then these they acknowledge none
to be among them.

Furthermore, inasmuch as the Sacrament of the body and 1 Cor 9.13.
as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 9. Do ye not know that they which minister
about holy things, eat of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at
the Altar, are partakers of the Altars? And to like purpose. Heb. 13, 10. We
have an altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve in the
Tabernacle, that is, such as retain the necessary use of the ceremonies Gal.
4, 9.
and beggarly rudiments of the Jews, are fallen from Christ. Whereby we see
plainly and apparently, that sacrifices and altars stood together, and fell
together: and therefore whereas they would conclude the sacrifice of Mass from
the use of the altars, we may inuert the reason, and make it serve to euert and
overthrow the sacrifice of their Mass, seeing it is certain there were no
Altars.

Lastly, we must observe that it is not barely called a table, but the Table of
the LORD: to teach us to draw of heaven and earth is present. When David would
reward and recompense the kindness of Barzillai, he charged Solomon his son
that the sons of Barzillai should sit and eat bread at his table: how great
then is the honor that God vouchsafes to us, permitting and appointing us to
sit at the Table of his own Son, of whom we say truly, a greater then Solomon
is there. Wherefore to stir us up to this duty and devotion, let every one
consider and meditate thus with himself, I am this day to be the Lords guest:
I am invited to his Table: I am to eat of his bread and to drink of his cup: I
have not in this business to do with man whose breath is in his Nostrils, but to
deal with God in whose presence I do abide, who is both a beholder and Judge
of all my actions, to whom I shall either stand or fall. If I come in
hypocrisy he will find me out, Heb. 4, 13.
before whom all things are naked and open: If I come fitted by faith and
sanctified by repentance, I shall receive Christ and all his merits to my
endless comfort. Thus much suffices to be considered touching this title of
the Lords Table.

The last title of this Sacrament remains to be handled, being called the new
Testament or will of Christ, The uses of calling this Sacrament the testament
or will of Christ.
from whence we may gather diverse uses as good conclusions from this doctrine.
For first it teaches, that there is a double Testament and covenant of God
made to his people, one of works, the other of grace: one of the law, the
other of the John 1, 17. The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by
Jesus Christ. And Ier. 31, 31, 32. I will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel and the house of Judah, not according to the covenant that I made with
their Fathers, when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of
Egypt, the which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them.
But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
after those days says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

The covenant of the law is a covenant wherein God has promised to his people
all blessings corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal, Leuit. 18, 5.
Mat. 19, 17. Gal. 3, 12. Deuteronomy. 27, 20.
under the condition of perfect obedience: and has threatened all curses and
death (...) to all that continue not in all parts and points of the (...) do
them. The covenant of grace ratified by the death an^ blood of Christ, is a
covenant wherein God promises his love and favor for ever to come upon all
that believe in his Son, Ioh. 3.16.
assuring them of remission of sins and eternal life, requiring of them only
faith in him, as John 3. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that such as believe in him should not perish but live for ever.

Again, if this Sacrament sealing up the new covenant Rome, that add and
alter, mingle and mangle this Sacrament at their own pleasure. For the Apostle
teaches, Gal. 3. Though it be but a man's Gal. 3, 11.
covenant, yet when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it, or adds any
thing thereto. And Heb. 9, 14. He is the mediator of the new Testament, that
through his death they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance: for where a testament is, there must be the death of the testator:
for the testament is confirmed when men are dead, for it is yet of no force, as
long as he that made it is alive. If then the testament of man may not be
abrogated or altered, much less the Testament of God confirmed by the death of
the Mediator.

Notwithstanding, such is the sacrilege and presumption of that Antichristian
Church, that the idolatrous Mass as a bottomless gulf, has ouerturned and
swallowed up the Lords Supper, turning the Sacrament into a sacrifice,
administering it in a strange tongue, taking away the cup from the people of
God, making prayers for the dead, bringing in their carnal presence,
imagininng a monstrous transubstantiation, setting up a new Priesthood, a new
sacrifice, a new Altar; and lastly feigning uses and ends thereof, which Christ
never appointed, the Apostles never acknowledged, the Churches succeeding never
confessed or practiced. Now masses Council. cabilon. can. 33.
are mumbled in memory of the Saints: they are held available, not only for
the living, but for the dead: they are judged profitable against storms and
tempests: they are thought a sovereign remedy against (...) ^ore and sickness
of the body: healthful and helpefull ^^r such as are going to war to cover
their heads in the day of battle, as a shield of brass, and to preserve them
from the sword of the enemy: good against enchantments and sorceries, and fit
to be applied to make trial and proof, whether a man be guilty of the crime
and accusation laid to his charge. But what are all these strange uses but
strange abuses, yea strong fancies and delusions of the man of sin, burying in
perpetual forgetfulness the true ends for the which Christ Jesus ordained his
last Supper. All these being pestilent corruptions of the Sacrament of the
Supper, and fraudulent additions to the last will and testament of Christ, do
lay open to the full the wretched abominations of the Church of Rome, the
mother of fornications.

Romans 8, 17. 1 Pet. 1, 12. and 5, 1.
are appointed heirs: the angels are as the overseers: the Apostles are the
witnesses: the legacies bequeathed, are not lands and possessions, or great
sums Mat. 8, 20, 26.
of money* for the son of man had not where to lay his head: not the kingdoms
and governments of this world, for his kingdom is not of Ioh. 18, 36.
this world: but the forgiveness of sins and everlasting life, obtained by the
body of Christ given, and his blood shed for us and our redemption. Wherefore,
if God have so loved us, if Christ have not spared his own life to give us
life and salvation; how bitter ought our sins to be unto us, and how ought we
to strive against them? If we will hate enemies, here are enemies for us to
hate: if we will seek revenge against enemies, let us fight against them that
seek our overthrow and the destruction of our soul and body. There is no
reconciliation and atonement to be made with these enemies, if thou kill not
them, they will kill and condemn thee for ever. Hitherto of the names given to
this Sacrament.

CHAP. II. What the Lords Supper is.
AS we have in the former chapter considered the names and titles attributed to
this Sacrament: so now we will see what the Lords Supper is. For we shall never
understand the nature thereof, except we be able to define or describe it.
Therefore, What the Lords Supper is
the Lords Supper is the second Sacrament, wherein by visible receiving of
bread and wine, our spiritual communion with the body and blood of Christ is
represented. This description is plainly proved by the Mat. 26, 26.27. 1 Cor.
10, 16.17. 1 Cor. 11, 24.25.
institution of Christ, by the first celebration of it, and by other apparent
testimonies of holy Scripture.

First I say, it is the second Sacrament, because such as have interest in the
Lord, Supper, must be first partakers of the other Sacrament: for Christ and
his apostles ministered it to those that were before baptized. And how should
they be continually nourished and fed at his table, who are not known to be of
his house, nor adm^tted members of his family? We must be received into his
protection and jurisdiction, before we sit down at his table for our
refection. They then that are in the house must be fed and fostered in the
house: the several parts of the family, have the privileges of the family: it
is not lawful to take the childrens bread and give it unto strangers.

Now baptism is the true bath of our souls to cleanse our sores, and an
honorable badge whereby we are dedicated to the service of Christ, and have
interest in the privileges of the Church sealed up: being partakers hereof, we
come with comfort to the Lords Supper. Under the law none uncircumcised Exodus
12, 4^
were admitted to the Passover, as appears, Exodus 12. If a stranger will
observe the passover, let him circumcise all the male^ that belong unto him.
If then the uncircumcised had bin admitted, the Passover had been profaned.
Wherefore it is not enough for us once to be baptized and admitted into the
number of the people of God: we must also be partakers of Christ's Supper. When
as by baptism we are brought into the Church of God, we are afterward
nourished by this heavenly banquet to eternal life.

Again, I say in the former description, that by the bread and wine the body
and blood of Christ are represented. Herein consists the substance of this
Sacrament: he was truly given for us, and his blood was shed for the remission
of sins, least our faith should wander, least our hope should waver.
Therefore he says to his Disciples, L^ke 22, 19.20. Mar. 14, 24.
This is my body, which was given for you: this is the cup of the new
testament, which was shed for you and for many for the remission of sins.

1 Cor. 10.3, 4.
they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink

Indeed many of them did receive only the outward signs and did refuse or
neglect the spiritual grace so lively represented and truly offered unto
them, but the greater was their sin, who labored for the meat that
perishes, 1 Ioh. 6, 27.
but rejected the meat that endures to everlasting life. Likewise, Christ in
the administration of his Supper says, Mat. 26, 26.
take, eat, this is my body. When he bids us take, does he not give? When
he charge us to eat and drink, does he not offer? When he commands us to
do this, does he not apply the thing signified? If then we come to this
Supper, and depart away without Christ and without comfort, the cause is in our
selves, he is come near unto us, he stands as it were at the door knocking
being ready to enter: he mercifully offers himself unto us, but we refuse
him, we will none of him, we bid him depart from us, and shut the entrance of
our hearts against him.

of the Lords Supper, howsoever to those whose faith it does not nourish, whose
assurance it does not confirm, and whose salvation it does not further, it is
turned into most hurtful and deadly poison: yet it is an holy banquet for the
Lords guests, an instrument of grace, a medicine for the sick, a pledge of
salvation, a comfort for the sinner, an assurance of Gods promises, a seal of
our faith, an help for the weak, meat for the hungry, drink for the
thirsty, and a refuge for the distressed in time of tentation. Is not this a
worthy dignity? Is not this a great privilege and an high prerogative? So that
we must highly regard and reverently esteem this mystery of our religion, and
badge of our profession, to the glory of God, and our own comfort. He that is
not moved hereby to a reverent regard thereof, has no spark of Gods Spirit
in him, but lies in darkness and discomfit.

Let us then make good use of it all the days of our life's, and not abuse it
to our destruction. It is not enough to seem religious, and pretend
reformation of our evil ways what time we do receive it, and to hang down our
heads like a bulrush for a day, and immediately after to run into all excess
of riot. We see how many abuse themselves and the Sacrament, giving themselves
to feasting, and banketting, and surfeiting, and have soon forgotten where
they have bin, what they have done, whom they have served, and how they have
appeared before the presence of the eternal God. We see also in others, how
contentions and brawlings break out (which seemed smothered and suppressed for
a time) like lightning and thunder out of a Cloud, or like fire covered under
the ashes, whose flame kindles afterward with much greater force and violence.
These me^ make not the supper an wholesome preservative, and as it were the
sick man's salve, as indeed it is by Gods institution: but a snare to entrap
them, a thorn to prick them, and a sword to wound them, through their own
corruption.

Thirdly, hereby the adversaries mouths are stopped, and blessed presence of
Christ in the Sacrament. We confess and believe, that we receive the body of
CHRIST verily, truly, and indeed, not a naked figure, not a bare sign, not an
empty shadow but even that body which suffered death upon the Cross, and that
blood which was shed and poured out for the remission of our sins. This
Christ Ioh. 6, 55, 56 53, 57.
himself teaches, John 6. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in
him. And again, verse 33. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man* and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. He
that eats me, even he shall live by me. So then we teach, we preach, we
publish, we profess, that there is no other substantial food of our souls,
and that whosoever is not partaker of his body and blood, is void of life, of
salvation, of grace, and of Christ himself. Wherefore, we shall show Chap. 10.
afterward, that the difference between the Church of Rome and us is, not
whether Christ be present in his Supper, but about the manner of his presence;
for we say, and will never fly from it, that as the outward signs of bread
and wine are delivered and received, so they represent and seal up to every
true believer, God the Father offering and giving, the church also taking,
receiving, and applying Christ crucified, with all the promises of his covenant
ratified in him unto eternal life.

1 cor. 10, 17
by eating all of one bread? Why should not such apply Christ to their
justification? We know the Apostles oftentimes prepared, offered, and delivered
the outward signs of the Lords supper, exhibiting Christ to all the faithful,
even every Lords day, or first day of the week, and the people received
oftentimes the same, Act. 2, 41, 42.
as we see Act. 2. There were added to the church about three thousand souls,
and they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship and breaking of
bread and prayers: and cha. 20. The first day of the week the Disciples came
together to break bread. And this was the order and ordinance of the Church
many years after the apostles times. In some places it was received August. in
Job. tract 26.
every day: in many places Chrysostom. in Ephesians 1. hom 26.
every Sabbath day: Aug ad Ianuar. epist. 119.
in all places often in the year: until through the negligence of the Pastors
in administering, and the slacknesse of the people in communicating, these uses
were grown out of usage, and a frozen coldness in the practice of religion
stopped in. For it cannot be denied, but it proceeds from the shop and
invention of the Devil (whosoever were the instrument) to bring in this
corrupt custom of once communicating in the year, and that for the most part
for fashion sake. Now to the end we might return nearer to the ordinance of
the Apostles, that the often use of the communion might be retained and
maintained, and that the backwardnes of the people might in part be redressed:
it was ordained by the Canons of many churches, that every one should
communicate at the least thrice in the year, not that men should do it no
oftener, but least otherwise they would not do it so often, or peradventure do
it not at al. And if a survey and examination were made, I fear it would be
found to our great shame and beastly slothfulnes, that scarce the tenth person
has satisfied the law in this respect in many places, regarding no time of the
year but Easter. But seeing it is so necessary a Sacrament let every one
consider of this holy mystery, how fruitful, profitable, and comfortable it
is to be partaker thereof, and how dangerous to neglect and contemn the same.
Is it not an unkind and churlish part among men, when one has prepared with
great costs and charges a rich banquet, killed his Oxen and his fatlings,
furnished his table with all provision, bidden his guests, and set all things
in order and readiness to entertain them: were it not I say an unkind and
discourteous part for those that are called and bidden, unthankfully and
churlishly to refuse to come? Which of us in such a case would not be moved,
disquieted, and discontented? Who would not think he had wrong and injury done
unto him? Wherefore let us take heed, least by withholding and withdrawing
our selves, we provoke Gods wrath and indignation. When he calls, are ye not
ashamed to say, ye will not come? When he says, Prou. 9, 4, 5.
Eat of my meat and drink the wine that I have drawn, will thou desperately
and dispitefully answer thou will not eat, thou will not drink, thou will
not do it? Or will thou say thou art a grievous sinner, thou art unworthy? I
would ask thee when thou will be worthy? Will thou lie still in thy sin, as
a man in a deep pit, and never strive to come forth? Why do thou not
return to God and amend thy ways? Why do thou continue in thy hardness,
and heart that Romans 2, 5.
cannot repent, and so heapest up as a treasure to thy self, wrath against the
day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God? Moreover, if
thou be unfit and unworthy to receive this supper, thou art Chrysostom. in Ephesians.
hom. 3.
unworthy to pray, thou art unworthy to hear: unless thou pray as a Parrat,
and hear as an hypocrite. Consider therefore seriously, and weigh earnestly
with your selves, Numb. 9, 13.
how little such fond, fained, and frivolous excuses shall prevail with God.
When Moses called Corah and his company to come up unto the Lord, they
answered presumptuously, Number. 16, 12.
We will not come. When the King in the Gospel had invited his guests, they
began all with one mind to excuse themselves, and some refused, saying, Luke
14, 20.24.
I cannot come. So in these days of sin, albeit the supper be prepared, the
guests called, and the table covered: many men make light account of it: and
what with some that reply carelessly, we cannot come; and what with others that
answer desperately, we will not come, the feast is unfurnished, God is
dishonored, the people are unprepared, and all the exercises of religion are
lightly and slightly regarded. I say unto you, that none of these men which
were bidden shall taste of his Supper. Again, another sort are as profane as
these, which stand by as gazers and lookers on upon them that do communicate,
and yet communicate not themselves. What is this else, then a further contempt
of God? Truly it is great unthankfulness to depart away: for these depart away
from the Lords table, they depart from their brethren, they depart from the
heavenly anchor of their souls: but their fault is much greater, when they
stand by in contempt, and will not be partakers of this communion: What can this
be else, but to have the Minister of Christ in derision? It is said to all that
are present, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, do this in remembrance of me: With
what face then, with what countenance, or rather conscience, can ye hear these
words sound in your ears, and not be touched? Let us therefore be drawn and
persuaded to this duty, by the benefit that redoundeth to the worthy receivers
and fruitful partakers thereof: and on the other side, fear to offend by
staying and standing still while the faithful are partakers of this Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. Hence then are many careless Christians reproved, that
altogether neglect this duty and intermit often coming to the Sacrament, as if
it were an indifferent thing and an arbitrary matter; for whereas they are
content to hear the word oftentimes, they will not come to the Table of the
Lord so often as the law requires; and as the sluggard is wise in his own
eyes, so have these sundry excuses, and diverse conceited reasons to keep them
from the performance of this duty. Objections of careless men why they come so
sildome to the Lords Table.
Let us therefore hear what they can say for themselves, and examine the
chief objections upon which they stand, that so the truth may be cleared, the
diligent resorters to this Sacrament may be encouraged, the dull and backward
may be provoked and pricked forward, and all persons may be instructed aright
how to behave themselves touching this duty. The first objection and shameless
excuses will not go for current payment, when the Lord of this feast shall
visit his guests. Neither do these men allege their vnpreparednes by way of
sorrowing for it, but rather by way of boasting in it as it were glorying in
their own shame. Christ Jesus commands us to be so watchful, Mat. 24, 44.
that we should always be ready for his second coming, and to meet him in the
Clouds: how then ought every soul among us, to be prepared and provided with
oil in our lamps, and with the wedding garment on our backs, with our loins
girded, and our lights burning, that we may meet Christ in his ordinances, and
enjoy his gracious presence in the Sacrament? If then it be evil to be
unprepared, then know that this is an idle excuse, like Adams figge-leaues that
could not hide his nakedness from God, or like the slothful servants pretense,
who received judgment from his own mouth. Again, others that are cast in the
same mould, The second objection.
and smell of the same smoke, allege for themselves, or rather indeed against
themselves, that they are not in charity. Alas say they, would you have us
come in this fearful manner, when such a man and I are not friends? he has
wronged and abused me grossly, to offer Swines flesh, or to cut off a dogs
neck, Esaias 66. Esaias 66, 3.
What folly then and sottishnes is it to come ordinarily to the word and prayer
and yet to refuse to come to the Sacrament? Does not God hate and his soul
abhor thy coming to his word without charity, as well as thy coming to his
Supper without charity? And how can thou be fit to come to the throne of
grace, that art not fitted to come to the Table of the Lord? These men will
seem to have some horror of sin in them, and to have a tender conscience
toward God, as if they durst not offend him, or once meddle with the holy
Communion: howbeit they do but dally with God, and deceive themselves. For who
taught them, or where have they learned to make scrupple of conscience, only
when they come to receive the Sacrament, and to be altogether careless and
dissolute of their behavior when they resort to the house of God, and perform
other exercises of religion? Either are they so simple to imagine that God
looks to our coming to his Table, but regards not in what manner we come
to his word? But to pass from this point, let them carry away these few rules,
First, that one sin cannot excuse another. One sin may aggrauate another,
and increase the judgment, (for sin joined to sin makes the sinner more
sinful) but one sin can by no means make another sin to be no sin at all, and
therefore never excuse through thy want of charity thy neglect of Gods holy
ordinance that wills thee to come often to his Supper. Secondly, the love of
God cannot dwell in his heart that bears no love to his brother. Hence it is
that the apostle John says, 1 John 4. 1 Ioh. 4, 10.
If any man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: for he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? Thirdly, so long as they live in this estate, the worship that they
perform is not performed to GOD but to the Devil; forasmuch as they are his
servants, and his works they do, and to him they yield obedience, and of him
they must look for their reward. They cannot pray aright, no not so much as
say the Lords prayer, and if they do, they sin in it and provoke Gods
judgments against the^, so long as they live in hatred and malice. I speak
not this as though I would have men to do nothing, to abstain from all duties,
to refrain from hearing, and forbear from praying: but because I would have
them careful and watchful over themselves, to make conscience of all sin,
and then they may look for a blessing at the hands of God. Thirdly, there is
another sort that is not ashamed to affirm, The third objection.
that this often receiving is more then needs, as if forsooth it were a work
of supererogation.

Thus they open themselves to the whole world, not only the word of God
requiring us often to eat of this bread and to drink of this cup, 1 Cor.
11.26.
but our own weakness and wants crying out aloud unto us, that we have great
cause oftentimes to come to his Table. And surely if these men had ever found
any sweetness in this Sacrament, and tasted how gracious the Lord is, 1 Pet. 2,
3.
they would never argue thus absurdly, I have often received, therefore I need
receive no more. If thou would reason in this manner touching thy bodily food
as thou do of this that is heavenly, I have eaten meat before, therefore I
need not eat again, there would follow the ruin of the body, forasmuch as it
must perish through famine: so if we will not come to this spiritual food
because we have often already eaten of it, it must needs bring the destruction
of the soul. As then they that are in health having eaten liberally and
plentifully of one kind of meat to day, do come with a good appetite unto it to
morrow: so should it be with us touching this diet of the soul, the oftener we
have eaten of it, the more we should desire it. These are like those carnal
Israelites that loathed the Manna that God gave them in the wilderness, Number.
11, 6.
saying, Our soul is dried away, there is nothing at all besides this Manna
before our eyes: so have we a multitude among us that regard not their souls
nor the food of their souls, but are like those that Solomon speaks of, Pro.
27. Prou. 27, 7.
The full soul loatheth an hony-combe, but to the hungry soul every bitter
thing is sweet. If these despisers of holy things would with diligence and
without partiality examine their own hearts, they should find much prophanes
and great corruption to lurk in the hidden corners of it, or else they would
never make it a needless and superfluous thing to come often, but would rather
think they come too sildome, and therefore desire it again and again. There
is none almost so absurd as to say, I need not come to the word because I have
heard it already: nor I have prayed to God therefore I need not to pray any
more: now it is no less unreasonable to reason thus, I have received
oftentimes, therefore I need receive no more. But as he that knows what it is
to hear aright, and has found the word sweeter to him then the honey and the
hony-combe, and more to be desired then much riches, the more he hears, Psalm.
19, 10.
the more he longs to hear: so if at any time we had tasted the sweetness
of that glorious work of our redemption, or the bitterness of the fearful
estate of man's transgression and corruption, we would come very often to this
Sacrament, which is a lively remembrance of his death and passion whereby we
are redeemed. Let such then as care not for their redemption, neither esteem
any thing of their salvation, neither think they stand in need of Christ to be
their justification, let such I say tell us they need not come oftentimes to
the Supper of the Lord: but if either Christ be needful for us, or his word
powerful in us, or if we have found that God has been merciful unto us, let
us not despise his bountifulnes, nor neglect the sweet pledges of his goodness
offered unto us. Others tell us plainly, The fourth objection.
they have gone further then the former, they have received oftentimes, and
come to the Table of the Lord again and again, and looked for some fruit and
benefit by it, but yet they could never find or feel any profit, any comfort,
or any good by it. This is because thou art not good: who of God is made unto
us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1,
30. Ioh 6, 55.
has given unto us his own flesh to eat, and his precious blood to drink;
forasmuch as it was not silver and gold, and such corruptible things that could
redeem us. It cost him dear, even his life to make us this feast and will we
neglect it? His soul was heavy, to make us merry and cheerful, and will we
not come to this feast? He was troubled, that we might be comforted. Esaias 53, ^.
He was wounded, that we might be healed. He was despised and rejected of men,
that we might be honored of the Father. He was cast down into the depth of
sorrow, that we might be exalted and lifted up. He was brought as a Lamb
unspotted to the slaughter, that our mouths and our hearts might be filled with
laughter. He was smitten with stripes, that we might be spared. He was afraid,
and astonished, and amazed, Heb. 5, 7. Mar. 14.33.
that we might be cheared up and refreshed. Finally, he was crucified and put
to death, that we might be delivered and restored to life. This is the rich and
royal feast that he has made us: this is the costly banquet that he has
prepared for us, and yet nowithstanding wretched and miserable men can find no
profit at all in this dainty and delicate food, that cost the heart blood of
Christ, before it could be dressed and provided for us. Howbeit we dare not so
hardly censure all that say they can feel no such comfort at the Communion, as
we persuade is to be reaped by it; we hope better things of many of them,
albeit we thus speak. For howsoever they do not at the present time and in the
act of receiving feel comfort, yet nevertheless they may find it and have
it. Wherefore consider with me, and bear away with thee these five things.
First, if thou should utterly abstain from the Supper of the Lord, it is not
to be doubted, but that albeit thou feel not thy self any whit the better by
thy coming to it, thou should feel thy self many degrees the worser. And
albeit thou feel not thy self after thy receiving to be so good as thou
desire, yet if thou camst not at all thou should find thy self to be
worse then thou art. Now it is some good to hinder that which is evil, and to
keep from us that which is worse.. Thus it is with many that come to the word
of God, albeit it do not work their conversion yet it keeps them from much
corruption that otherwise they might and would fall into. Secondly, it is one
thing to have grace, and another thing to feel grace: for a man may have
grace, and yet not feel it, especially in time of tentation, as a man likewise
may have life in him, and yet not feel it. And although he do not feel it
through violence and extremity of the disease, yet we cannot truly conclude
that he is dead and without life: so albeit we do not feel any comfort in our
hearts, it is a false conclusion, that therefore we are without comfort, we
live by faith, not by feeling. Heb. 2, 4.
We may believe though we do not presently perceive it. God does oftentimes
give faith, and yet will have us wait a long time for the feeling of it. David
had lost his feeling, as also the inward joy of the Spirit, yet even then he
ceased not to have faith, and the Spirit the worker of faith, Restore to me
the joy of thy salvation, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Psalm. 51, 12.
So then faith goes not always with feeling. Thirdly, every man must submit
himself with conscience to Gods ordinance, and then he may be assured he shall
in his good time find comfort. Let us be ready to do for the good of our
souls as we are content to deal for the recovery of the health of our bodies.
Such as are sick and want health, make have to have the help of the
Physician, and they continue to use his counsel, albeit they find not present
help. Let us do likewise in seeking the health of our souls; we must proceed
to use the means carefully which God has ordained for comfort: and albeit
help come not by and by out of Sion, yet we must not be discouraged but wait
with patience for the appointed time. We see touching our ordinary meat in
sick persons, though they feel small strength and corroboration by it, yet no
doubt they are strengthened through it, and receive some nourishment from it,
even while they know it not, and feel it not, or else they could not live: so
may it be with us, we may have some strength of the inner man. some gift of
faith, and some comfort of the Spirit, albeit we do not suddenly feel it and
presently perceive it. Fourthly, we must set down this as an infallible rule
that never fails, no man was ever made better by withdrawing himself from
the Sacrament. For be it that we have used oftentimes the Supper of the Lord,
No man can be made better by abstaining from the Supper.
and have found no comfort in it, nor fruit by it: do we think to reap any
benefit by abstaining from it, and never coming to it? It was never heard of
from the beginning of the world, that any has grown either richer in grace,
or stronger in faith, by keeping himself from any of Gods holy ordinances.
This is as possible as it is to see in the dark time of the night, by keeping
himself from the light of the Candle, and abstaining from the place where it
is set in the Candle-sticke to give light to them that are in the house.

Lastly, we must not stint God, nor limit him a time when to make us feel
comfort, like the unruly patient that will not be cured, except he be cured out
of hand. He will try our faith and patience, whether we will depend upon him or
not. Our Savior says, The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear
the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whether it goes:
so is every one that is borne of the Spirit, John 3, 8. (...). 3, 8.
We know not how or which way the Spirit works in us, but in time we shall
perceive the work what it is, to our great and endless comfort.

Now we proceed to another objection: The fifth objection.
Some say that often receiving will breed and bring forth a loathing, as in our
common proverb we say, too much familiarity often breeds contempt. I answer,
might no longer be preached unto them, and say that the common preaching of the
Gospel makes it to be contemned. If this were so, yet the fault is not in the
word, but in such as are of the common sort of Christians, who care not which
end goes forward, whether they have the word, or Sacraments, or prayers, or
Churches, or religion, or Christ himself, they do not greatly regard, neither
trouble themselves much with these things: but as Gallio answered the Jews
touching the worship of God, and salvation by Christ, Act. 18. Act. 18, 14.1^
If it were a matter of wrong or wi^c^ed lewdnes, reason would that I should
bear with you: but if it be a question of words, and names, and of your law,
look ye to it, for I will be no Judge of such matters. So do these men deal
with God and his people touching the chief mysteries of Christian religion,
and the high ordinances of God appointed for our salvation, they esteem them
as frivolous and superfluous things that might well be spared. They regard
nothing but the matters that concern this present life, and serve to fill the
pursse, and to feed the belly. But as God has dealt bountifully with us, so he
would have the word of the kingdom preached in season and out of season by his
Ministers, 2 Timothy 4, ^ Col. 3, 16.
and he would have it dwell plentifully in all that are hearers, that they
might be richly furnished with the knowledge of it. And the more we know it,
the more we will respect it and reverence it: and the deeper we search into it,
the farther we shall be from the contempt of it, and the more we shall learn
to magnify it and the author of it. So it is in the Sacraments, if once we
know the virtue and value of them, we shall esteem them according to the
dignity and worthiness of them. True it is indeed, that ouer-common use of
temporal things breeds contempt, because the nearer we come unto them, and
the more familiar we are with them and they with us, the more we see the
imperfections of them, and the less we see in them to admire them: but the
nearer we come to spiritual things, the more we behold the excellency, and
glory, and goodness of them. Even as it is in things that are visible before our
eyes, the nearer we are unto them, the greater they seem, but the farther they
be distant, the less they do appear: so the more we are conversant with
heavenly things and have them continually before us, the greater respect we
will have of them, and the more excellent they will seem unto us: whereas the
farther they are removed from us, and we from them, the less we will account
of them, and they will seem very small to our sight. Would we then be in love
with the word and Sacraments? and have a reverent account of them? Let us come
oftentimes unto them, and never think our estate and condition better, then
when we are partaking of the one or the other. Neither let us fear by our
often drawing near unto them to run into the open contempt of them: for
whether we do consider the honor of the place where we meet, or the reverence
of the person before whom we appear, or the worthiness of the mysteries
whereof we partake, or the danger of the judgments which we incur by our
carelessness and negligence, all these are able to preserve us from a society
and loathing of the Sacraments, and are sufficient to bring us to have a good
stomach to them, as the hungry man has to his meat, and thirsty man to his
drink.

The sixth objection.
Thus much we have to say against those cauillers: now we come to another sort
that pretend they have a great desire to come to the Lords Table; they say they
are so far from loathing it that they earnestly long after it, howbeit their
often infirmities and manifold imperfections do discourage them. Their measure
of faith and grace is so little, that they are afraid of coming unworthily,
and therefore they think it better to stay until they may be better prepared.
Mat. 12, 20.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench,
till he send forth judgment unto victory. Thus ought it to be with us we must
by all good means nourish good things in those that are weak in grace, and not
altogether destitute of grace: as we must warn them that are unruly, so we
must comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, 1 These. 5, 14.
and be patient toward all men. To this end and purpose I would have them
observe these four conclusions. First, that the feeling of the want of grace,
with grief for that want, is grace. For such as are altogether grace-les and
faith-les, do not find at any time any defect of grace and faith in
themselves. The step to true spiritual riches is to feel our own poverty,
Mat. 5, 3.
and such Christ pronounces to be blessed. Then are we righteous before God,
Hier. lib. 1 cen^. Pelag.
when we acknowledge our selves to be unrighteous. The beginning of perfection
is to know our selves to be imperfect. August. ad simplici.
If we be grieved inwardly because we cannot pray, we do thereby pray indeed:
forasmuch as our sighs and sobs, the groans and gripings of the perplexed
heart, have the force and effect of prayer it self, and therefore the Apostle
says, The Spirit helps our infirmities for we know not what we should pray
as we ought, Romans 8, 26.
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with gronings which cannot
be v^tered. The second point is diducted out of the former, which is, that no
man must please himself in his own wants, and nourish the weakness that is in
himself. For albeit ^od condemns no man for his wants, neither withholdeth
his graces from him for his imperfections, yet he must not make much of the^,
nor delight in them, nor think himself the better for them, but rather with
might and maine strive against them, and crave a supply of them. Mat. 11, ^5
God reuealeth the knowledge of the Gospel to the simple, howbeit no man should
please himself in his simplicity: he makes known the mysteries of his
kingdom to Babes) howbeit no man must rejoice in his own infirmities, nor
purpose with himself to continue in them.

The third meditation must be this, that it is a dangerous tentation of Satan
against our souls, when he councelleth and persuades any man to withdraw
himself from the Communion for want of grace, if he have any in sincerity,
albeit it be the least measure, albeit it be but as a grain of mustard-seede.
The Lord regards the truth of grace, more then he does the measure of it: and
if there be in us a ready and willing mind, 2 Cor. 8, 12.
he accepts us according to that which we have, not according to that which
we have not. This Supper of Christ was iustituted for the weak, not for the
strong: for the poor, not for the rich: for the hungry, not for the full: for
the sick, not for the whole: forasmuch as the Sacrament is as physic to cure
him, as balm to refresh him, as a salve to heal him, as wine to cheer him,
as bread to strengthen him, and as a staff to stay him. Shall any reasonable
man then reason so unreasonably and absurdly* that he will not eat, because he
is hungry? that he will not drink, because he is thirsty? that he will admit
no plaster, because he is wounded? that he will not take physic, because he
is sick and diseased? that he will not stay himself with his staff, because
he is ready to fall? If we all see this to be a foolish consequence, what
vanity or rather impiety is it to yield to this false conclusion, which is no
better then a devilish tentation, that because we are weak in grace, therefore
we will not come to the Sacrament to receive strength of grace, and increase of
faith? whereas we ought to reason thus within our selves: I feel mine own
infirmities, and know how weak my faith, my hope, my love, my repentance, and
all the rest of the graces of God are in me, I will therefore repair with all
diligence to the Supper of the Lord, which he has appointed for the increasing
and strengthening of all good things in me. The last point necessary for us to
consider is this, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, and to
redeem them that were lost, that is, such as feel themselves to be sinners,
and know themselves to be as lost sheep going astray, and desiring to return
unto the shepherd and Bishop of their souls, 1 Pet. 2, 25. True it is, God
requires that we should come unto him as well furnished with grace, and
replenished with faith as may be, yet he will reject none that presents
himself before him with any grace, albeit he have never so little a measure,
provided that these two cautions and conditions be observed, that the faith and
grace be true and sound, not in show and appearance only: Secondly, that there
be in him an endeavor and striving for more grace and a greater faith. But if
we think we have enough and need no more, we have just cause to suspect our
selves that we never as yet knew what true grace means. To conclude then, we
must understand that it is not the weakness of grace which is here reproved
and rejected, but the contempt of grace; not such weakness of faith as is in
the faithful, but such contempt of grace as was in the profane heart of Esau,
who sold his birthright and contemned the blessing, Genesis 25. Genesis 25.34.


The next objection that these sluggards use is, The seventh objection.
that they say the Sacrament is as physic to purge and cleanse the soul: and
therefore as it is not good to take physic often, so it is not good to take
the Sacrament often. Surely these are Physicians of no value, that cannot
discern a difference between physic for the body and physic for the
soul. It is dangerous to the body to be evermore purging and taking of pills,
which give no nourishment to the body, but take away good humors as well as
bad. It is not so with the Supper of the Lord, it contains holy and wholesome
nourishment in it, through the ordinance of God, and can never deprive us of
any good gift and grace of the soul. Besides, we are daily sick in soul,
not in the body: and therefore we have often need to seek remedy for our
sicknesses and infirmities. Furthermore, all physic to the taste of the body
is bitter, and grievous, and loathsome: it is not so with this physic, it is
most sweet and pleasant to the soul, and rejoices the heart of every true
believer. This comparison therefore is not to be urged farther then the point
wherein it may be compared, namely, that as they that are weak and sickly use
the means and remedy of physic to very good purpose, eue^ for the recovery
of strength and health: so whenever we find in our selves spiritual
diseases to abound, and weakness of faith to assail us, we must have recourse
to this Sacrament to confirm and strengthen us in the promises of salvation.
The meaning then is not that as physic is best when it is sildome taken, so
the Sacrament is best taken when it is sildome taken. For as this Supper is
truly called spiritual meat for us, because as meat feeds the body, so the
Supper of the Lord nourishes the soul: yet we cannot conclude from hence that
we should as often receive it as we receive our meat: In like manner, when it
is resembled fitly to physic, the which being rarely taken, works most
effectually, we may not conclude that therefore the more sildome the Sac^ament
is received, the greater fruit it will bring unto us, for then we conclude
against our selves, and stretch the similitude farther then the purpose and
intent of it.

The eight objection.
The next objection which I will touch is, that some say, a man by sildome
receiving shall be the better prepared when he does receive: whereas if he
shall presume to come often, he cannot be so advised as he ought, neither so
thoroughly examine himself as he might by continual exercising of himself in
this work. I answer, Adams figge-leaues patched together to cover their shame.
These may be fitly compared to idle and slothful Ministers, who to excuse
their negligence in preaching, allege for themselves, that the more sildome
they preach, the more learned and profound Sermons they make, and the better
they shall be prepared and furnished to speak to the people.

Now as they deal with the people, so do the people deal with them. As they
sow sparingly, so the people reap sparingly, hear sparingly, and receive
sparingly. A careless ministry makes a careless people. But as this color
of fitting himself the better shall not excuse the Minister in his negligence,
^ Tim. 4.2.
if he preach not in season and out of season: so it shall not be allowed as a
just and lawful defense for the people, to pretend that their sildome
receiving is recompensed by their sufficient preparation when they do come. If
this might be allowed and warranted for a good plea, then the most careless
receivers should be the best receivers: A false plea that the sluggard uses.
and such as come most sildome, should above all others deserve to be most
commended. So touching the rest of the exercises of our religion, it would
follow that such as hear the least, should be the best hearers: they that pray
most rarely, should pray most reverently: and they that resort sildome to the
house of God, should be chiefly commended; all which we know to be contrary to
reason, truth, piety, and religion. If a man were dangerously sick and
required the present help of the Physician, will this patient neglect his
health, and go to him at his own leisure, under color of coming better
furnished and prepared to tell him what his disease is? Or will he not rather
make all the have he can that he may the sooner have help? We are all of us as
sick men, we have many sins as noisome diseases that hang about us and beset
us on every side, Romans 6, 23.
(the least whereof are mortal) if they be not cured by the precious blood of
Christ: shall we then delay to go to the Physician of our souls under pretense
of giving him better information of our estate? and laying open our sins more
thoroughly before him? Surely we do herein much deceive our selves, while we go
about to deceive others and think to make them believe that we desire nothing
more then to come thoroughly prepared to this Sacrament, to which end let us
mark these few points following. First we must know, that he which will not be
fit to day, shall find himself less fit to morrow, his heart will more and
more be hardened, and custom will turn into another nature, and continuance in
any thing brings a resolution of the heart not to give over. Whosoever he be
that begins not to remove his corruptions speedily which keep him from
being prepared, shall see it much more difficult every day then other; whereas
contrariwise, he that receives often shall be the more fit to receive. For how
vain a thing is it for any to persuade themselves that by delaying their
repentance, they shall repent the better? or by delaying to take physic, they
shall be healed the better? or by suffering a disease to grow dangerous upon
them, they shall be recovered and restored to health the sooner? Thus much for
answer to this objection. Let us proceed. For albeit truth be one, yet error
is manifold, and the bypath of it have no end. The ninth objection.
Some others object that the Jews received the Passover but once a year,
Exodus 12, 18. Leuiticus 22, 5. In the foureteenth day of the first month at
even is the Lords Passover. Now the Passover of the Jews and the Supper of
the christians is in substance the same, howsoever in outward rites they
differ: therefore seeing they killed the Paschall Lamb once only in the
year, and then did eat it: why should it not suffice us to take the Supper of
the Lord once in the year and eat of it? I answer, Reasons why we ought
oftten-times to communicate.
to the end the death of Christ and his passion should be ofttentimes
remembered, that our faith should be strenghened, that the name of God should be
praised, and that mutual love among us might be professed. Hence it is, that
the Apostle does make mention of often eating this bread, and often drinking of
the cup of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11, 24.25.
1 Cor. 11. This do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me: for as often
as ye eat this bread and drink this cup* ye do show the Lords death till he
come. But these men would not care if the remembrance of the death of Christ
were quite buried and utterly forgotten, and would not have the Sacrament of
his Supper to be over common in use: whereas doubtless they are all enemies to
the sufferings of Christ, that are enemies to the often remembering of his
sufferings, which is done in this Sacrament. True it is, they would be loath to
be so censured, and will be ready to tell us that their life consists in his
death, and their salvation in his passion, but it skilleth not what they
pretend, forasmuch as they do deceive themselves and bar themselves from all
comfort to be received that way. The tenth objection.
And hereby appears the answer to another objection, which is just of the
same nature and stamp with the former. For what need we say they, such
frequent and ordinary use of the Supper, seeing the Lord administered it once
only in all his life. Now if there had bin such a necessity to have it so
common, no doubt he would have administered it oftentimes in the year, and so
have commended it by his own example, and left it as a direction unto us. I
answer, they would make arbitrary, and not of necessity. These will seem to
be very good Christians, and to look for salvation by the death of Christ, yet
notwithstanding they cannot abide the often use of that Sacrament which puts
us in mind of his death. But let us know and bear this away with us, that the
more we have a feeling of the fruit and benefit of his death, the more we will
have a desire to do this in remembrance of him: 1 Cor. 11, 25.
and contrariwise the less we find profit by the death of Christ, and the
more hard we find our hearts to be, the less we will desire to come to his
Table. The comfortable feeling of the great work of our redemption wrought for
us, will make us so long to eat of this bread and drink of this cup, as the
hungry soul does for meat to slake and satisfy his hunger. And therefore the
Apostle lays before us both the common and the continual use of it. For as
we must eat this bread and drink of the cup of the Lord until he come again
to judgment, so likewise must we do it oftentimes, because his death is
oftentimes to be remembered, and the mercy of God toward us to be praised and
commended. And if we would consider the zeal and forwardnes of the former
times, and compare it with the dulnes, and backwardnes, and coldness of these
men, that would be accounted Christians no less then they; we shall find as
great a difference and contrariety between them, as between heaven and earth.
For the first and ancient Christians never assembled together to hear the
word, but withal they did receive the Supper, as appears in the Acts of the
Apostles, and the writings of Iustine Martyr and Tertullian. As for the example
of Christ, he administered it no oftener, because he did not institute it before
his death, to the end we should know it came in place of the Passover, and
that it might be the more regarded and the better remembered of us, being the
last pledge of his love left unto the Church. The 11. objection.
Another objection which some use to justify their sildome resorting to the
Sacrament is this, that they have very urgent occasion, and that it is not fit
or decent they should come at al times when others do. Christ our Savior has
appointed it to be common both to men and women: but you shall hear many men
allege for themselves as some have done to me: that their wives are sick, or
lie in, and that they purpose to come hereafter with them. Likewise ye shall
meet with many women, that will pretend that their husbands are from home, or
not in health, but at their return or recovery, they purpose to come with
them. Thus they post off the matter particularly, and think they have spoken
wisely, and defended themselves very strongly. The 12. objection.
which I will touch is this, that many ignorant souls say for themselves when
they are told of their negligence and wretchfulnes, They hope they do well,
they bear as good a soul to God as the best of them all, they thank God they
love their Church and say their prayers duly; but indeed they were not wont to
receive their maker so often, they come at Easter as their honest neighbors
do, and they thank God they never missed. These are they that ever stand at
one stay, silly women which are ever learning, and are never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy 3, 7.
Where ye left them, there ye shall find them: they will do that which they
were wont to do: ye shall find them I warrant you evermore the same. They were
wont to bow down to stocks and stones: they were wont to go on pilgrimage to
this and that Saint: they were wont to worship a piece of bread: will they
therefore do so still? will they be as ignorant as they were before? Let them
not tell us what they were wont to do, but let them learn what they ought to
do. This objection is the same in effect with the ninth, pretending that the
Paschall Lamb was offered once only in the year, so these would tie it only
to the time of Easter: saving that they stand besides upon their blind
custom, that for-sooth they were ever wont to come at Easter, and at no time
besides, yet they thank God they have sped as well as the best, and never
received hurt by it, and that now they would be loath to change their custom.
But Christ Jesus, from whom thou look for salvation says, I am the truth:
he never says, I am custom. John 14.
Evil customs are better changed then observed. The light is now come into
the world, knowledge is discovered as the noone day; let not us shut our eyes
that it should not shine upon us, remembering the saying of the Apostle, when he
exhorts the Idolatrous Athenians to forsake their Idolatry and to turn to
the living God, Act. 17. Act. 17.30.
The times of this ^gnorance God wincked at, but now commands all men every
where to repent. Albeit then we have lived and bin led blindly and ignorantly,
let it be sufficient that we have spent the former course of our life in
superstition, and after the traditions of our forefathers without all
understanding, and let us walk as children of the light, being ready to learn
what is the good and acceptable will of God. There are many that will say they
hate the popish religion, who notwithstanding clean to popish customs, and
will by no means depart from them. They thank God they are no papists, and
yet they lean too much to their relics and rags that they have left behind
them. Let not us make much of their rotten trash that is not worth taking up,
but let us know that we have a sure word of the Prophets and Apostles whereunto
we must attend, and by which we must direct all our ways. This is the rule of
our faith; this is the line and level to square our actions: if we prefer
our own bad and blind customs before the word of the Lord, what wisdom can
there be in us, or how can we be assured to please God? Thus we have run over
and answered the foolish and frivolous objections, that carnal minded men
allege in defense of their negligent coming to the Communion of the body and
blood of Christ. Christ himself is ready to entertain us as his friends, to
inuit us as his guests, to command us as his servants to come to his Table:
let us then make conscience of this duty, and not bring this curse upon our
selves, to exclude our selves from his Sacrament and from his presence.
Excommunication is the greatest and highest censure of the Church, which as a
sharp sword cutteth off offenders from the Church, casts them out from the
communion of the faith-ful, and puts out from among them: but these careless
persons that regard not to be present at the partaking of this Supper, do
banish themselves from the City, and excommunicate themselves from the Church
of God. They do willingly and wilfully cast out themselves, and cut themselves
off from the society of his people. To conclude this point, let all such
slothful and sluggish persons take heed, they do not exclude themselves from
this comfortable Sacrament, under what pretense soever it be, least they be in
the number of those that draw back unto perdition, of who^ the Lord
pronounces, My soul shall have no pleasure in him. These things being thus
rightly waighed and considered, let us make conscience of this duty, and come
chearefully and comfortably to this Table. No man comes unto it, but he
departs better away, if he come as he ought to do. He is filled with good
things, if he have an hand to receive them. No man shall repent of coming unto
it, if he repent of his sins before he come. And when we come often, yet we
should be sorry that we come not more often. It is Christ's commandment, let us
obey it: it is his will, let us do it: it is his counsel let us follow it: and
his commandment, his will, his counsel, is not cumbersome or burdensome unto
us. If he should require at our hands something that were hard or heavy to
flesh and blood, ought we not with chearefulnes to undergo it, seeing he has
made us, and not we our selves; seeing he has redeemed us, and not we our
selves; and seeing he has sanctified us, and not we our selves, so that all
that is in us is the Lords? Howbeit, that which he wills us to do, is not
hard but easy: it is not a burden grievous to be borne, to resort often to his
Supper, but light and pleasing to them that are spiritually minded. It was well
said of Naamans servants to their Master when he turned away in a rage from
the Prophet, My father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
would thou not have done it? How much rather then when he says to thee.
Wash and be clean? 2. King. 5, 12. 2 Kings 5, 12.
So if Christ our Lord and Master should command us to do greater things then
these, and such as were costly to us, ought we not to do them? How much more
then when he says unto us, Mat. 11. Mat 11, 30.
My yoke is easy, my burden is light, and my commandments are not grievous? 1
John 5.3. 1 Ioh. 5, 3.
How much more when he says, Eat O my friends, drink and make you merry O my
beloved, Cant. 5, 1? Cant. 5, 1.
Surely he will do very little for a man, who being solemnly bidden, and
friendly invited to a feast by his neighbor, will not go to his Table, but
scornfully refuse, and churlishly reject both the feast and him that called
him. We cannot think he will do any great thing for us, neither can we make any
great account of his favor and friendship, that will not come to supper unto us
being kindly and courteously entreated. In like manner, what can we assure our
hearts that we will do for Christ, that will not feast with Christ? It is well
said of Cyprian, How will that man drink the cup of Martyrdom for Christ,
that will not drink the cup of salvation with Christ? How will he suffer death
for him, that will not rejoice with him, nor eat and drink in his presence?
Remember therefore that the partaking of this Sacrament is to our great
benefit: he that eats of this bread shall not hunger again: and he that
drinks of his blood shall never thirst again. Remember that he which finds
good by any thing that he does, needs no great inuiting, much less
compelling and enforcing. He needs no law to enforce him, the love of it will
sufficiently allure him. It is enough to compel such as feel no benefit by
it, and have no regard of it. But such as love his last Supper and have felt
the benefit of it, and have tasted the sweetness of this feast, need no
compelling, nor devising of excuses to justify their absence. Remember that
God will not always bear with our contempt, nor put up the wrong that is
offered unto him. He is indeed very patient, and a God of much long suffering:
he is content to warn us oftentimes, and to withold his hand from punishing
of us; but if we abuse his patience, we provoke him to plague us with diverse
judgments. If he send out his messengers, and we refuse to come at the first
call, he may forbear us: or at the second call, he may peradventure bear it at
our hands in hope of repentance: but if we harden our hearts and stop our ears
when he calls, he has passed sentence upon us already, we shall not eat of
his Supper. For when this feast is kept in his Church, Christ himself comes
among them and surueyeth his guests, he looks for us to meet us at his
Table; if he see our places often empty, be sure he will miss us, and ask for
us, and not always suffer it: even as Saul did bear with David's absence the
first day of the feast, and spoke not any thing, 1 Samuel 20, ^^* 27.
but when his room was empty the second day, he held his peace no longer, and
Ionathans excuse served not. God may bear with our dullness and negligence for
a while; but if we be absent from day to day, and can allege no just excuse
for our absence, we may be well assured he will not take it at our hands. For
as a fearful judgment hangs over his head that comes unprepared and
eats unworthily: so is he guilty of judgment that refuses to come at all.
It is not enough to say, we come not unworthily; for as well negligence in not
coming is a sin, as want of reverence in our coming. We cannot be excused
by pleading for our selves, I thank God I am not as many others, I come not
unfitted and unprepared to the Lords Table; I press not in among his guests, I
do not come ignorantly and unworthily, without knowledge, without faith,
without repentance, without assurance of the love and favor of God, without a
sound resolution to live a lively member of Christ, withou meditation of the
benefits of his passion, and without acknowledgement of the greatness of the
mercy showed toward us, by consideration of the greatness of the torment that
was prepared for us: for all this we may do, and yet be condemned for not
coming at all. And let us mark this as the last point and take it as a
farewell, that the cause of all these excuses and colorable pretenses is, the
suffering of some one maister-sinne to reign in us, there is one predominant
or capital sin that thus has the upper hand over us, the which till it be
pulled up by the roots, will ^euer suffer any grace of the Spirit, or duty of
obedience to grow in us. This makes our hearts heavy, and casts us into a
dead sleep, that we cannot hear the voice of God. Let us therefore learn
betimes to prepare our selves by humiliation, by confession, by prayer, and by
bewailing the want or weakness of grace in us, that so judging our selves for
our sins, we may not be judged of the Lord.

CHAP. III. Of the first outward part of the Lords Supper.
HItherto we have showed what the Lords supper is, and how to apply it to our
instruction: now we are to consider in this Sacrament two things, his parts and
his uses: as we have showed in the former books. The parts are partly outward
and partly inward. A man is a compound creature made of flesh and of a
reasonable soul, as Athanasius speaks in his Creed. If the question were
asked, whether man were a mortal creature or immortal, earthly or heavenly,
visible or invisible: no man could rightly answer without a distinction, that
he is earthly touching his body, and heavenly touching his Spirit. In like sort
we must consider touching the Lords Supper, which is made of an earthly and an
heavenly thing: and therefore if the question were demanded touching this
Sacrament, whether it be an earthly or heavenly thing, we may answer it is
both, and must resolve that in part it is earthly, and in part heavenly:
earthly in the sign, and heavenly in the matter that is signified. Let us
understand this well, and acknowledge the diverse natures and parts of it. There
had never risen so great division and confusion in the Church touching the
Sacrament, if this distinction had been well observed. The ignorance of this
point has bred much strife and debate: for whilst some judge of it according
to the inward thing, and some according to the outward only, the truth of the
Lords Supper has been buried in silence: both sorts forgetting that the
providence of God and his loving kindness did abase it self unto our
capacity, not only yielding words to our ears, but visible signs to our
eyes, whereby he would exhibit to our faith spiritual things. The outward
part is one thing, the inward part is another thing: the outward is taken in at
the mouth, the inward by the inward man: the outward is turned into the
nourishment of the body, the inward works in us to eternal life: the outward
is taken by some to their destruction, but the inward always to salvation.
This appears evidently by the words of the Apostle delivering to the Church
what he had received of the Lord, and declaring how the same night he was
betrayed, He took bread, and 1 Cor. 11, 23 22, 25 Mat 26, 26. 28, 29.
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take ye, eat ye, this is
my body, which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me. After the
same manner also, He took^ the cup when he had supped, saying, This cup is the
new testament in my blood, this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.
In these words we see, both the outward parts propounded, and the number of
them defined and determined. For here are Four outward parts of the Lords
Supper.
four outward parts handled, to wit, the Minister, the words of institution,
the bread and wine, and the Communicants. The first Minister thereof was
Christ: the words of institution are, This is my body given for you, this is
the cup of the new testament in my blood: the signs are bread and wine: the
first Communicants were the Apostles. So then the Ministers must do that which
Christ did, and the people that which the Disciples did: the actions of Christ
are directions to the Minister, the actions of the Apostles are directions to
the people.

I am not ignorant that it seems hard and harsh to some, to make the Minister
and receiver of the Sacrament to be parts thereof. I am not willing to contend
about words and names where we agree in the substance of the matter, forasmuch
as every one confesses that these two are outward things, which being wanting,
there can be no Sacrament. Again, I have declared in the first book, and the
fourth chapter, in what sense I call them parts, to wit, because the Minister
stands in the place of God, and his outward actions do represent the inward
actions of God the Father, as is farther proved in the 8. chap. of this book:
and the receiver does nothing in receiving, in eating, and in drinking, but it
has his inward signification, as we may see in the 11. chap. following.

Lastly, I would have the indifferent reader understand that I say no more then
others of the learned have said before me in other words, howbeit in the same
meaning; who make two kinds of signs, the one elementall, the other rituall:
the one in the matter, the other in the form. The signs elementall in this
Sacrament are the bread and wine: the signs rituall are the giving and taking
of the elements, which are the proper actions of the Minister and of the
receiver. Whether therefore you call the Minister and the receiver signs or
parts, or outward things, it is not greatly material, so that we confess and
join together in this, that the outward actions performed as well by the one
as the other, have a relation to some other thing resembled by them.

Let us then see the actions of Christ. He took bread, he blessed, he brake
the bread, he poured out the Wine, he distributed and delivered them both.
Wherefore the actions and works of the Minister are Four actions of the
Minister.
fourfold. First, to take the bread and wine into his hands after the example
of Christ, who did it to show that himself willingly gives himself for his
Church, which serves to strengthen our faith and persuasion of his love toward
us: in whose imitation the Minister does it, to represent the action of God the
Father, giving his Son unto us for our full redemption. The second action is
blessing and giving of thanks, that is, by prayer, by thanksgiving, and by
rehearsal of the promises of God, together with the institution of Christ,
actually to separate the bread and wine so taken from their common use to an
holy use. Whereby we are given to understand, that the outward creatures are
reverently to be used, calling upon the name of God, and craving his assistance
to use his ordinance as we ought to do: and that we should joyfully praise God,
for the gracious work of our full redemption by Christ.

The third action is breaking the bread and pouring out the wine, which are
necessary rites to be observed, having respect and relation to the unspeakable
torments of Christ for us, who was pierced, crucified, and made a curse for us
upon the Cross, Psalm. 22, 16. Esaias 53*5.
as the Prophet teaches, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken
for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. Wherefore, these Sacramental rites of breaking and
pouring out are not to be rejected and omitted, being used by Mat. 26, 26. Act.
2, 42. 1 Cor. 10, 16.
Christ, practiced by his Apostles, and retained by the Churches. Not as in the
Church of Rome, where they break not to distribute to the people, neither
pour out the wine to give unto them, as we shall show at large in the end of
this chapter.

So then, we see that whole bread is not to be delivered, but that the bread is
to be broken, and the wine to be poured out, to be distributed among sundry
Communicants. The last action of the Minister, is to distribute the bread and
wine and give them into the hands of the people present. Christ did not offer
them up to God, but delivered them to his Disciples. All these being works to
be done and performed by the Minister in the administration of this Sacrament,
do note out the actions of God the Father, scaling up his Son unto us, as we
shall see afterward when we come to the inward parts.

Rome teaches and practices. They are commanded as Ministers of God to
deliver the outward signs to the people, not as Priests to offer them to God
the Father: they are appointed Preachers of the Gospel, not Priests of the
law: which were to abolish the Priesthood of Christ. Wherefore, we must
detest the blasphemy of these shameless shauelings, Stella Clericorum se^dis.
Sermon. 3.
that teach the Priest to be the maker of his maker, and that he which made
them, Cre^tura vobis mediantibus vobis.
gave them power and authority to make him, and so after a sort prefer
themselves being the sacrificers, before Christ who is the Sacrifice:
themselves being the creators, before Christ the creature: themselves the
makers, before Christ being made of them. Thus these sacrificing Priests are
not ashamed to speak, and to bray aloud.

Secondly, if the Minister be an outward part of this Sacrament, then it
belongs not Number. 3, 10. Heb. 5, ^.
to private persons to deliver Two objections answered, pretending that private
me^ may deliver the Supper.
two things of importance may be objected, which I purpose to prevent before I
proceed any farther. For first, this doctrine seems not to agree with that
maxim and principle, which before we have resolved upon, namely, Accedat
verbum ad elementum, and fit Sacramentum, that is, Join the word of
institution to the outward sign, and there is made a Sacrament: Secondly, it
seems to leave sick persons without comfort in their hearts and peace to
themselves, if for want of a public Minister, themselves may not supply that
want, and give unto themselves this Supper. These are the two objections,
pretending and intending that private persons may at some times, upon some
occasions, have some right and interest in dispensation of the Sacraments.
Touching the former point, being a ruled case of Saint Augustine, Aug. Tract.
80. in Johan. 13
that if the sign be annexed to the word, a Sacrament is ordained, we doubt
not to affirm the rule undoubtedly to be true, being truly and rightly
understood. For the meaning is, if there be an outward sign which is the
matter, and a word of institution which is the form of the Sacraments,
Aristot. metaphys l^b. 7. cap. 7.
the essence of them is fully finished, as if there be the matter and form of
an house, we conclude rightly there is an house. Howbeit we presuppose there
was a builder of the house to prepare the matter and to order the form. So the
former principle does presuppose a Minister to deliver, and a receiver to
receive the Sacrament: otherwise we shall also war under the ensign of our
enemies unawares, who hold it to be the Supper of the Lord, Bellar. lib 4. de
Eu^b. cap. 2. con^t. Tr^d. f^ss. 13. can. 4, 7.
albeit there be no eating, no drinking, no receiving thereof. If therefore in
the constitution of a Sacrament, the institution of Christ, touching taking,
eating, and drinking, must be observed: then we see that more is required then
the sign and the word in the work of the Sacrament.

Again, touching the objection of the sick, who seem to be wholly left in
distress and discomfort, if they may not lawfully administer the Supper to
themselves, or receive it at the hands of some private persons: I answer, it
was an ancient practice of the Beza quaest. and resp d. Sacr.
Church to carty the Sacrament unto the sick when it was administered in the
Church: besides, albeit in extremity of sickness the Minister be wanting, we
leave not the sick without counsel and comfort. For this we teach, this we
are ready to maintain, this we would have all believers in health and in
sickness to recall and remember; that if they steadfastly believe that the Lord
Jesus has suffered death upon the Cross for them, if they particularly apply
unto themselves his precious merits for their redemption, if they earnestly
remember the benefits of his bitter passion with all thanksgiving, and if they
truly repent them from the bottom of their hearts of al their sins: they do
eat and drink effectually, Ioh. 6, 54, 55 56, 57, 58.
and to their souls health profitably the body and blood of Christ our
Savior, although they do not receive the Sacrament with their mouth. If they
do not thus the Sacrament received cannot profit them. This serves to comfort
the weak, and to keep them within the lists and limits of their proper
calling.

Lastly, seeing the former actions of the Minister are done plainly in the
sight of all, it is the duty of every one to give diligent heed, and to have
weighty consideration of these outward ceremonies, by the meditation thereof to
confirm their faith and to make the outward works to further the inward
graces. For they are offered to our senses, not that we should rest in them,
but that our weakness by them should be helped, and we by them lift up our
hearts to think upon greater things.

This serves to reprove those that omit the breaking of the bread, and
delivering of it being broken, into the hands of the Communicants. True it is,
some make too much of the breaking of the bread, others esteem too little of
it, and both sorts are to be reproved, and a middle course between them both
is to be retained.

One sort much more straight and rigorous then is meet, The first opinion.
offend in the excess, who make the breaking of bread to be simply necessary
and an essential part of the Supper, as that without it there can be no
Sacrament. The reason whereupon they build, is the title given to this
Sacrament, that it is called the breaking of bread, and this breaking of the
bread is said to be the Communion of the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10, 16.
Objection.
1 Cor. 10.16. From whence they reason thus, The bread broken is the Communion
of the body of Christ. Therefore the bread unbroken, is not the Communion of
the body of Christ. a man is not a sound man, and such a body is not a perfect
body: so it will only follow that the Sacrament is not an entire but a maimed
Sacrament where the bread is not broken. Wherefore these men do great wrong to
many reformed Churches which have not yet this ceremony among them, while they
dare pronounce that they have no Supper at all, because they are destitute of
this rite: which judgment of theirs sauoureth of the want both of verity and
charity. The second opinion.
Another sort offend on the contrary side, to wit, in the defect, who make this
breaking to be merely indifferent and not necessary: accidental, and not of
the substance. They confess that the Lord Jesus at his last Supper did truly
break bread, but that he did it as a thing indifferent, and according to
ordinary custom. Besides, they affirm that this breaking signifies the
distributing or dividing of the bread to others. But one of these is contrary
to the other, the former overthrows the latter, and the last destroys the
first. For if Christ did truly break bread in his Supper, then it follows
that to break bread in the Supper, is not only to deal the bread, but to
give it into several parts being broken, as he says distinctly, He brake it
and gave it to his Disciples. Mat. 26, 26.
Again, if breaking and distributing be all one, then is not the breaking
which they omit a rite indifferent, but very necessary, forasmuch as the giving
of the Supper to the Communicants is so necessary, that without it there can be
no Sacrament. These therefore are they that overthrow themselves. The third
opinion.
The third opinion is the sounder of such as hold a mean way between both
extremes, that the breaking of the bread is no essential part of the Supper,
neither yet an indifferent ceremony, both which are two dangerous rocks on
which sundry me^ suffer shipwreck: but a necessary ceremony, not as though
without it there were no Supper at all, but as a part serving to perfect the
whole; which wanting, the Supper cease not to be, howbeit it is not entire
and complete. For this rite is not as the head or the heart in man's body,
without which there could be no body, but as the hand or the foot, without
which it is a body, albeit a maimed or a lame body. So likewise touching this
holy Supper, without bread, without blessing, without giving, there can be no
Supper: it is as much as if the head were cut off, or the heart pulled out, or
the brain perished. But without breaking, the Supper remains; albeit maimed
and imperfect, as if the body wanted an eye or an arm. Besides, How the
breaking of the bread is necessary.
it is the will of Christ that this ceremony should be observed: so that it may
be said to be necessary in two respects: first in regard of the making perfect
of the Sacrament: secondly, in regard of the commandment of Christ. Now that
this necessity may appear how great it is, let us consider the reasons,
whereby it is proved that this beaking, where it is, ought to be continued: and
where it is not, ought to be restored. The first reason.
First of all we have the example of Christ, who said of himself, Learn of
me, every action of Christ about the Supper is our instruction. But in the
first institution of the Supper he brake the bread which he had blessed, and
did distribute it to his disciples. Therefore it behooves us to do the like.
The second reason.
The second reason is from the commandment of Christ, Do ye this. And again,
So often as ye shall do this: here is an express precept and a direct
commandment, without this the Sacrament is as a body lame of his limbs. From
hence we reason thus, That which Christ has commanded us to do as well as
blessing and giving, that is necessary to be done: but he has commanded us to
break bread in the use of the Supper as well as to bless it, and give it to
them that are present: Therefore to break bread is necessary and not
indifferent. The third reason is drawn from the example of the Apostles, The
third reason. 1 Cor. 11, 1.
who following Christ are to be followed of us, as 1. Cor. 11. Be ye followers
of me, even as I also am of Christ. Neither did they use this ceremony
according to the custom of the country of Judea, for they used it as well out
of the borders of Judea as in them, as appears in many places, Acts 2.42. and
20.7. 1 Cor. 10. So that they respected nor the custom of the place, but the
commandment of Christ. This is a good precedent for the Churches that profess
the Gospel to follow. Fourthly, the whole Sacrament is called by this name,
The fourth reason.
and has this title given unto it, to be called, The breaking of bread, as we
may see in the places before expressed. Doubtless the Apostles would never
call it thus, if this rite that we speak of were not truly necessary and
Sacramental. The f ft reason.
Fifthly, this mystical rite serves notably to the comfort of our hearts and
the strengthening of our faith, and therefore is not to be omitted, seeing it
shaddoweth out unto us the breaking of the body of Christ, and witnesses that
Christ was as truly broken for us upon the Cross, as the bread that is
blessed is truly broken and divided into pieces; this the Apostle notes,
saying, 1 Cor. 11. Which is broken for you, 1. Cor. 12, 24 Luke 22, 19.
that is, which shall shortly be killed and crucified; according to that which
Luke says, cha. 22. Which is given for you, to wit, unto death, even the death
of the Cross. To take from us and to rob us quite and clean of this comfort
and consolation expressed by breaking of the bread, Break thy bread to the
hungry; he gave it: whereas if they were both one, it should be a needless and
fruite-lesse repetition, which the Scripture uses not. Again, for not a bone
of him was broken. For if Christ's body were broken figuratively, then it is
evident that this b^eaking has a similitude and resemblance with the breaking
of the bread, so that the one holds proportion with the other. Besides, they
confess that by breaking, the Apostle would express the most grievous
torments which our Savior suffered; and the most shameful kind of death
which he endured, as the word is taken elsewhere, as Esaias 38. where Hezekiah
complains that his bones were broken as it were of a Lion. Esaias 38, 13.
Objection.
Again they say farther, If Christ would have his passion represented by this
means, he would not have abrogated the ceremony of the Passover, which beyond
all compassion did more evidently represent the passion of Christ the^ the
bread: otherwise Christ should have abolished a type that was clearer, and have
ordained another that was darker, whereas the new Testament and all things done
in it and belonging to it are compared to the light of the day in respect of
the shadows of the old Testament. Piscat. in Man. cap. 26.
not in regard of the form of the ceremony. For the legal washings did no
less represent in regard of the outward form, the washing away of our sins by
the blood of Christ, then the baptism of the Gospel. So the passion of Christ
and the fruit and benefit of his passion was no less, but rather more
represented by killing of the Paschall Lamb and the eating of it, then by
breaking of the bread and by eating of the bread. If these had bin used in the
time of the law as they are in the time of the Gospel, they had not bin so
significant and pregnant as the slaying of beasts: but the breaking of bread in
the Sunshine of the Gospel and plenty of knowledge revealed to the world,
being a sign of a thing already done, and finished, must needs be more lively
in representation then the killing of sacrifices in the law which were
shadows of things to come, whereas Christ was not yet revealed, nor the
mystery of the Gospel opened. Besides, the words of institution pronounccd in
the Sacraments of the new Testament are clearer and more significant then any
set down in the law, so that Paul says, his Gospel was not hid, 2 Cor. 4, 3.
Gal. 3, 1.
2 Cor. 4, 3. and that Christ Jesus was by his preaching discribed in their
sight, Gal. 3, 1. Lastly, here is produced a false cause of abrogating the
Paschall Lamb in stead of a true. For it was not abrogated by the holy Supper,
because it is a more clear, manifest, and evident type, but because it was
instituted and ordained to continue, until Christ the true Lamb of God
figured by it was killed. When he was once crucified, the other killing must
cease and give place: forasmuch as his blood had force to stanch all other
blood which was wont to be shed both in circumcision and in the sacrifices.
This is my body which is broken for you: so it is said of the cup, This is my
blood which is shed for you for the remission of sins. And what can the
separation of the bread and the cup signify, but the separation of the body
and blood of Christ once made upon the Cross, whereas his blood is now no
longer separated from the body, because he can dye no more? The sixth reason.
Sixthly, that which includes under it the mystery of the union of the Church
among themselves and with Christ the head, is by no means to be passed over.
But the breaking of bread has this mystery in it, that many by partaking of
one bread broken, are made one mystical body, as the Apostle witnesses, 1
Cor. 10, 17.
We being many, are one bread and one body: for we are all partakers of that
one bread, which he declared to be broken in the former verse. The unity
between the members of the Church which are many, is shaddowed out by the
bread made and compact together of many grains: howbeit this is much more
evident unto us by the bread which is broken and distributed to all that are
present. Seauenthly, we have the express testimony of the Apostle, The bread
which we break, etc. The seventh reason.
Now that is to be judged necessary to be done, without which we cannot say
with the Apostle in the administration and participation of the Supper, The
bread which we break is the communion of the body of Christ: but without this
ceremony we cannot join with the Apostle and say, The bread which we break,
is the communion of Christ's body: Therefore the rite of breaking and parting
the bread into many pieces is necessary. They may say, the bread which we give
or distribute, but not the bread which we break: for to break is one thing,
and to distribute is another. These two differ so far the one from another,
that a thing may be broken which is not distributed and given; and it may be
given which is not broken. Eighthly, The eight reason.
that which fitly serves to make the Sacrament perfect and absolute, whole and
entire, may not be neglected or omitted; and where it is not, it ought to be
restored. But the breaking of bread makes the Sacrament instituted of Christ
to be more full, and without it to be maimed, as a man without an hand.
Therefore it ought to be restored again.

Ninthly, The ninth reason.
it is in the power of no creature to omit or abolish any rite not in it self
indifferent, but commanded by Christ in the celebration of his Supper. But the
breaking of bread is not indifferent to be done or to be left undone, but is
expressly commanded to be practiced, as we have proved before. Therefore no
man under heaven has authority to abrogate it. For this is a true and certain
rule, that a right having the commandment of Christ for the use of it to be
continued is not indifferent. Tenthly, it gives us peace of conscience. The
tenth reason.
Now that which sets the conscience at quiet and does more effectually
minister comfort in the use of this Supper, that is by no means to be
neglected. But the due observation of this breaking according to the
commandment of Christ does quiet the conscience and comfort the heart more
forcibly and fruitfully, inasmuch as it assures us that we keep the ordinance
of Christ purely and entirely, without adding any thing unto it, or without
taking any thing from it: Therefore it is not to be passed over. The 11. reason.
Lastly, to draw to an end, that ceremony ought to be retained and continued in
the Church, whereby the Idolatrous and false opinion of the corporal presence
and eating of the body of Christ, is most strongly convinced and pulled out of
the hearts of the ignorant people: but such is the ceremony of the breaking of
bread. Therefore it ought to be practiced, that the Idol set up in the hearts
of the multitude may be defaced and pulled down. This carnal and corporal
presence profits not, as we will make plain afterward. Thus we have heard the
reasons which urge and require this as a necessary duty belonging to the
Minister to break the bread, a duty neglected not only of the Church of Rome,
but also of others, who maintaining a real presence of the body of Christ,
omit the breaking of the outward sign. In all this that hitherto has bin
observed, we may note three things. First, that we do not condemn our brethren
or the Churches who have not this breaking of the bread observed among them,
whether it be through error conceived, or any other let and impediment
objected. Secondly, the defect of this rite cannot destroy, albeit it do
disfigure the Supper, it is as a maime in an whole body, or as a scarre in a
fair face. Lastly, that this ceremony is not to be holden indifferent, but
necessary in respect of Christ's commandment, and necessary to preserve the
comlines and beauty in this Sacrament.

CHAP. IIII. Of the second outward part of the Lords Supper.
HItherto of the first outward part of the Lords Supper, to wit, the Minister,
who is in the Church not only as a Steward to provide, but as a Cook to
prepare meat for the children and servants of God: now we come to the word of
institution The words of institution are the second outward part of the Supper
and promise annexed or contained therein, which are the second part of this
Sacrament, expressed in these words, This is my body which is given for you, or
which is broken for you: where the name of the thing signified is given to the
sign it self, as if it should be said, this bread which I have in mine hands,
is Tertul cont. Marcio lib. 4. August contr. Ad^m ^n. ca. 12.
a sign of my body, which shortly after shall be crucified for you, and
delivered unto death for your salvation. Christ took nothing but bread: he
gave into his Disciples hands nothing but bread to eat, he brake nothing but
bread: and Paul says expressly of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10, 16 Objection.
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? If
any object that Christ's body neither is, Ioh 1^, 36. Answer.
nor was broken, as Job. 19, 36. Not a bone of him shall be broken, that the
Scripture should be fulfilled: I answer, the Apostle has respect to the
sense and signification which the breaking of the bread imports, being taken
for the tearing and tormenting, the pains and renting of the body of Christ,
and the violent sundring of his soul and body one from the other. For as the
bread is parted and divided into diverse parts: so the soul and body of Christ
were sundred and separated each from other. Again, it is said, This is my
blood of the new testament which is shed for many for the remis^^^ of sins,
or, This cup is the new testament in my blood which is shed for you: these
speeches are Sacramental, not proper, by the confession of the adversaries
themselves, where the thing containing, which is the cup, has the name of
the thing contained, which is the wine the fruit of the vine. So then they
which cannot abide figures in the Sacrament, must be constrained to confess a
figure, and therefore cannot blame us, when we say the words are figuratively
to be understood.

But before we come to handle the uses of this part, let us briefly consider
the words of Christ delivered at the institution and administration of this
Sacrament, that so we may see the true and natural meaning thereof. These
words The words of institution are variably set down.
are not recorded and reported in so many words in the scripture, or in so many
sillables, but the sense being one, the sentence varieth and is not one. Matthew
delivers the words thus, Mat 26, 26.
Take, eat, this is my body, whereunto Mar. 14, 22.
Mark also accords. Luke is somewhat more ample by way of interpretation,
Luke 21, 19.
This is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. And 1
Cor. 11, 14
Paul to the like purpose, but in unlike sound of words, Take, eat, this is my
body which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise touching
the other sign of this Supper, Matthew says, Mat. 16, ^8.
This is my blood of the new testament, that is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. Mark is somewhat more short then the rest, Mar. 14, 23.24.
This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many: but he adds
this more then the rest, they all drank of it. Luke says, Luke 22 20.
This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you. But Paul
declares the same more at large, This cup 1 Cor. 11, 25
is the new testament in my blood, this do as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me.

Thus we see expressly, a difference in words by adding, by detracting, by
changing: yet inasmuch as nothing is added, or detracted, or changed, in regard
of the true meaning, let us come to the interpretation and exposition of the
words, seeing the Gospel stands not Ierem. (...) cap. 1 ad Galat.
in the words of the Scripture, but in the mind and meaning of them. Let us
therefore come to the right understanding of the words of Chrst. The words of
institution expounded briefly, truly, (...) plainly.
Take, to wit, not only into your mouths, but into your hands, representing the
soul and faith of the receiver. Eat, that is, not gaze and look on, not
reserve, not adore, not offer it, but divide by chewing and preparing to
concoction. This, that is to say, not the shows of bread, but this very bread.
Is my body, that is, a true sign of my true body, and signifies unto you my
self with all that is mine, or belonging either to my person, or office, or
merits. Which is broken for you, that is, which shortly shall be crucified for
you, and immediately given to death for you. Do this in remembrance of me, that
is, practice these duties, and call to remembrance Christ and his merits
oftentimes. So that it is in our choice and liberty to do these duties, or not
to do them: if we be not fit, we must presently prepare to make our selves fit:
and we must do them often, so that howsoever there be no set time, yet the
oftener the better, due reverence and regard being had thereunto. Moreover,
touching the other sign, observe thus much for interpretation. This cup, that
is, this wine in the cup: Is the new testament in my blood, that is, this wine
is a true sign of shedding my blood, which confirms and ratifieth the new
Testament, and Gods agreement with mankind for their salvation.

This is briefly the mind of Christ, and meaning of the Arist. rhetor. ad
theode^t. l^b. 3 cap. 6. C cer. de orat o. lib. 3.
not to darker, but to open: not to hide, but to help the understanding:
howbeit they must have a right construction and a sound interpretation,
otherwise, the plainest sentence may breed error and mistaking. Now this is a
sacramental speech, and sacramental words must be sacramentally expounded, as
proper, must be interpreted properly: spiritual, spiritually; and mystical,
mystically. We may not take the letter in all places: for as we have showed,
the Scripture stands not in words, Hierom. co^. (...) and in Cap. 1. ad Gal.
but in the meaning of the words: not in the reading but in the understanding:
not in the outward show, but in the inward substance. Christ in the new
testament is called a lamine a lion, a way, a bridegroom, a head, a door, a
vine, a g^ (...) a rock, bread, water, light, and such like these words are
(...) and evident, yet must they be understood metaphorically, not properly:
spiritually, not literally. So to come to the words of institution, What did
Christ take in his hand? bread. What did Christ command them to take and eat?
bread. What did he call his body? Was it any other thing then the same bread
which he had taken, which he had broken, which he had given unto them? Neither
is there any other antecedent going before, whereunto it can be referred.

Now the bread and body of Christ are in nature Disparata.
sundry and diverse things, and the one cannot be spoken of the other, and
verified of the other without a figure, as to say, one and the same thing
should be both bread and Christ's body, but if it be bread, it cannot be his
body, if it be his body, it cannot be bread. Wherefore, true bread is a true
sign and seal of his true body. Neither is this figure strange or new, but
common and usual, when mention is made of the Sacraments: as Genesis 17. This is
my covenant, Genesis 17, 10.11.
speaking of circumcision: yet circumcision was not the covenant it self, but
a sign and token of the covenant, as also it is afterward expounded, It shall
be a sign of the covenant between me and you. The adversaries cannot deny a
figure in this speech. Now what difference is there between these two
speeches, This is my covenant, and, this is my body? are they not alike, and in
like manner to be understood? So Exodus 12. It is the Lords Exodus 12, 13 14.
Passover, properly the Lamb was not the Passover, but served to put them in
remembrance of that benefit, and it is expounded after, the blood shall be a
token for you upon the houses where ye are, this day shall be unto you a
remembrance. Likewise the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. That rock 1 Cor. 10, 4.
was Christ, whereas properly the rock was not Christ, but the water flowing
from it did represent him. Thus then we must understand the words plainly,
truly, and briefly, A paraphrase upon the wor^s of institution.
as if Christ had said in this manner, This bread which ye have seen me take,
break, deliver, and distribute, and which I bid you take and eat, is a sign
or Sacrament of my true body, signifying and sealing up unto you, that my body
shall be broken, crushed, and crucified for you, to purchase unto you eternal
life, let these Sacramental rites and actions now performed by me and you, be
hereafter put in practice by you and all faithful Ministers and professors,
for the strengthening of your faith by the remembrance of my death, and by the
applying of the benefit thereof, every one to your own selves. Likewise, having
finished his Supper, when he did eat the Passover with his Disciples, having
taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it being filled with wine to his
Disciples, and said, drink ye all of this, for this wine in this cup is a
sign and Sacrament of my blood, by the shedding whereof, together with my death
following, the full forgiveness of sins and perfect salvation (which I by my
unchangeable will and decree do give unto you and all that believe in me) are
assured to you and all believers. Thus having opened and cleared the
interpretation of the words, we shall hereafter need to spend the less time
in confuting the contrary doctrine: darkness shall fly before the light,
error before truth, and cloudy mists before the Sunshine of the day.

Again, seeing the words of institution are variably and Paul: we learn that
every change of the words where the sense is nothing altered or diminished, is
not to be condemned, as sinful or unlawful: so that the alteration being in
the form and frame of words, not in the substance and sense of the matter, the
Sacrament is not destroyed. For if it had bin an heinous sin to have made any
change or alteration, or to have missed of the terms or sillables of the
institution: no doubt the Evangelists would have consented in the words, and
not have swarued one from another, as appears they have done. We see how the
Apostles in the allegation of sundry places of Scripture borrowed out of the
old Testament, do not evermore strictly bind themselves to the Mat 2, 6.
very words, as Mat. 2. 6. Heb. 10, 5. and in sundry other places: but only to
the sense, and therefore Mat. 4, 10.
sometimes they add as Matthew 4, 10. sometimes they leave out as occasion
serves.

True it is, to alter any substantial part; or to wrest the words to a wrong
and contrary meaning, or not at all to express the sense of the words, makes
the Sacrament void: but an alteration only of certain circumstances, All
change in the w^rds of institution makes not the Sacraments void.
as of number, or person, of Letters or sillables, cannot make frustrate the
whole Sacrament: albeit we allow not any private and particular man to make any
change of his own head in such circumstances, or to bring in a new frame of
words. So in baptism, the Greek Church says, Let the servant of Christ be
baptized in this water, etc. and hereby nothing is detracted from the truth of
the Sacrament, because Christ Jesus has not precisely appointed how many words
the Apostles and Pastors of the Church should use in the execution of their
ministry.

Notwithstanding, the observation of the words, I baptize thee, observed in our
Churches, seems to draw nearer to the commandment of Christ, and to confirm
more fitly and fully the faith of the baptized, and to answer unto the words
of John the Bapt^st, I baptize with water. Likewise in the Lord's Supper,
whereas Christ said, Take ye, eat ye, do ye this, as speaking to many: the
Sacrament is not destroyed, when the words are particularly rehearsed, and
specially applied in our Churches, saying* take thou, eat thou, drink thou.



Notwithstanding, Council. Trid. sess. 22, ca. 9.
the sinagogue of Rome, that it might take away all fruit and comfort from the
faithful, and that it might broch horrible errors safely and securely, and not
be espied, has not only commanded to pronounce the words of consecration
closely and in silence, but forbidden to use the common mother tongue of all
the people. The people of God must not be like Parrots, or Pies, or Ravens, or
such birds that chatter with voice, record men's words, and sound a sentence,
but understand not the meaning thereof. As Pliny Plin* nature. histor. lib. 10.
cap. 43.
makes mention of a certain Raven that had learned to say, Aue Caesar
Imperator, All hail, or good morrow Emperor Caesar, saluting Tiberius and the
two young Princes Germanicus and Drusus. And Celius Rhodiginus writes, Celius
Rhodiginus.
that Cardinal Ascanius had a Popintay, that could pronounce distinctly and
orderly all the Articles of the Creed. Such birds or rather beasts, would they
have Christian men to be, that would have them pray, and not Bellar. lib. 2. de
Missa. cap. 12.
understand what they pray: hear the reading of the Scriptures, but not know
what is read: receive the Sacraments, but not know the meaning of the
institution. Things without life which give a sound, whether Pipe or Harp,
except they make a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is
piped or harped? Or if the trumpet 1 Cor. 14, 7, 8.
give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to battall? All things in
the Church must tend to the instruction and edification of all the parts and
people: but reading and praying in a strange tongue, do not edify and profit
the hearers, as 1 Cor. 14, 26. Let all things be 1 Cor. 14, 5, 11, 12, 1^, 14,
18.19, 26.
done to edifying: and verse 14. I speak languages more then ye all, yet had I
rather in the Church to speak five words with mine understanding, that I might
also instruct others, the^ ten thousand words in a strange tongue: for how then
should he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say, Amen, at thy giving
of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou say? Wherefore, except we know
the meaning of the words, we shall be unto him that speaks a Barbarian,
and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto us. Even the learned languages
of Greek and Latin not in themselves, but in regard of the hearers that
understand them not, are barbarous. For the Apostle does not here like an
Orator distinguish the tongues, and show which are eloquent and rhetorical in
themselves* and which rude: but holds every tongue barbarous, Hebrew,
Syriack, Caldy, Arab ck* Greek, and Latin, to him that knows not the force
and signification thereof. And this to be most true, Psalm. 114.1. Romans 1 14.
the Scriptures teach, Ch^ysost in 1 Cor. 14, hom. 35.
the Fathers avouch, Strabo Geograph. ^ib. 1.
the heathen writers warrant, Plautus. in prolog. asmar. Ovid de Tristib. lib.
5. Eleg. 10.
the very Poets declare, yea their own Doctors Johan Beleth. paris. Theol.
explic. divine: offi. in proemio. Nicol. lyra in 1. Cor. 14. ad verb verse. 16.
Caietan opulcutor. tom. 3. tract. 15.
do determine. Wherefore to conclude, it is the ordinance of God, it is the
doctrine of the Apostles, it is the duty of all Christians, when the word is
read or preached, when supplications are offered, when the Sacraments are
administered, to use a known tongue understood of all: and without this the
Scriptures are vain, the prayers are barbarous, the Sacraments are fruitless,
to such as know not what is read, what is asked, what is promised, what is
received. Nevertheless, there is nothing so absurd, but the Church of Rome
will defend it, especially if it serve to maintain ignorance, one of the maine
pillars of their Antichristian usurpation and of the kingdom of darkness.
Hence it is, that to nuzzle the poor simple souls in the blindness of their
superstition, they tell them that forsooth they pray to God who understands
all languages; and that it suffices to have a good intent and meaning in
prayer, and leave the rest to him who doubtless will accept of it and them.
True it is, God can speak all tongues, he understands them better then they
that speak them: what then? Does it follow therefore that he allows and
approves such prayers? He understands that the Atheist prays not at all:
does he therefore allow his not praying? If we come in hypocrisy or use vain
repetitions, he knows it, but condemns it and detesteth it: so that from
his knowledge we cannot conclude his allowance and acceptance. Neither is it
sufficient to have a devout intent of praying; to pray is to speak to God, not
to intend to speak: neither will God be worshipped by such intentions, but
according to his word. And what reason can they render why the word should be
preached in a known tongue rather then read unto the people in a tongue that
may be understood? Wherefore, whether there be reading of the Scripture, or
praying to God, or singing of Psalms, or receiving of the Sacraments in the
Church, al ought to tend to edification and instruction. And thus far of the
second outward part of the Lords Supper, to wit, the word of institution: for a
Sacrament without the word, is as a picture without sense, or an image without
life, which has a mouth but speaks not.

CHAP. V. Of the third outward part of the Lords Supper.
THe third outward part of the Lords Supper follows, Bread and wine are the
outward signs of the Lords Supper.
which are the elements of bread and wine, fittest signs for this purpose, to
signify the spiritual nourishment of the soul, by eating the body and
drinking the blood of Christ. That these are appointed as the substance and
matte^ of the Supper, it apeareth by the words of Christ, and his Apostles
delivering this Sacra^. For the Evangelists expres, Mat. 26, 26. Mar. 14, 22.
Luke 22, 19. Act. 2, 41, 42. and 20.17. 1 Cor. 10.16.
that Christ took bread, gave it, and said, Take ye, and eat ye. So likewise
it is said of the Church newly planted by the Apostles, that such as gladly
received the word, and were baptized, Continued in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread. And chap. 20. it is recorded, That the first
day of the week, the Disciples came together to break bread. And Paul says,
1 Cor. 10. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? And in the chapter 1 Cor. 11, 23 26, 27, 28.
following, the same Apostle often mentions and remembers the bread of this
Sacrament. In like manner Christ took the cup, Mat. 26, 29.
wherein was the fruit of the Vine. By these Christ is truly exhibited unto
us: he is truly offered unto all: he is effectually given to the faithful, as
has been oftentimes remembered unto us.

But before we come to the uses arising from these signs, any other elements
to be the signs of the Sacrament of his body and blood? I answer, Reasons why
Christ made choice of bread. Genesis 18, 6. Leuit. 2, 4.
as of the grain of wheat is made corporal bread: so of the body of Christ is
made spiritual bread. Secondly, as bread is baked in the Oven by the heat of
the fire: so is the body of Christ heated and boiled by the fire of the Cross,
and thereby prepared for us to be the food of life. Psalm. 81, 16.
Thirdly, as this natural life is sustained by bread: so through Jesus Christ
the bread of life, our souls are nourished to a spiritual and eternal life.
Fourthly, Psalm. 104, 15.
as the heart of man is strengthened and fortified by bread, so the merit of
Christ's body does sustain and support the soul to eternal life. Genesis 18.5.
Fifthly, as bread slaketh the hunger of the body: so the force and efficacy of
Christ's body does assuage and alay the hunger of the soul. Sixthly, as bread
profits such as are hungry, Esaias 58, 7. Prou. 27, 7.
but does no good to them that are already filled and glutted: so the merit of
Christ's body brings a benefit to them only that hunger after righteousness:
but as for such as are proud and puffed up with a conceit of their own
righteousness, it yields no profit at all unto them. 1 Cor. 10, 17.
Seauenthly, as the bread distributed and divided among many is a sign of
unity and concord: so the body of Christ offered up for many upon the Cross;
is a pledge unto us of his love toward us, and of the love that ought to be
among our selves. 1 Cor. 10, 16, 17.
Lastly, as one loaf is made of many grains: so we that are many are become
one mystical body of Christ which are partakers of one bread. Thus we have
seen a similitude and likeness between the properties and effects of bread
and of the body of Christ: Reasons why Christ made choice of wine.
now let us see wherefore Christ used wine, and commanded it to be used after
his own example; why he preferred it before all other things, and what is the
resemblance between it and the blood of Christ. First of all, as wine is the
sweetest liquor proceeding from the Vine: Judge. 9, 13.
so the blood of Christ is the most pleasant drink of the soul that was shed
for us, and flowed out of his side who is the true Vine, Ioh. 15, 1.7.
Secondly, Prou 9, 5.
as wine does quench the thirst of the body: so the merit of Christ's blood does
take away the thirst of the soul, that it shall never thirst again, Ioh. 4.
Thirdly, as wine does cheer up the heart of man: Psalm. 104, 16.
so the promises of Christ do cheer and refresh the soul. Fourthly, Prou. 31,
6.
as wine does warm the body and make it more apt and fit to do business: so
the blood of Christ received by faith does stir up and inflame the soul to
all good motions, and makes us more prompt and ready to every good work.
Fifthly, as wine takes away fearefulnes, Prou. 23, 32.
and causes men to be more bold and secure: so does the blood of Christ
applied to the conscience by faith, assure us of Gods favor, ease us of the
curse of the law, and make us constant in the confession of Christ. Lastly,
Prou. 21, 29* 30.
as wine puts away the palenesse of the face and makes the countenance
shine: so the blood of Christ turns the color of the soul into a comely
hue, which before was pale and wan through fear of death; that is, it quieteth
the conscience, Romans 5, 1.
appeaseth the wrath of God, and makes us gracious before him, so that we
appear righteous and acceptable in his sight.

This being the plain and evident truth, let us see the uses, first such as
concern both the signs jointly and in general, then such as belong to each
of them in several and in particular. To begin, we learn from hence to
acknowledge a difference between baptism and the Lords supper; in baptism we
have one sign as the material part, in the Supper we have two signs, Why we
have two signs in the Lor^s Supper and only one in baptism.
partly to note out our whole, full, and perfect nourishment in Christ, having
whatsoever is requisite for our salvation; and partly to show a fuller
remembrance of his death, for the wine which is a figure of his blood, does as
it were present it and represent it before our eyes. So then, albeit the same
participation of Christ and the same washing away of sins by his blood, are
sealed up in baptism and in the Supper: yet the manner of sealing them in each
is diverse. Again, baptism is a sign of our entrance into Gods Covenant: the
Supper is a sign of our abiding and continuing in that covenant. Touching
bapt^sme, it is sufficient for infants if they be borne in the Church: in the
Supper, the condition of examining our selves, and remembering the Lords death
is required. They differ also in often celebration of them: baptism is to be
received but once only in all our life, because the promise once made, is
always firm and forcible to such as believe and repent: but the Supper is
oftentimes to be received, because an often renewing of that Covenant, and
calling it to our remembrance is necessary to increase and strengthen faith.
They differ also in the order which is to be observed in the use of them: for
baptism is to be given before the Supper, and the Supper may not be given to
any, except to such as are known to have been first baptized, or are at least
reputed so to be.

As first a Child is borne, before he be fed: so must Baptism go before,
whereby our new birth is sealed: then the Supper must follow after, whereby our
daily nourishment is declared and confirmed. Lastly, they differ in the signs,
there is only one sign in baptism, which is the water: but there are two
signs in the Lords Supper, to wit, the bread and wine.

The second general use is, that if Christ took, gave, and delivered the
substance of the bread and wine: then they must needs retain their former
nature and their proper substance, as well as their qualities, as sight, taste,
smell, bigness, whitenes, sweetness, rednes, roundnes, and such like
properties. But the Papists turn all things Against the bare shows of bread
and wine: and accidents without subject.
vpside down, matter into form, substance into accidents, creatures into
shows, and subjects into things adjoined: they bring in new shifts and fables
against all divinity, philosophy, reason, sense, and experience, setting up
their own inventions, and building Castles in the air. Let them prove the
annihilation and removing of the substance of bread and wine away, and the
Arist. phis. lib. 1. cap. 3.
consisting of accidents without subject, which they are never able to do. For
as the water in baptism remains in his nature and substance: so do the bread
and wine in the Lords Supper. And albeit in both the Sacraments the signs be
changed to a special use: yet are they not corrupted into shows, and turned
into shadows. The heavens Psalm. 102, 26.
shall be changed at the end of the world: yet hence it follows not, that
they shall be clean abolished and consumed to nothing. All young scholars are
taught in the schools, Accidentis esse est in esse.
that an accident has no being without a subject: yet here these Sophisters,
against all the rules of Logic, Porphyr. ca. 5. de accidente. (...).
and grounds of reason, would have accidents and shows of bread and wine to be
in no subject. Thus whereas in all places of learning we are taught, that
accidents may perish, not the substance of things: they will have the matter
and substance to perish, not the accidents. We see whitenes, roundnes, drynes,
moisture: we taste the sweetness: we touch all these qualities: yet (behold a
popish wonder, whereat marvel and be astonished) these, these I say are not in
the bread and wine, because they are gone, neither in the body of Christ,
because it is not white or black, round or red. So we shall have a white
thing, yet nothing white: a round thing, yet nothing round: a smell, yet
nothing that smells: a taste of bread, yet nothing that tastes: a breaking,
and yet nothing that is broken: so that here we have somewhat made of nothing
and nothing made of somewhat. For if any should ask them what round or white
thing is this, showing the bread? Or what sweet thing is that, pointing out
the wine in the cup? They cannot say it is bread and wine, (for they hold that
none are left) they are not able to shape any answer: for they will not say
the body of Christ is white, round, sweet, red, or such like. Wherefore, these
accidents of bread and wine rouing without subjects, are shows of reason
without substance, colors without truth, and fancies without settled judgment:
and as well might they imagine, walking without feet, an house without a
foundation, a vessel without bottom, or a body without space or place.

Again, what is it that does nourish? What is it that does comfort and
refresh? For we feel our bodies strengthened by the creatures taken and
received. And we read in their own histories that King Jews the gentle, for
the Aimoin. ex Ade^^. li. 5. c. 19
space of 40. days did eat nothing else. What is it then whereby we feel our
selves to be fed? Can their accidents do it, hanging in the air by miraculous
Geometry? Can whitenes, or rednes, or roundnes nourish us where no substance is
to be found or felt? Can drines, or moisture, can smelling or seeing nourish
without some material body? They cannot. It must be substance that is turned
into our substance: for never was it heard, that accidents were turned into
substance. But whereas we have bin taught, that accide^ts are in their subject,
now we must hold for our new learning that substances are in their accidents.
Wherefore, let us leave these doubtful and deceitful builders that go about
to build without ground or foundation, which cannot stand: and therefore their
opinion is as improbable and impossible as the alchymisticall transmutation.

The third general use arising from both the signs, is this: if Christ
delivered his last Supper in bread and wine, then these signs may not be
altered, but must be The bread and wine being the matter of the Sacrament may
not be changed in the Lords supper.
retained for the perpetual use and comfort of the Church. And howsoever it be
left to the choice and liberty of the church, what bread or what wine they will
use: yet that it ought necessarily (as I take it) to be bread and the fruit of
the Vine, may appear by diverse good considerations. I will propound the reasons
that draw me to this opinion, let the church judge of them, seeing the 1 cor.
14, 32.
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. First, the institution of
the Supper, and the example of Christ himself, whom the Church is to imitate
and follow, who said, Do 1 cor. 11, 25.
this in remembrance of me. He said not, do the like, or do what pleases you,
and swerve from my example where you will, bu^ do this which ye have seen me
do. Whosoever therefore change either the bread or wine, do not that which
Christ commands, but another thing then he appoints. Again, no other
signs are so significant and effectual as these are for this purpose, to
strengthen and to comfort them that are in trouble, and almost in the present
Psalm. 104.1^ 15. Prou. 31, 6. Judge. ^, 12. Eccl. 10, 19.
estate of death, as Psalm. 104. He brings forth bread out of the earth, and
wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make the face to shine, and
bread that strengthens man's heart. Likewise the wise man says, Pro. 31. Give
ye strong drink unto him that is ready to per sh, and wine to them that have
grief of heart. So that we are hereby effectually and significantly put in
mind, to have a most sweet feeling of Christ, to seek strength in him, and
that it is he which abundantly cheereth our hearts. Thirdly, the matter and
form of every thing, Arist. Met^sh lib. 7. cap. 7. Plato in euthiph
are holden to be of the nature of it, and to constitute the essence: so it is
in the Sacraments, where the signs are the matter, and the words of
institution are the form. True it is, circumstances may vary and be changed,
as time, place, sitting standing, kneeling, and such like: but the essential
parts may not be changed. If then, both of the^ be of the essence of the
Sacrament, such as take either of them away, destroy the Sacrament, and bring
in a nullity thereof. Wherefore, if the signs which are the matter, might be
changed: then the words also of institution which are the form might be
altered, and a new word brought into the church: but a new word cannot be
brought in, therefore no new outward sign or matter. Fourthly, if the bread and
wine in the Supper might be changed and yet the Sacrament in substance remain:
then in like manner, water in baptism might be changed, and yet be true
baptism; for of things that are like, there is a like respect, and a like
conclusion to be inferred. But this cannot be, as we have showed before in 2.
book. cha. 5. where we have proved, that the Minister cannot baptize with any
other liquor or element, then with water, as the matter of that Sacrament.
Neither let any object the case of necessity: for no necessity can make that
lawful, which simply and in it self is unlawful. Fifthly, if we admit and
grant a change in the signs at the pleasure of men: why may we not also change
other parts of the Sacrament? Why may we not in stead of the Minister appointed
of God and called by the Church, admit private persons and receive other
alterations enforced upon the Church by the Papists? Do we not hereby open a
gap for them, to bring in all their trash and trumpery besides the written and
revealed word of God? Sixthly, we have showed in the former book, that Nadab
and Abihu the two sons of Aaron were smitten by the immediate hand of God
Leui. 10, 1, 2
for offering the oblation with strange fire. But all signs brought into the
Sacraments beside the Scripture, are strange signs and consequently procure
strange judgments. And we see how the Prophet Ioell threatening from God a
dearth of Corn, and wine, and of oil, Joel. 1, 9, 19.
declares also that the offerings shall cease, where he says, The field is
wasted, the corn is destroyed, the oil is decayed, the new w ne is dried up,
the meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the house of the
Lord, the Priests the Lords Ministers shall mourn: showing hereby that they
were restrained from changing the outward signs. If any pretend greater
freedom and liberty in the time of the Gospel: let them show their charter,
and we will believe them. Lastly, it is confessed on al sides, that without
consecration and sanctification, there can be no Sacrament: for without this
hallowing, the water in baptism is bare water, the bread in the Supper is bare
bread, the wine is common wine. Now every creature is 1 Timothy 4, 5.
sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, as the Apostle teaches, 1 Timothy
4. and therefore we cannot assure our hearts that God will bless any other
creatures, as fish or flesh in stead of bread, water or beer in stead of wine,
seeing the word has not sanctified these elements for this purpose. They are
sanctified by the word for the ordinary nourishment of our bodies, but they are
not by any special word sanctified for the use of the Sacraments. If then it
be simply unlawful to change any thing in the matter of the Sacraments, no
pretense or necessity can ever make it unlawful. And as when a lawful
Minister is wanting, a private person may not be taken: so when the matter
appointed for the administration of this Sacrament is missing, another may not
be assumed. For as well may we change the Minister of the Sacrament into a
private man, as the bread and wine (being the signs) into another matter. If
the Sacraments cannot be had according to the precise and pure institution of
Christ, they may lawfully be deferred or omitted: for the danger stands not
in the want (as we have declared before) so long as we are free from the
contempt of them.

I am not ignorant that many learned men are of another judgment, and such as
are of reverent account in the church, Bucan. instit. loc. 48. de coen. Beza.
epist. 2.
who think that where there is no store of bread and plenty of wine sufficient
for this purpose, some other thing may be taken in stead of them. Thus it may
come to pass, that we shall have nothing which Christ commanded and sanctified
by his example, and yet boast that we have his Supper, and do that which he
appointed. For whereas we make four outward parts of this Sacrament, the
Minister, the word, the signs, and the receiver: there are that hold there is
no necessity of the Minister; others, that there is no necessity of the words
of institution: others, that there is no necessity of the signs: others, that
there is no necessity of the receiver: so that every thing is quite ouerturned
of one or another, and yet all would be thought to do as Christ did, and as he
commanded them to do. But consider herein the difference of opinion among men,
receiving one part but not another; so that if once we admit any alteration in
any of the parts, we open a gap to al innovation, and bring in great
uncertainty in the Sacraments. For touching baptism, some require it to be
done by a Minister, that think we are not precisely tied to the words of
institution, or to the element of water: others hold we are limited to use the
water, but in case of necessity we may use private men or women to baptize. So
in the Lords Supper many do necessarily require the Minister and no other to
administer it, but do not think it necessary he should use bread and wine, and
no other element. Thus we see, there is no certainty when once we depa^t from
the institution: so that the safest way is to clean strictly to the example of
Christ, and then we shall be sure we shall not do amiss. Then we shall be
sure we have the fairest warrant for that which we do, and lie least of all
open to be reproved of others.

The fourth general use arising jointly from both the signs is, if Christ
delivered, and the Disciples received bread and wine as the outward signs of
this Sacrament: then we learn that the doctrine of transubstantiation is a
dotage Against transubstantiation.
of man's invention. Though this device be now received in the Roman Church, as
a matter of salvation, as an Article of says, and a maine point of religion,
Council Trid. sess 13. cap. 4.
that by virtue of these words. This is my body, this is the cup of the new
testament, the substance of bread and wine is gone, and nothing remains but
only the shows, likeness, and appearance of them: yet if we examine the matter
by the words of institution, by the nature of a Sacrament, by the proportion of
says, by the true properties of a true humane body, by force of reason, by
judgment of the senses, by confession of the adversaries themselves, and by
the manifold co^tradictions among themselves: we shall find it to be a late
device and invention of the Papists, first decreed and determined in the
council of Laterane, under Pope Innocent^us the third, in the reign of King
John of England, Anno 1255.
not yet 400. years ago. There it was hatched at that time, and made Barth.
Caranza summa Council.
a maine matter of faith, approved in the Church of Rome, but yet not then
received over all the world. This error is a spice of the error of Marcus, who
went about to make his fellows and followers believe, Iren lib. 1. c ^ Epiphan
haeres. 34.
that he did transubstantiate wine into blood, in the Sacrament. Thus do the
church of Rome at this day, yet was he noted for an heretic by the Fathers. I
will not for shortness sake bring all the reasons that might be brought to
overthrow and ouerturne The bread and wine remain in their proper nature
the turning of the bread into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood;
but allege some few among many, whereunto we require them to answer if they
can. Neither let them pretend that they have bin answered already, inasmuch as
no sound and certain answer can be brought unto them, to satisfy us or
themselves. Our reasons for the present shall be these.

First, that which Christ took in his hands, he brake: that which he brake, he
gave: that which he gave his Disciples, he commanded them to eat: that which
he commanded them to eat, he calls his body. This appears by the testimony
of Mat. 26, 26. Mar. 14, 22. Luke 22, 19.
the Evangelists, and coherence of the words. But he took bread and brake it:
therefore he gave bread, he commanded to eat bread, he said of the bread, This
is my body. Now if he took bread, but brake it not: or if he brake bread, but
gave it not: or if he gave bread to his Disciples to eat, but told them, not
this which he gave them, but some other thing beside that, was his body: the
latter part of the sentence starteth from the beginning, and the middle
swarueth from them both.

Secondly, the Apostle after the words of consecration, does oftentimes call it
bread, as 1 Cor. 11. As often as ye shall eat this 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. 1
Cor. 10, 16.
bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. And
again, Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again, Let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup. These men say it is not bread: the Apostle says it is bread: whether of
these we shall believe, judge you. So in the former chapter he says, The bread
which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? Likewise,
touching the other sign, Mat. 26, 29.
our Savior expressly calls it wine after the thanksgiving, Mat. 26. I will
not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine until that day, when I shall
drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom. This fruit of the Vine is wine,
therefore the substance of it remains. Now if the bread had bin turned into
the body, or the wine into the blood of Christ, and if the Apostle would have
spoken properly, he should have said, As often as ye shall eat, not this
bread, but this body of Christ under the form of bread, the blood of CHRIST
under the form of wine. And again. He that eats the body and drinks the
blood of Christ unworthily. And again, Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat and take in his mouth the very body of Christ his Creator. But thus
the Apostle has not spoken, neither could he so speak truly, properly, and
fitly: therefore we do truly, properly, and fitly conclude, that there is no
transubstantiation.

Thirdly, Christ speaking of the cup says, Take, Luke 22, 1^, 19.
divide it among you; and of the bread he says, he took it, and brake it. But
if the substance of bread be abolished, or changed into the body of Christ, and
likewise the nature of the wine turned into the blood of Christ, there could
be no true distributing or breaking: for the blood of Christ is not divided
into parts, neither is his body broken.

Fourthly, if the strength or force of transubstantiation depend upon these
words of institution, This is my body, This is my blood: then there can be no
real change before these words be fully finished, and pronounced to the end.
Therefore, when they begin to say, This is: what is it? What mean they, I say,
it is? Is it any other then bread and wine by their own confession, til the
words be ended? So then, these sentences shall not be true, when they say, This
is my body, this is my blood, except they mean this bread is the body of
Christ, this wine is his blood: wherefore bread and wine remain, their nature
is not changed and altered.

Fifthly, these words, This is my body, must be understood as the words
following, This cup is the new Testament: but the cup is not turned into the
new Testament, nor into the blood of CHRIST: therefore the other words must be
figuratively understood, not literally: for there is one respect of them both:
neither can any reason be rendered, why a figure should be admitted in the one
part, rather then in the other.

The 6. reason: Christ is said to give to his Disciples that which he said was
his body, If then this be properly taken, we shall thereby make a proper
Christ, and make him a monster of two bodies, as they also make the church a
monster of two heads. For so there must be one body which gave, and another
body which was given. But it is most absurd, that he should give and be given,
hold himself and be holden, offer and be offered: which differs little from
the Theodoret de sabul. haeretic. lib 2. August. de haeresib. cap. 32.
heresy of the Helcesaits, who held there were sundry Christ's, two at the
least, one dwelling in heaven above, the other in the world here beneath: so
these make Christ to have a double body, visible and invisible; a visible body
sitting at the table, and an invisible body made of the substance of bread,
which (as the papists hold) was given to the Disciples, as likewise they teach
of the headship of the Church, that one head is invisible to us in the heavens,
another visible to us upon the earth.

The 7. reason: It destroys the nature of a Sacrament, which stands Iren.
lib. 4. cont. haer cap. 34.
of an earthly and heavenly part: one outward, the other inward: one seen, the
other understood: one a sign, the other a thing signified: of which we have
spoken before, book 1. chap. 3. But if there be an actual transubstantiation,
then the outward part is abolished, and disanulled.

The 8. reason: In baptism the substance of water remains, though it have
words of consecration, and be made a Sacrament of our regeneration: and
therefore in the Lords Supper the bread and wine are not changed and done away
utterly. The Scripture speaks as highly Mat 26, 26, 1 Pet. 3, 20, 21
of the one as of the other.

The ninth reason: If bread be really turned into the body of Christ, and the
wine into his blood: then the body and blood of Christ are really separated,
for the words are severally pronounced, first of the bread, then of the wine:
yea the soul of Christ should be separated from his body, for the bread is
turned only into his body, and not into his soul. But his soul, his body,
and his blood are not really separated. So then, if the bread be his very
flesh, and the wine his blood, and the one really separated from the other;
then Christ must necessarily be slain afresh every time the Supper is
celebrated, and we are found to be crucifiers of the Lord of life: whereas it
is contrary to the doctrine of the Scriptures, that he should dye any more,
being ascended far above all principalities, and set down at the right hand of
his Father.

The 10. reason: If the bread be turned into his body indeed by force of a few
words uttered by a Priest: then the Priest should be the maker of his maker,
and so every massemonger should be preferred before Christ, as much as the
creator has more honor then the creature, the builder then the house, the
worke-man then the work. But they are not ashamed to publish it in their own
words and writings, Stella clericorum.
that the Priest is the creator of his Creator, He that created you, has given
you power to create him: he that has created you without your selves, Creatura
^ob ^lli^d ant^bas vrb^s.
is created by you, by the means of you. These are the speeches of their wise
men, if they be not ashamed of their own words: of which all wise men are
worthily ashamed.

The 11. reason: the bread in the Sacrament after the words of consecration, is
subject to as many changes and chances as it was before: the bread may mould,
putrify, and breed worms, (...) Leuit. (...) cap. 3. H^^^he l. co ^t ^aet.
and was accustomably in many places burned: the wine may (being immoderately
taken) make drunken, it may wax sharp and turn into vinegar: yea both of
them may be boiled and made hot: both of them may be vomited up, as certain
leapers did; both of them may be mingled with very rank poison, as a certain
(...) 5.
Monk gave the poisoned host to Henry the seventh, a noble Emperor of famous
memory, which when he had taken, he dyed. The like may be said of Victor the
third, a Pope of Rome, who was poisoned after the same manner (...).
in the chalice, as the Emperor was in the bread. But the precious body and
blood of Christ cannot be mingled with poison, but is an excellent
counter-poyson against the biting of the old Serpent and all infection of sin
whatsoever; the body cannot mould or putrify, the blood of Christ cannot
become sharp or sour, as the outward signs may, therefore the substance of
bread and wine remains.

The 12. reason: there is something in the Sacrament material and
substantial, which goes the way of all meats, according to that saying of
our Mat. 15, 17.
Savior, Mat. 15, 17. Perceive ye not yet that whatsoever enters into the
mouth, goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught? But none of the
accidents, as shape, color, quality, taste, and such like are avoided, because
they are altered in the stomach, before they come to the place of auoydance:
O^igen. in Mat. cap. 15.
and it were blasphemy to think that the body of Christ either enters into
the mouth, or goes down into the belly, or is cast out into the draught,
howsoever many of them have also maintained this monstrous impiety: Therefore
the substance of the bread and the wine remain in their own nature in the
Sacrament.

The 13. reason: If there were a miraculous conversion of the bread and wine,
it would appear to the outward senses, as Ioh. 6. The multitude Ioh 6, 26.
saw his miracles. There was never miracle wrought by any bodily creature, but
sense judged it to be so: but seeing our eyes see, and our taste discerns
that it is bread, we cannot imagine there is any miracle. The miracles that
Moses did in Egypt, when he turned water into blood, and his rod into a
Serpent: The miracles August. de Trinit. lib. 3. cap. ^0.
that Christ did, when he turned water into wine, the eye saw, the taste
discerned, here was no deceit, no fraud, no collusion. And thus every
hedge-priest should be a worker of miracles, that only can read his portuise,
and say over his Paternoster with an Aue-mary. This is an honor that may be
challenged, but cannot be granted unto them.

The 14. reason: If there were any transubstantiation, there should be an
actual conversion of the bread into the body of Christ; but this cannot stand.
For when one thing is changed into another, the matter remains, the form is
altered: but here they make the form to abide, and the matter to be changed.
A strange Metamorpho^is, and fitting the fable of this counterfeit turning. Now
the matter of bread is not in the body of Christ, because it is perfect in it
self, and so glorified, that it can receive no access. Besides, nothing can
be converted or changed into a thing before being and preexisting, which was
really before the change or conversion; as Christ turned the water into that
wine which was not before, Exodus 4, 3. John 2, 8. Gen 1^, 26.
and Moses turned his rod into that serpent which was not before: and Lots wise
was turned into that pillar which was not before. But the body of Christ is
before their transubstantiation, whereupon it follows, that the bread cannot
be changed into his body.

The 15. reason: If Christ did transubstantiate the bread into his body when he
said, This is my body: then in like manner the Apostle did transubstantiate the
Church of the Corinthians into the body of Christ, when he says, Now ye are 1
cor. 12, 27.
the body of Christ, and members for your part. And Theophylact upon the sixth
chapter of John says, We our selves are trans-elemented (or transubstantiated)
into the body of Christ. What reason can they then allege why
transubstantiation should be in the one sentence more then in the other? For
the whole college and company of Divines of Rome and Themes, and all the
multitude of Papists throughout the world, shall never be better able to prove
their transubstantiation out of these words. This is my body: then out of the
other Ye are the body of Christ.

The 16. reason: If the bread were turned into the body of Christ and received
in the mouth, it should go far better with our bodies then with our souls,
because our bodies should really receive the body of Christ, but our souls
should not* being spirits: and bodies cannot be mingled and intermedled with
spirits. Wherefore, we cannot believe and receive this real conversion of one
substance into another.

The 17. reason: If the bread be transubstantiated into the body of Christ, and
so received by us: then either it is turned into our bodies, or vanishes away
into nothing, or returns and departs back into heaven. For what fourth
thing they should imagine, cannot be imagined. But it is not turned into our
bodily substance, for then we should grow bodily into one person with him, he
should walk with us and rest with us: he should eat with us, and sleep with
us: he should be whole with us and sick with us, finally, he should live with
us and dye with us: al which are absurd. Neither does his body vanish to
nothing, for this were horrible blasphemy once to affirm or conceive of the
body of Christ Jesus, who by this fancy shall be made Jesus, and no Jesus;
Christ and no Christ; a Savior and no Savior. And if once we admit this, we
shall also have religion and no religion: heaven and no heaven: yea God and no
God. Neither does it depart into heaven; for he was there before, Act 3, 21.
and the heavens contain him until the times of restitution of all things.
Besides, he should every day ascend; which overthrows our faith, and withal
ouerturneth the truth of his ascension, and brings in a strange manner of his
taking up, never believed, or received, or delivered, or dreamed of in the
Church. Furthermore, as the body of Christ is first supposed to be received and
then the blood: so the body should first asce^d without the blood, and
afterward the blood alone without the body. Lastly, as well we may hold and
believe, that he dies often, rises again often, is conceived and borne
oftentimes, as hold his continual and daily ascension. Thus also we may reason
concerning the wine: If it be turned into the blood of Christ, what becomes
of that blood? Either it must necessarily pass into our substance: and then
Christ's blood should be mingled with our blood, as the blood of the Galileans
was mingled with their sacrifices, Lu. 13. Luke 13, 1.
Or else it must perish and come to nothing: and then it should dry up as
water, and vanish away as smoke, and consume as a vapor. Or lastly, it must
return into heaven, which does ouerturne his ascending from the earth, in as
much as it was there before. And as there can no other way be devised, so none
of these can stand either with divinity or philosophy; either with faith or
reason: either with Scripture or nature: and therefore th se pillars being
removed, this tower of Babell, I mean the doctrine of transubstantiation, must
of necessity fall to the ground. The 18. reason: If the Disciples had not
understood Christ to call the bread his body sacramentally: they would have bin
greatly troubled (who often doubted of the least things) and demanded the
understanding of the^. As the hearers of Christ I h. 6. supposing he had spoken
of a carnal manner of eating his Ioh. 6, 52, 60
flesh, were troubled and offended, saying, How can this man give us his flesh
to eat? And ver. 60. This is an hard saying, who can hear ^t? Wherefore, who
sees not that they would have marvelled and required farther, if they had
understood Christ to have changed the bread into his body, and the wine into
his blood? But they doubt not, they demand not, they marvel not, they murmr
not, and therefore believe not this iugling of transubstantiation or turning of
one substance into another. And if they believed it not, how should we receive
it? If they received it not, how should we believe it?

The 19. argument: It ouerturneth sundry Articles of ou^ Christian faith. We
believe that Christ Jesus was begotten of the Father before al worlds, and
borne in time of the Virgin Mary: this the Scripture teaches, this the Creed
delivers: this every true Christian professes and believes. But if the
bread be transubstantiated into the body of Christ, and the wine into the
blood of Christ: then his body is made and borne of bread and wine, and the
Priest after the words of consecration may say, a little pretty son is borne
unto us, and newly made. Wherefore, in the Missal of Sarum after that the
Priest has consecrated, he makes a low leg, worshipping the work of his
own hands, and says, Aue: which is as much as God save you Sir; or, you are
welcome to town.

Again, we believe that Christ was crucified and dyed for our sins, that he
was buried, rose again, ascended, and sits at the right hand of God the
Father almighty. But if the body of Christ be made of bread as often as the
Eucharist is celebrated, then Christ being on the Cross might be elsewhere
then on the Cross: when he dyed, he might be where he suffered nothing: lying
in the grave, he might be out of the grave: yea he might be in the grave after
his resurrection and rising out of the grave: whereof notwithstanding the Angels
said, Mat 28, 5.
he is not here. Lastly, we believe that Christ shall come from heaven to
judge the quick and dead, and that in the same manner he ascended, Revel. 1, 7.
who^ we doubt not but men shall see, as Revel. 1.7. Every eye shall see him,
yea even they which pierced him through. But if Christ's body be made of bread,
he shall stare and start out of the pixe, and not come from heaven, and that in
another shape then when he ascended: nay thus he should come daily unto us, and
yet no man can see him, nor perceive his coming. All these devices overthrow
the foundation of faith, savor of nouelty, and bring in heresy against all
certain grounds of true religion.

The 20, argument: If by virtue of Christ's words, transubstantiation were
brought to pass, and the true body of Christ were really present on the
earth: then the bread should be changed into whole Christ, that is, into his
body endued with his magnitude, quantity, quality, color, and all his
dimensions. For Christ said not at his Supper, this is the substance of my body
without accidents: but Luke 21.16. 1 Cor. 11, 24.
This is my body wh ch is given for you, and which is broken for you. Therefore
the body was visible and seen of them al it was felt, it had all accidents
agreeable thereunto, and the substance of Christ's body alone without his
qualities was not crucified on the Cross, neither yet could be crucified.
Notwithstanding, we see not Christ's body upon the earth, nor any adioynt
thereof is perceived or discerned. Where are they then? Are they in the
substance of Christ's body which is in heaven? And not in the substance of his
body which is on the earth? Then they make Christ to have two distinct bodies:
for one and the same body cannot have his properties and dimensions, and yet be
without them, which necessarily implies a contradiction, and consequently
falsehood: especially considering how great a difference they make between the
body of Christ in heaven, and this body that lies and lurketh under the
accidents and shows of bread in their box.

The 21. reason: It destroys the nature of a true body, it takes away the
defense used against heretics, and brings in the heresies of Marcion, of
Eutyches, and the Manichies, which August. ad Quod vult de.
denied Christ to have a solid, and true humane body, and held that he had
only a fantastical body without any material flesh, blood, or bone, in
appearance and sight somewhat, but in deed and substance nothing. For they
teach that his body is in infinite places at once, and those discontinued, void
of quantity and quality, not circumscribed, not visible, nor any way sensible:
that being in heaven, he is really and corporally on earth, though not in the
distance between heaven and earth, nor in those places where the host is not:
which is to assign innumerable bodies to our Savior Christ, and consequently
to make him no body, which is in effect as much as to deny he is come in the
flesh, 1 Ioh 4, 3. and 2 Ioh. 7.
which is the very doctrine of Antichrist himself, as John speaks, Every
spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist of whom ye have heard. And in his 2.
Epistle, Many deceivers are entered into the world, which confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: he that is such a one, is a deceiuer and an
Antichrist. But Occam propounds this as the doctrine of the schools, that
Occam. in cen. tilo. ^hee^. conclus. 25, 26.
The body of Christ is every where, as God is every where, and that if there
were an host that filled all the world, the body of Christ might be with every
part thereof when it should be consecrated. And Holcot treading in the same
steps of the schools, not of the Scriptures says, If there had been a
thousand hosts in a thousand places at the same time that Christ did hang upon
the Cross, Ho^cot. in 4. lib sentent. quaest. 2.
Christ had been crucified in a thousand places. But it is an inseperable
property of bodies to be local and contained in place: August. epist. 57. ad
Dardan.
take away space of place, and true dimensions from bodies, and they are no
where, as Augustine teaches. Besides, hence the Fathers concluded the truth of
Christ's body, because Luke 24 39.
he might be seen and handled, and because he had flesh and bones, according
to the Scriptures, Behold my hands and my feet, for it is I my self: handle
me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see that I have. But
if he be neither seen nor handled in the Sacrament, nor discerned to have
flesh and bones: how shall his humanity be holden and maintained against
heretics impugning the same?

The 22. reason: It takes away all judgment from the senses, and makes the
Sacrament of truth to be a Sacrament of forgery and falsehood: for the senses
of seeing, of tasting, of touching, of handling, and smelling, do judge bread
and wine to be in the Sacrament, and not man's flesh truly and properly:
neither can Ari^t. lib. 2. de anim cap. 6.
all the senses be deceived in their proper objects, as even the Philosophers
themselves do teach, and that truly.

The 23. reason: It is an horrible act and unnatural cruelty for man to eat
man's flesh, and for man to drink man's blood: and therefore the Papists are as
inhumane as the Cyclopes, Cannibals, and other barbarous people. It is more
brutish and barbarous August de doctr^ Christ. lib. 3 cap. 16. Cyril. anat. 11.
to eat man's flesh, then to kill a man: and to drink man's blood then to shed
it. Thus they make Christian people eaters of man's flesh and blood-suckers,
which is beastly and horrible wickedness, which is threatened oftentimes as a
punishment, Revel. 16, 6. and Ezekiel 39, 17, 18. and noted as a thing
unlawful, 1 Chronicles. 11, 19.

The 24. reason: the Apostle makes an opposition between the table of the
Lord, and the table of Devils, saying, 1 Cor. 10, 20.21.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of devils: where he shows,
that to eat the flesh offered unto Idols is to be partakers of the Idols, as
the bread which we break, is the participation and communion of the body of
the Lord. Hence he concludes, that they should not eat of those things which
the Gentiles sacrifice to Idols, because they have fellowship with the Devils
that eat of them, even as they are united to Christ which partake of the bread
in the Supper. If then the flesh offered to Idols be not transubstantiated: why
should the sacramental bread be turned into the body of Christ, seeing it
suffices to make us partakers of the Lords body, to eat of the bread; as it
was sufficient to make them partakers of the Idols, to eat of the things
offered unto them?

The 25. reason: If the institution of Christ be a sufficient direction unto
the Church what to hold in this question, we shall easily give this
transubstantiation a fall. We see in the cases of matrimony that did befall,
our Savior brings them to the first institution, and thereby dissolueth the
doubts and difficulties that arose, saying, Mat 19, 3. 4, 8.
From the beginning it was not so. So when any controversy arises about the
Lords Supper, the ordinance of Christ is able to take it up, how great or
grievous soever it grow. Now there is no sentence, no word, no syllable, no
jot, no title in the description of the Supper, that favors or sauoureth of
transubstantiation, or signifies and insinuates any such matter. True it is,
Christ says, Mat. 26, 26.
This is my body, but to be, does not signify to transubstantiate: for then
when he says, Ioh. 15 1. and 10, 7. and 14, 6.
I am the true vine, I am the door, the way, and such like, he shall be turned
and transubstantiated into a natural vine, into a material door into an high
way, from whence would follow infinite abuse; and absurdities. Besides, if the
word (is) in the institution signify, is transubstantiated, that is, changed
from one substance into another, from bread into flesh, from wine into blood:
then the change should be made before all the words be uttered, so that hence
it would follow, that it cannot be done by virtue of the words, which goes
before the pronouncing of the words.

Last of all, the maintainers of transubstantiation, as the builders of Babell,
have their tongues divided, and their languages confounded: they cannot accord
together, but vary and dissent one from another, Mar. 14, 56.
like the false witnesses that arose against Christ. First, they know not
certainly, whether the bread be turned into his body, or come in place
thereof, the substance departing. Secondly, some a-low not these speeches,
Thom. p. 3. qu. 75 art. 3.
bread is Christ's body, or bread is made Christ's body: but will have it said,
Christ's body is made of bread: Canon, conuertantur.
others condemn this speech also, that bread is made christ's body. Thirdly,
they know not what is broken, whether bread, or accidents, or nothing: others
say, the true body of Christ is broken. Fourthly, they agree not, whether their
water in the chalice mingled with wine, be transubstantiated: some say it is,
other say it is not: some more sober then the rest, are afraid what to say,
Durand. li. 4.
and ask who is able to decide the question? Others say it is turned into the
humors of his body: others unknit the knot thus, that the water is turned into
the wine, and then the wine into his blood, and therefore are circumspect to
give this cautel that a little water be mingled, being afraid least if more
water were put in then, the wine, the wine should be transubstantiated into
water. Fifthly, they cannot agree with what words their consecration is wrought,
whether accidents be without their subject, whether the accide^ts nourish no
less then the substance of bread and wine: likewise what the rats and mice do
eat: how and from whence the worms are oftentimes ingendered in their
Eucharist, and so consume it: whether the shows of bread be the body without
the blood, and the shows of wine the blood without the body. Sixthly, soon
after the Apostles had received the Supper into their stomachs, Luke 22, 44.
Christ Jesus did sweat great drops of blood trickling down to the ground,
and was afterward buffetted, mocked, spit upon, and crucified. Now they dare
not say that this body of Jesus so spitefully and contumeliously entreated,
swet any drops of blood in the stomachs of the Apostles, or was by the
Soldiers apprehended and buffetted under the forms of bread and wine, and
therefore they make at one and the same time a double Christ; one Christ
suffering in the garden and on the Cross: another not suffering in the
Disciples: one Christ apprehended, and another not apprehended: one Christ
sweating, another not sweating; one Christ buffetted by the Soldiers, and
another not buffetted. Seauenthly, they confess that Christ both administered
and participated of this Sacrament with his Apostles, whereof will follow that
Christ did eat himself and did drink himself: and seeing they hold his body
is in the cup, they must also hold that he did drink his own body. From
whence arises a flat and express contradiction: for to say that the body of
Christ was all whole in his stomach, is to affirm that that which is within,
contains that which is without, as if the scabberd were in the sword, or the
cup in the wine, or the purse in the money. Thus they make the outward part to
be within the inner, and without the inner, that is, without and not without:
yea, whereas they affirm that the body of our Lord is greater then the forms
of bread which contain it, they make that which is contained greater then that
which does contain it, that is, the treasure wider and larger then the casket
in which it is locked: contrary to all the rules of reason, the principles of
nature, and the maxims of the Mathematics. Eighthly, they say, that the body
of Christ is all whole in heaven, and all whole in the pixe, and yet they
renounce the Vbiquity of his body, and hold that he is not in place betwixt
both, so that they make a distance between the body of Christ, and the body of
Christ; and therefore withal they make him lower then himself and higher then
himself, and separated from himself. Ninthly, they teach that the body of
Christ in the Mass, has all the dimensions and parts of an humane body
distinct in their natural situation: and yet they teach, that there is not so
small a piece of the host where that body is not whole, so that his head shall
be where his feet are, and his feet where his head is. And touching his blood,
they say it is shed in the Mass, and yet notwithstanding they call it an
unbloody sacrifice, so that by their reckoning, there is blood not bloody, and
a shedding of blood not bloody; as if a man should say, whiteness which is not
white, heat which is not hot, or coldness which is not cold. Thus they had
rather say and unsay, and be at discord with themselves, then to accord with us
and the truth. They think it reason to deny all reason, and a senseless thing
to be judged by the senses. These open and evident contradictions so stiffly
avouched and stoutly defended, that an humane body should fill no place, and
yet should be in an hundred thousand diverse places, have length without being
extended, and be whole in every crum of the bread, are so gross and palpable
absurdities, that they do estrange the Turks and Infidels from embracing the
Christian religion. Auerrhoes.
It is noted of an Arabian Spaniard writing upon the 12. book of the
Metaphysickes, that his soul should hold with the Philosophers, since the
Christians worship that which they eat. The Pagans mock at this as a brutish
conceit, Cicer. de not. Deor. lib 3.
as among others it appears by Tully in his third book of the nature of the
Gods, who says thus: Think thou any man to be so mad as to believe that
that which he eats is his God? So that this monstrous device embraced in the
Church of Rome, as a maine pillar that holds up the house, hinders the
faith, offends the ignorant, brings the doctrine of Christ into reproach,
hardens the hearts of the enemies of the Gospel, and mingleth heaven and
earth together.

It were infinite See D. Sutl. de m^ss. l b. 5. cap. 10.
to note out all their contentions and contradictions: these may suffice to
show how the enemies of God fight one against another, and al of them with
their own shadows. And thus much of the late doting device of
transubstantiation, which is the soul and life of their popish religion: the
denyers or doubters whereof, they pursue with fire and sword more eagerly, then
such as are enemies to the blessed Trinity.

The last general use is this: If Christ delivered both these signs, not
only the bread, but the wine also to his Disciples: then both kinds by the
Minister are to be delivered, Christ's people must receive the supper under both
kinds.
and both kinds by the people are to be received, not bread alone, nor wine
alone, but bread and wine: the bread in token of his body given for us, and the
wine in token of his blood shed for us. This is the ordinance of Christ: this
is agreeable to the Scripture. Notwithstanding, the church of Rome has
decreed, that it is not necessary for the people to communicate in both kinds,
and holds them Con. Trident. sess. 21, cap. 2.
accursed that hold it necessary for the people to receive the cup, consecrated
by the Priest. Thus it appears they labor nothing more, then to take from the
faithful the sweet comfort of the Lords Supper. This is a sacrilegious
corruption of Christ's institution, devised by Satan, broached by Antichrist,
published by his adherents in the corrupt times of most palpable darkness, as
may appear by these reasons.

First, if none may drink of the consecrate wine but the Priests, then none
should eat of the bread but Priests: so that they must either exclude the
people from both, which I trust they dare not; or admit them to both, which as
yet they do not. For to whom Christ said, Mat. 26, 26.27.
Take and eat, to those gave he the cup and said, Drink ye. Wherefore, the
signs being both equal, all communicants must drink of the one, as well as
eat of the other, there being the same warrant for the one, that there is for
the other, and the let that would bar the one, will hinder the other: so as
Mat. 19, 6.
the things which God in his goodness has joined together, man without sin
cannot separate.

Secondly, when Christ instituted this Sacrament, he said, Mat. 26, 27. Mar.
14, 23. 1 Cor. 12, 13.
Drink ye all of this: and by all he understood all the Communicants. And the
Evangelist Mark adds, They al drank of it, to wit, all that were present at
his last Supper, who had before eaten of the bread of the Lord. This also
appears by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. They have been all made to drink into
one Spirit. This commandment of Christ being general, imposes a necessity
upon the people, when he says, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, do ye this.
These commandments are perpetual, unchangeable, and always in force: not
arbitrary, not temporal, not repealed, but bind the conscience to the end of
the world, against which no limitation, or dispensation can be allowed, being
the commandments 1 Cor. 14, 37
of God, not of man.

Thirdly, the cup is a part of Christ's will and testament. Now touching the
nature of a testament or will, the saying of the Apostle is known, Gal. 3, 15.
Heb. 9, 16, 17.
If it be but a man's testament, when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it,
or adds any thing thereto: where he shows, that the dead man's will may not
be changed, nothing can be put too, nothing taken out without forgery and
falsehood. This is the law of nature and Nations. But the Lords Supper is a
Sacrament proper to the new Testament, as Christ says, Luk, 22, 20.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood which is shed for you. This
testament the Lord Jesus made the night before he was betrayed, he sealed it by
shedding his most precious blood, he has given legacies, not of earthly and
temporal, but of heavenly and eternal goods. And seeing he has appointed the
cup of this his testament to be delivered and drunk of al those for whom his
blood was shed: it is intolerable boldness and presumption to take away the use
thereof from the greater part of the Church, and an infallible token of an
unshamefast and shameless harlot, to alter her husbands will, to defraud and
defeat his children of that worthy portion which their father allotted them,
and so to keep back part of their inheritance and possession.

Fourthly, the blood of Christ shed upon the Cross belongs not only to the
Pastors and teachers, but to all the faithful that come to the table of the
Lord, as appears by the words of Christ, Mat. 26, 28. Luke 22, 20.
This is my blood which is shed for you and for many: why then should the blood
of Christ be denied, or the cup of the Lord be barred from the^? If then the
blood of Christ were shed for the people, as well as for the Ministers: surely
the cup belongs to one as well as to the other. If the people have the
greater, who shall keep the^ from the less? If they have their part in the
thing signified, who shall deny them of the outward sign? For as the fruit
and effect of the blood of Christ is common to the people with the Pastor: so
should the cup also, which is the communion of his blood shed for the
redemption of the peoples sins, be divided indifferently between the Pastor
and the people.

Fifthly, the 1 Cor. 11, 23
Apostle delivered that to the church which he had received from the Lords
Jesus: Now the church ought diligently to observe the written traditions and
verities of the Apostles, which are committed to posterity to be kept
inuiolably. But he has delivered, how the Lord after taking, blessing,
breaking, and distributing of the bread, likewise took the cup, blessed, and
distributed it among them, so says the Apostle must the churches do. If then
he received this from the Lord, to deluer both kinds to the people; let the
Church of Rome consider with her self, from whence she has received the
contrary, to withold one of the kinds from the people: for both cannot
proceed from one and the same spirit of truth, which is never contrary to it
self.

Sixthly, if all the faithful that come to the Lords Table, must show forth the
Lords death until he come, and this be done by them as well by drinking of the
cup, as by eating of the bread: then all the communicants must receive the
Sacrament under both kinds, 1 Cor. 11, 26
until the second coming of Christ. But the faithful must show forth the
Lords death by eating of that bread and drinking of that cup, as the Apostle
teaches, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye show
the Lords death until he come. Therefore, all communicants must partake the
Sacrament under both kinds.

Seventhly, the Apostle gives an express commandment to the whole church,
which all must obey that come worthily to this holy table, Let a man examine
himself, 1 Cor. 11, 2^.
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. Where he gives a
double commandment, first to prepare reverently, then to receive worthily. Now
all that must prove and try themselves, are commanded not only to eat bread,
but to drink of the cup: but al must try and examine themselves: therefore all
are commanded both to eat and drink at the Lords table. If this be a
commandment to examine: then the words following of eating and drinking, are
likewise commandments. There is no haulting in these, let them admit both, or
let them deny both.

Eighthly, if the faithful take not the cup in the Supper of the Lord, the
condition of Christians under the Gospel, shall be worse then of the
Israelites under the law. For the people of Israel in the wilderness having
the same Sacrament in effect with us, 1 Cor. 10, 4.
Did all drink of the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was
Christ, as the Apostle affirms. But our condition is not worser and weaker
the^ theirs: therefore all the faithful are to drink of the cup of the Lord.
Bellarmine, the Souldan of the Romish Synagogue, Bellar. lib. 4. de Eucha ca. 27
answers thus, They drunk not water out of the rock when they did eat of
the spiritual meat, but in another place and at another time. But this is an
answerelesse answer which cannot satisfy. For albeit the Sacraments of the
Israelites as figures and types did represent, the same graces that our
Sacraments do: yet it is not necessary they should in all points answer each
other, and in all respects agree together. Besides, the church of Rome at no
time allows the people to drink of the Wine, a seal of the blood of Christ:
they keep them from the cup of the Lord, both when they give them the bread,
and at all other times, and thereby make their estate worser then the estate of
the Jews. Indeed, if they did at any time permit all the people to drink of the
cup, they might pretend this example of the Israelites: but inasmuch as they
utterly deny them this part of the cup, they overthrow themselves in their
malice, and yet in their blindness they do not see it. Finally, many of the
Fathers did both eat Manna, and drink water out of the Rock, if not in the
same place, yet at one and the same time, Exodus 16, 21
inasmuch as they gathered thereof every morning, and it ceased not Josh. 5, 12.
until they entered the frontiers and confines of the land of promise. But they
never allow without a tolleration and dispensation, the people in any place, at
any time, upon any occasion, and in any respect, to taste of the cup in the
Lords Supper.

Ninthly, if the cup of the new testament may be taken from the Lords people:
in like manner the water in baptism may be taken away from the^. For the blood
of Christ, whereby remission of sins is purchased and procured, is represented
by the wine of the Lords Supper, as well as by the water in baptism. But the
water in baptism without great sacrilege, cannot be omitted or neglected:
wherefore then should the cup be taken away.

Tenthly, in the matter of the Supper our adversaries allege the words of
Christ in John, John 6.
If you drink not my blood, you shall have no life in you. If these words be
thus to be understood, then by depriving them of the cup, they deprive the
people of life and salvation.

Again, if drinking of the chalice be a privilege of the Clergy, how comes
it to pass that Kings and Princes have a part in this privilege? How is it
that they are permitted as well to drink of the consecrated wine, as to eat
of the consecrated bread? But herein was a notable piece of cunning and a
great point of policy used, partly to advance the dignity of the Clergy, and
partly to stop the mouths of Princes. For as by this order or rather disorder,
the proud Clergy are made companions with Kings and Princes, even equal unto
them, so they think to hood-winke them and make them content to swallow the
rest of their superstitions, because they are pleased to grace the^ with this
privilege above the people as with a special favor.

Moreover, it is not to be omitted, that a principal end of this Sacrament was
instituted to set forth the death of Christ, not only as an idle narration,
but as a profitable application thereof to the conscience. How then shall the
people know that the fruit of shedding his precious blood belongs unto them
as the nourishment of their souls, except besides the looking upon the cup,
they be partakers of it? It is therefore necessary to understand by eating and
drinking, that God does not nourish them by halfes, but that Christ yields
whole nourishment unto them. Such then are worthily taxed of rashness themselves
that complain how the people rashly presume to receive the Sacrament under
both kinds: for as well they might say, that it is rashness and presumption
to imitate and follow Christ. And they may justly be condemned of heresy, who
pronounce them heretics and worthy to be punished by the secular power, that
speak against receiving in one kind only; as if it were heresy to follow the
example of Christ left to the Church. For what remains more but to proceed
one degree farther, even to pronounce Christ himself an Arch-heretick, and all
the Apostles heretics also, and to condemn them to the Inquisition as
deceivers and impostors seducing and misleading the people?

Lastly, if any part of the Supper might be taken away from the people: then
likewise the word of God may be taken from them, for in this point there is
the same reason and respect of them both. A Sacrament is nothing else but a
visible word, and a sealing up of the word: and the offense seems to be the
same, whether a man break the seal, or rent the writing. But the word cannot
be withdrawn from Christian people, it being the instrument of faith, and the
life of the Church. Wherefore it is the greatest wrong and injury done to the
people of God to take from them the cup of salvation. The answer to this
reason must be, to confess the parts and yield the conclusion; forasmuch as by
forbidding the people the reading of the scriptures, they have robbed them of
the word of God, and taken from them Luke 11, 52.
the key of knowledge, neither entering themselves into the kingdom of heaven,
nor suffering those that would enter. No marvel then, if they take the cup of
blessing from the people, who have taken from them the free use of the word of
God. To conclude these reasons* it is Antichrist, who contrary to the doctrine
of Christ, contrary to the institution of the Supper, contrary to the practice
of the Apostles, and contrary to the use of the former churches, has excluded
the people languishing and thirsting after the blood of Christ, as the dry
earth for the sweet showers of rain, from taking the cup of the Lord, and left
them a dry communion to eat the bread of the Sacrament alone. Having
considered the truth of God by sundry reasons grounded in the Scripture, that
the people have good interest and title in the cup denied unto them: let us
answer the Objections for taking ^he cup from the people of god Arist in Top.
Cicer. lib 1 ad Heren. et de Orator.
objections of the adversaries, made against the former doctrine. For it is not
sufficient only to teach the truth* and to confirm our own cause, except we
labor soundly to infringe and confute the contrary. First, they pretend that
Christ administered it to the apostles only, and not to any of the people: and
consequently the institution, for taking the cup can be no general
commandment for all men: thus Rhem. Test. upon Mat. 26. and Mar. 14.
the Rhemists reason without reason. I answer, first it may be doubted and
disputed, whether only the Apostles were present at his last Supper. For
seeing diverse were added unto the Church, and professed the faith of Christ,
seeing he had other Disciples beside the twelve, seeing many godly men and
women followed him to see his miracles* and to hear the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth: why should we think that none of them were
admitted to his table, who had often heard his preaching* and depended upon him
in their living. Again, the Passover was celebrated in the house Mat 26,
17.18.
of a faithful man, as may be collected by sundry circumstances: now then,
either the Lord Jesus annexed that family unto his, as the law in one case
appointed; or else we shall have two Passeouers at one time in one house, which
has no warrant of Scripture, no color of truth, no probability of reason. We
read in the institution and celebration of the Passover, of joining house to
house, Exodus 1^, 4.
and taking his neighbor next unto him in case of the insufficiency of one
household to eat the Lamb: but we never read of killing two lambs, and
keeping two Passeouers under one roof. Besides, the small remnant of the
faithful among the Jews would no doubt rightly and religiously observe the
Passover after the example of their Lord and Master, rather according to the
Exodus 13, 6.
precept of Moses, then according to the practice of the Jews: in imitation of
Christ, Ioh 13.1. ^am 18, 18.
rather then according to the tradition of the Elders. Furthermore, we are to
consider, that in eating the Passover, they sorted themselves together,
according to the number of the persons able to eat up the lamb: for they were
commanded to take Exodus 12, 4, 5
A lamb without blemish, a male of a year old: and if the household be too
little for the lamb, he shall take his neighbor which is next unto his house.
Now Christ with his twelve disciples alone, were not sufficient to eat up this
Lamb of a year old, especially if the Syrian kind were great and large, as
may be supposed by the Arist histor. Anno lib 6. cap 28 P^r h^s^. nature. l b
cap. 98
description of Aristotle, Pliny, and others. Neither does it appear that any
remained, or was burned with fire, Exodus 12, 10.
according to the institution of God, because the Evangelists declare, that so
soon as the Supper was administered and a psalm sung of thanksgiving, Mat 2^,
30.
they went out into the Mount of Olives. Why then should we not think that
Christ added and annexed other to his family, seeing his own disciples
sufficed not, especially the blessed Virgin his mother who was not long from
him? Ioh. 19, 26.27.
whom afterward, after his departure, he commended and committed to John, to be
protected and provided for, who from that time took her home to his house as
his own mother. To conclude, we must consider, that besides the lamb killed
for the Passover, (whereby they were not all satisfied) they had other meat
to make up their Supper, as appears by the broth wherein the soppe was
dipped, Math. 26, 23. Mark. 14, 20. John 13, 26. For the Lamb commanded by the
ordinance of God to be roasted, had no sauce or broth appointed, but only
sour herbs prescribed, Exodus 12. So there, Fulk on Mat. 16.
the learned observe that there were three Suppets that night: the first of the
Pafchall Lamb, of which the Evangelists say, The Passover was prepared. The
second was an ordinary supper to feed and nourish the body, such as was daily
received, whereunto we must refer the dipping of the soppe in the platter,
inasmuch as the Passover had no such ordinance. The third was after both the
other, to wit, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper instituted to feed the soul,
and therefore was taken after the body was fed. Moreover, when the Disciples
were sent to prepare a place to eat the Passover, the man whom they met
bearing a pitcher of water showed them a large upper room furnished and
prepared: Mar. 14.15.
now what need had there been of such a large chamber, if twelve guests only
had sat therein? Wherefore albeit we confess according to the Scripture, that
he sat down with the twelve, yet it follows not hereupon that the twelve
only were present, but that all the twelve were present at the Passover. It
was indeed prepared and provided for the Disciples, Matthew 26. 18. Luke 22.11.
but he had more Disciples then they, believing in his name, and professing the
truth that they had learned of him; and are oftentimes distinguished from the
twelve, which he called his Apostles. Ioh. 6, 66, 67.


But to leave these considerations as conjectures, we answer the former
objection, that inasmuch as Christ delivered both signs to the same persons,
they might bar the people from the bread as well as from the cup. For I would
know why the bread is necessary, but because it was instituted by Christ, and
retained by his Apostles? Wherefore, the institution makes the one as
requisite as the other. Besides, if other heretics should arise, as great
enemies to the peoples partaking of the bread, as the Church of Rome is to
their communicating of the cup of the Lord: how might they better be
repressed and refelled, then by alleging the first institution of Christ, and
showing the practice of the Apostles? So that the reasons brought to confute the
one, will serve directly to overthrow the other.

Moreover, the Disciples at the first ministration of the Supper, performed not
the office of the Minister, nor any part of his duty, but of the people; Christ
was the Minister thereof, he took the bread he blessed, he gave the bread,
saying, This is my body. Likewise he took the cup, blessed, and gave the
same, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood. On the other side, the
Disciples took it, did eat and drink, which are the proper duties of all the
people. Lastly, the Apostle says not in the first person, we eat and drink,
as speaking of himself and other teachers of the Church: but directing his
speech to al 1 Cor. 1, 2.
that are called and sanctified in Christ in every place, (according to the
inscription of the epistle) he says, As often as ye shall eat this bread 1
Cor. 11, 26
and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Now these
Corinthians to whom he especially wrote, could not live until the second
coming of Christ to judgment: therefore this eating and this drinking
belongs to us that live in these days, and to all that call upon the name of
God to the end of the world.

They continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in breaking of bread: and cha.
20. They came together to break bread. It is not said, to deliver the cup unto
the people, Act. 2, 42. and 20, 7.
but to break bread: whereby they gather, it was ministered unto the people in
one kind only, and not in both. I answer, Hebrews, this phrase in
Scripture, to eat bread, is to receive whole nourishment and full refreshing
by eating and drinking: as appears by Esaias. 58, 7. Lamon. 4, 4. M^t. 15, 33.
Acts 20, 11.
many places, where mentioning only bread for food, it were madness to
imagine and gather that they drunk not. Besides, the Apostle sometimes puts
the other part, to wit, drinking of the 1 Cor 12, 13
cup, for the whole celebration of the Supper, as when he says, By one
Spirit we are all baptized into one body, and have been all made to drink
into one Spirit: where we see, as our Savior added the universal note, drink
ye all of this: and as the Evangelist Mark accords, saying, They all drank
of it: so the Apostle does not pretermit it, but says, All were made to
drink: as if the Lord Jesus, the Evangelists and the Apostles would prevent
before hand, the corruption that followed in the Church of Rome. Wherefore,
seeing drinking of the cup, does not properly note out the whole action,
because no man was ever so grossly blinded, to suppose that the cup might be
alone administered: it follows, that by this member expressed, we must
understand the other, and by one part the whole. Furthermore, it is a ruled
case among themselves, that it is flat sacrilege, if a Priest consecrate not
this Sacrament in both kinds, but do it in bread only. If then the former
Scriptures, Act. 2. and chap, 20. prove the receiving under one kind, because
bread only is expressed, and so the cup to be excluded: it will likewise
follow, they consecrated in one kind, because the wine is not expressed: and
therefore by these places, neither Priest nor people should take the cup, if
they will not admit a trope or figure. Neither can they say, that Luke
describes not what the Apostles consecrated or received, but what they
delivered to the people: for the Evangelist declares, Acts 20, 11. not only
that the Apostle brake the bread but Act. 20, 7.
did eat there of himself; so that they must confess, that Paul also
received in one kind, and consecrated in one kind, or else necessarily grant
one part put for the whole: as likewise we see, 1 Cor. 11. where he does
expressly touch and teach both kinds, 1 Cor. 11, 26 27, 28, 29.
to the eating of the bread joining the drinking of this cup: yet sometimes 1
Cor. 11.20, 29, 33.
he expresses only the one sign for shortness sake; and the Church had
received this usual manner of speaking, to call the Lords Supper the breaking
of bread, as verse 20. When ye come together into one place, this is not to
eat the Lords Supper: and verse 33. When ye come together to eat, tarry one
for another: likewise verse 29 He discerns not the Lords body: and yet in the
sentence going before, he says that such as eat and drink unworthily, do
eat and drink their own judgment. Wherefore, as the Apostles always
celebrated the Supper by consecration both of the bread and of the cup: so
the people always received in both these ki^des, to their great comfort and
consolation.

Thirdly, they pretend that Christ our Savior did eat Emaus, Luke 24.30.
where it is only said, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it: Howbeit here is no speech of the cup at all, of taking it into his
hands, and delivering it into their hands. I answer, of the body. Secondly,
suppose and admit that Christ had there administered the holy Supper, because
here is mention made of taking, and blessing, and breaking, and giving of
bread: yet it will not follow by any good consequent, that there was no wine at
all, because Luke speaks of bread only; for it is said in like manner that
Joseph, made Governor of the land of Egypt, Genesis 43, 25. and 37, 25. Mat. 14,
19. Luke 9, 16.
invited his brethren to eat bread: the meaning is not that they were bidden
to a dry feast and drank not at it, but one part is put for the whole
nourishment. So are the words to be understood in this place, that they did
eat and drink together, having communed and traveled together. If any man
remain obstinate and will not be satisfied with these things, but ask
further, how it will appear that there was more then bread used among them, I
refer him to the words of Peter preaching to Cornelius, Acts 10. Act. 10
40.41.
where speaking of Christ he says, Him God raised up the third day, and showed
him openly, not to all the people, but unto us witnesses chosen before of God,
even to us that did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. In
which words the truth of his resurrection is proved, by performing of such
actions as were ordinary and familiar: and albeit he be said, not once or
twice, but oftentimes to eat with them, Ioh. 21, 13. Luke 24, 33, 43. yet
Peter testifies in this place that he did both eat and drink, and so we are
to understand these words. Lastly, let them mark what will follow from these
words being restrained to eating only: for thereby we gather, not only that
the two disciples did not drink, but that Christ himself dru^ke not, who is
supposed to deliver the Supper, for there is no speech or mention of it, nor
one syllable touching any such matter. And if Christ did not drink, then the
Priests also should be exempted from the necessity of partaking of the cup,
which marreth all the market and merchandise of these half communions.

Concomitantia.
there is no separation of the body from the blood, or blood from the body. I
answer, Gal. 3, 27.
baptism, and he dwells in our hearts by Heb 3, 14, 15 Ephe. 3, 17.
faith which comes by the word of God. Again, were not Christ and his
Apostles as wise as they? Were they ignorant of this union? Did they not know
this accompanying of the body with the blood, and blood with the body? Is the
present church of Rome wiser then he, in whom all the Col. 1, 19. and 2, 3, 9.
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid? If they think so, let them tell
us plainly: if not, let them lay their hands upon their mouth, and submit
themselves unto him who administered it in both kinds, and commanded his
Apostles to do the like. Moreover, Christ would have us in his Supper consider
his blood separated from his body, and set his death before our eyes, and his
precious blood shed out of his side: so that delivering the cup, he said,
Mat. 26.27.28.
Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new testament, which is
shed for many, without which shedding, there is Heb. 9, 22.
no forgiveness of sins, as the Apostle teaches. Wherefore, seeing these two
are contrary one to the other, and cannot stand together; to wit, the blood to
be in the body and to be out of the body, to be shed for us and not to be shed,
and that the Sacrament leads us to the consideration of the death; and
especially of the piercing of the body and pouring out of the blood of Christ:
we may conclude, that this Council. Trid. sess. 3. can. 3.
union of the body with the blood, and blood with the body, flatly crosses
and overthrows the institution of Christ. And why I pray you do their
sacrificing Priests receive the blood twice, and the body twice, drinking
first the blood in the body, and again eating the body in the blood? Nay, does
not this union devised, alter the institution of Christ, and confound the
several parts of it, making him to speak otherwise then the Evangelists
express? For when he said, This is my body, they will have him mean, this
is my body and blood: Again; when he said, this is my blood, they will have
him mean, this is my blood and my body. Last of all, this late invention,
turns and ouerturneth the nature of the parts, distinguished one from the
other: while we eat the flesh they make us drink the blood, and while we
drink the blood, they imagine we eat the body. Thus to eat and to drink
shall be all one with them: for we shall eat liquid and moist things, and we
shall drink dry and hard things. And is not this drinking of flesh, and eating
of blood, an inuerting and euerting of the nature of things? But thus God
strikes his enemies with giddiness of spirit. For after they have broken the
pure institution of Christ, and brought in a carnal presence of his body, (one
absurdity being granted, Arist. phys. lib. 1. cap. 2. and 3.
a thousand follow) infinite abuses have ensued upon heaps, the floodgates
being set open, whereof there is no end or measure. Let them therefore repent
themselves of this sacrilege against God, and injury against his people,
restoring unto them the communion under both kinds, according to the ordinance
of Christ, and direction of the Apostles. And thus much of the general uses
arising from both the signs jointly considered. Now let us come to the
particular uses offered unto us, Partic. use 1.
in each of the signs. And first touching the bread. Is bread simply
considered the first sign in the Lords Supper? Then it is not necessarily
required, that it be administered in unleavened bread. For bread is oftentimes
named and repeated: but the word (unleavened) is never added. Wherefore as it
is in it self indifferent whether the wine be red or white, and whatsoever the
kind or color be (if it be wine:) so is it not greatly material whether the
bread be leauened or unleavened, so it be bread. Which overthrows the error of
the church of Rome and her fauorits, who hold it Beliar. lib. 4. de Eucha cap.
7.
necessary that the bread used in the Sacrament be unleavened. They pretend the
institution of Christ, who (say they) made the Sacrament of unleavened bread,
instituting it after he had eaten the Passover, which was to be eaten with
unleavened bread, Exodus 12, 8.18.
according to the law of Moses, neither was there any leaue^ to be found in
Israel seven days together. Thus they charge us to break the institution of
Christ. But see here the peeuishnes and partiality of these proud spirits, who
fly to the institution, and stick precisely to the circumstances of it, when
it serves any way to their purpose: but when the question is of matters of
substance not of circumstance, as touching communicating under both kinds,
touching the necessity of eating and drinking, and of many receiving together
against their half communions, private masses, and reseruations, they cannot
abide to be tied and yoked to the institution. Indeed we deny not, but Christ
might use unleavened bread at his last Supper, having immediately before eaten
the Paschal Lamb. This peradventure is truly coniectured: yet no such thing is
expressed in the Gospel, nor prescribed as a rule necessarily to be followed.
The Evangelists teach, he took bread: but make no mention or distinction what
bread he took, nor determine what bread we should take, no more then limit
what wine we shall use, but leave it at liberty to take leauened bread or
unleavened, as occasion of time, place, persons, and other circumstances serve,
so we take bread; as their own Gregor. 1. in Registr.
Prophets have confessed, and their own Councels Council. Florent. sess. vlt.
have concluded. Wherefore, to consecrate in unleavened bread, is not of the
substance of the Supper, no more then to eat it at night or after Supper, as
Christ administered and the Apostles first received it. For if any would bring
in a necessity of that time, as well as of that bread which Christ used, we
see as fair a warrant for the one as for the other: nay we have a more
certain direction for the time which is expressed, then for the kind of bread
which is not defined. Besides, if Christ on this occasion used unleavened
bread: it was because it was usual, common, and ordinary bread at that time,
as we also should use that bread which is usual and common. So the Apostle
speaks of that bread which was daily used among the Gentiles, saying, 1 Cor.
10, 16
The bread which we break: he adds, neither leauened nor unleavened, but
understands that in common and continual use. Thus then we conclude, it is
no breach of Christ's ordinance, nor a transgression of the first original
institution of the Lords Supper, to eat either the one or the other.

Partic. use 2.
Again, touching the other sign, which is the wine, the Church of Rome may
justly be charged with transgressing the ordinance of Christ, who by her sole
authority would tie us to mingle water with wine for Rhem. Test. fol. 452. nu.
23.
great mystery and signification, especially, for that water gushed with blood,
out of our Lords side. So they condemn all those Churches as doing impudently
and damnably, that do not mix water with wine in the Sacrament, and say it
cannot be omitted without great sin. True it is, the Church in former times,
where the wine provided for the Lords Table, was of it self heady, strong,
hot, fiery, and fuming, was wont to allay it with water, that it might be mild
and temperate: least that which was taken to help and further the soul,
should disquiet and distemper the body. This began for conueniency, not for
necessity: for fitness, not for signification: for sobriety, not for any
mystery. But the water is no part of Christ's institution, neither can it be
proved, that Christ or his Apostles used water with their wine, or commanded
others to mingle wine and water in this mystery, or that Christ's Apostles ever
received it as a matter of faith, or taught it to be a necessary part of this
Sacrament. For Alexander the 5. Bishop of Rome, was the first that Barth.
Caranza sum. Council. Florent p. 458.
mingled water with wine at consecration, and ordained that the oblation should
be of unleavened Polid. Virg. de inuentor. Rerum lib. 5. cap. 9.
bread, and not of leauened, as till that time had been used. Wherefore, let
us retain and maintain the plain and simple institution of Christ, who in
his last Supper gave wine, not water to be drunk, for he calls it the fruit
Mat. 26, 29.
of the vine, which is wine and not water.

Again, they may be pressed and hampered with their own dreams and devices.
For whereas they hold that the wine must be mingled with water, and that the
elements after the words of consecration are transubstantiated, and remain in
their own nature no more: I would ask this question of these Watermen, rowing
in the troubled sea of their own decrees (who are near of kin Papists are
near of kin to the old heretics called Aquarij.
to the old heretics called Aquarij) whether the water mixed with the wine be
turned into blood? If they say it is not, then they deny transubstantiation of
all that is within the cup, and so shake the virtue of their consecration in
pieces: if they say it is, then will they make Christ a watery body and
eleme^tall: besides, it cannot be by virtue of Christ's institution, where water
is neither expressed nor included. So then, their best defense is to answer
with the Pharisees, Mat. 21.23.
We cannot tell. To conclude, let us not seek to be wiser the^ Christ, nor to
mingle together more mysteries then we have learned of him, as Paul says of
his own practice, 1 Cor. 11, 23
That which I received of the Lord, I have delivered unto you. Neither Prophet,
nor Apostle, nor Angel from heaven is to teach otherwise then Christ himself
has taught, as he charged his disciples, Teach them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. He has supreme authority in the Church, his
doctrine alone should be heard, as the Father himself witnesses from heaven,
Mat. 17, 5.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I have delight, hear h m. We are not to
regard what other before us have thought meet to do, but what Christ did, who
is before all other, and called himself the truth, Cyprian epist.
and not custom. Thus much of the third outward part of the Lords Supper, to
wit, the two signs of bread and wine.

CHAP. VI. Of the fourth outward part of the Lords Supper.
THe last outward part remains, which are the The fourth outward part are the
communicants.
communicants: whose actions are outward, to take the bread and wine into their
hands: then to eat the bread and drink the wine to the nourishment of their
bodies, Mat. 26, 26.
as is directly proved by the institution of this Sacrament, where Christ gave
the bread and cup into their hands, the Disciples received the one and the
other, they did eat the bread and all drank of the cup. These being the
necessary actions of every receiver, to take, to eat, to drink: it beats
down many false doctrines of the Church of Rome, as their reservation,
ostentation, elevation, adoration, circumgestation, procession, and private
communion: it teaches also many necessary truths to direct our knowledge and
increase our obedience, which we will consider in order.

Con. Trid. sess. 3. can. 5.
lifting it over the Priests head, and going with it in procession, is utterly
unlawful. For it is no Sacrament unless it be used according to Christ's
institution and commandment, but to the institution it belongs, as on the
behalf of the Minister to take, to bless, to pour out, and to distribute: so
on the behalf of the communicants to take, to eat, and to drink, in them
all, to show thereby the Lords death, and to do it in remembrance of him: which
cannot be performed but by observing the whole action. For how can they show
the Lords death, or do it in remembrance of Christ, unless they take and eat?
And as the Paschal lamb was not that passover, unless it were killed and
eaten: no more is the bread and wine a Sacrament, except they be received and
digested. The Passover was the same in effect with the Lords Supper, Revel.
13, 8.
who was the lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Now God commanded
that none of it should remain unto the morning, but the remnant Exodus 12, 10
should be consumed with fire. The like may be said of Manna, the same in
substance with this Sacrament: it was not to be kept and carried about, Let no
man Exodus 16, 19
reserve thereof till morning. Besides, there is the same reason of the cup and
of the bread: but they reserve not the wine, they carry it not about to show
the people: why then should they keep the other part? Likewise, when Christ
said to his Apostles, Mat. 28, 20.
Go baptize the nations: it was no baptism by the H^^si. Confess. de Euchar
st. cap. ^9.
confession of the adversaries themselves, unless there were some person
baptized: so when Christ said, Take and eat, there is no Sacrament unless
there be a receiving and eating. For as the one stands in washing, so does
the other in eating and drinking, not in keeping and reserving, not in carrying
in procession on a white horse, not in hanging it up under a Canopy, nor in
bearing it to the sick with bell and candle. Christ took bread and gave it to
his Disciples saying, Mat. 26 26.27. 1 Cor. 11, 26.
Eat ye: he took the cup, and when he bad given thanks he said, Drink ye all
of this, do this in remembrance of me: as often as ye shall eat this bread and
drink of this cup ye show the Lords death till he come. But they hang it in
the pixe, bear it in boxes, and carry it about in public triumphs, and in
common calamities, when any judgment of war, plague, pestilence, and famine,
and like visitation is among them: then their Jack in the box goes abroad in
solemn Council Trid sess. 13. cap. 5.
processions to be seen, which is the way to increase, not to slack: to
kindle, not to quench: to provoke, not to revoke the judgments of God gone out
against them. Besides, they show this Sacrament to the simple people, to fall
down to it as to a God, they put it upon the breasts of the dead, and
sometimes lay it in the grave with them, I think to declare it to all the
world, that they wish Christ dead, buried, and forgotten for ever, that the
Bishop of Rome might with his shauelings rule and reign as a God up on the
earth. Can light and darkness, can heaven and earth, fire and water, sweet and
sour be more contrary then these vain things, to the institution of Christ?
Who never said, keep it in vessels, hang it under Canopies, carry it in
processions, Orig in Leuit. hom. l. 5.
give it to the dead, lay it up in their tombs, bring it abroad in common
judgments: but take ye, eat ye, drink ye, and by receiving, eating, and
drinking, show ye forth the Lords death until he come to judgment to judge
the quick and the dead. This Sacrament is an holy feast, an heavenly banquet,
and therefore not to be hidden in a box, as a light put under a bushel, but
to be set on the Lords Table for all his guests to feed thereon.

Again, if the substance and essence of this Sacrament and calling the
Sacrament Guil. Alan. de sacrific. Euchar cap 41. Bristo. moti. 26.
their Lord and God, as it is destitute of all antiquity, so it is full of
gross and palpable Idolatry. For whereas it was accustomed to hold up the
arms and offerings consecrated to God for the poor, thereby imitating the
heaue-offering of the Jews, and stirring up the people to the like charity and
devotion, it degenerated to the lifting up of the host and bread in the
Sacrament. So that where Christ says, take ye, eat ye: these
bread-worshippers have changed it into, look ye, gaze ye, worship ye, giving
his glory to dumb and senceles creatures. True it is, we confess that the
Sacraments as mysteries sanctified to an holy use, as vessels of Gods grace,
and as instruments fitted to work great things, are not to be contemned or
refused, but to be received with due regard, and to be used with all sobriety:
yea we confess that Christ God and man is to be worshipped every where: we
honor his word, we reverence his Sacraments. Notwithstanding, The Sacrament is
not to be adored.
we put a difference between God and the Sacrament of God, the same honor is
not due to the one, that is due to the other, and therefore we cannot adore the
Elements with divine worship, for many reasons. First, because Christ in the
institution of his Supper said, take, eat, drink: he said not, worship, fall
down, bow the knees before the Sacrament, and call upon it in time of need. We
heard before in the case of unleavened bread, they appealed to the institution
of Christ: why do they now fly from it, turning eating and drinking into
worshipping and adoring? Wherefore, is it not a great iniquity and wickedness to
omit that Christ comma^deth, and do what he comma^deth not? Secondly, God only
is to be worshipped with divine honor, Mat. 4, 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only thou shall serve. And Exodus
20. Thou shall not bow down to the^, nor worship the^. Now the Sacra^. is not
Christ, it is an institution of Christ: it is not God, but an ordinance of God;
for God is not visible, but the sacrament is visible, that al may know it, and
see it with their eyes: the Sacram. is eaten, but God cannot be eaten and
swallowed up of us, 1 Kin. 8, 27. Acts 7, 48, 49.
whom the heavens and the heavens of heavens cannot contain or comprehend.
Thirdly, Christ reproves the Samaritans, because They worshipped that Ioh. 4,
22.
they knew not: but the papists know not the body of Christ to be contained
under the accidents of bread and wine, for the Scriptures have not taught it,
Christ has not delivered it, the Apostles have not showed it. Besides, they
know not the Priests intent, whereon they say the essence of the Sacrament
depends, so as if he had no purpose of consecration, they cannot deny
themselves to be Idolaters and bread worshippers. Fourthly, Ioh 4, 24.
the true worshippers must worship God in spirit and in truth, as Christ
sets down, John 4, 24. that is, not according to our own imaginations and
devices, but as God has prescribed: but to fall down to the Sacrament is a
bodily service, a new forged worship, and an humane invention. Fifthly, without
faith no man can Heb. 11, 6.
please God: but faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,
which yet they could never show unto us: therefore they can have no assurance
of pleasing God in their willworship. Sixthly, if this Sacrament be to be
worshipped, then it is united personally to Christ, because adoration should
not be due to Christ as man, except God and man in the union of person were one
Christ: but there is no personal union between Christ and the Sacrament of
Christ: therefore not to be worshipped. Seauenthly, no man in his wits and
right mind will honor that with divine worship, which himself may take in his
hand, and eat with his mouth, and which may be devoured by Mice, Rats, dogs,
worms, or other vermin: for how shall that be adored as God, that cannot
defend it self from the teeth of men and beasts? As Ioash answered, Iud. 6,
31, 32.
Will ye plead Baals cause? If he be God, let him plead for himself against
him that has cast down his Altar. Lastly, seeing they adore Christ in the
pixe, where the bread is; and in the chalice where the wine is, why do they not
likewise worship him in the Priest and in the faithful people, and every man in
his brother, when they have created and eaten him up? The same Christ that was
surely enclosed in the pixe, is by their doctrine, really contained in the body
of Priest and people, when they have eaten and drunken their supposed
sacrifice: Why then adore they not the flesh of Christ, after that it is entered
into the mouth of man, as well as in the golden box, or in the golden chalice?
Nay, why may he not be adored in the bodies of mice and vermin by them, if it
fall out that they eat up their God? Shall he be any where without honor? Or
will they worship him where they list, and ouerskip him where they please?
Howsoever therefore Christ is to be worshipped, yet we must take heed we
worship not a piece of bread in stead of Christ, which is most gross and
horrible Idolatry.

(...)
turning the holy Sacrament into an unbloody sacrifice for the quick and the
dead, abolishing the fruit and remembrance of the death of Christ, disanulling
his Priesthood, giving him to his Father, whereas the Father has given him to
us; and imagining thereby to pay a price to God, which he should receive as a
satisfaction for our sins. True it is, the Lords Supper may after a sort be
called a sacrifice, not as the Church of Rome means, In wine ^ea^ Ch ^ists
Su^p^^ (...) be called a ^ac^ifi^e.
but because therein we offer up praises and thanksgiuings to God, for that
sacrifice of attoneme^t once made upon the Cross, which is most acceptable to
God: and because such as come aright thereunto, offer up themselue; wholly to
God, a reasonable, holy, and living sacrifice: and lastly, because thereby we
call to our remembrance the bloody sacrifice of Christ with all the
circumstances thereof, the shame of the Cross, the darkness of the heaven,
the shaking of the earth, the renting of the air, the cleaving of the rocks,
the reproaches of the Jews, the taunts of the Soldiers, the opening of the
graves, and the conquering of the Devil. For the Christians in former times,
The Fathers of the church living among the Gentile, called the s^pper a sa^^^^.
perceiving that many both Jews and Gentiles, refused to embrace the faith of
Christ, and to join themselves to the Church, because they pretend the want of
sacrifices among them, (and nature engrafted in all nations this principle,
that we have no free access to God, no true peace to our selves, without a
sacrifice) the Fathers to win such as were without, affirmed that the Church
had also a sacrifice, and thereupon entitled the Sacrament of the Supper with
the name of a sacrifice, for the causes before remembered. But for a mortal
man, whose breath is in his nostrils, to presume in the pride of his heart,
under the forms of bread and wine o offer up Christ the Son of God in
sacrifice to his Father, and to dare to desire the Father favorably to behold
and accept his own Son, is idolatry, blasphemy, and horrible impiety, to be
detested of all true hearted Christians.

Touching the original of The original of the word Mass.
the word Mass, it seems to come from an ancient custom of the Church,
sending away such as communicated not. For the Deacon was accustomed to bid
the^ depart that were nouices in the faith, and such as by Church Discipline
Folid (...). de invent Rerum l^b 5. c 19.
were removed from the Communion. This dimission of them was noted by the word
M^ss^, signifying a sending away and licensing to depart: and thus some of
Suct^^ in Cal^g cap 24.
the heathen used it. The name then being in it self not evil, is turned into
an evil practice, and therefore as it is used and understood of our
adversaries, we reject both the name and thing it self, for these causes.
First no Angel, no man, no creature is of that dignity and worthiness, that he
may offer up and sacrifice the Son of God: for the Priest is above the
sacrifice: they therefore that will be the Priests to offer Christ, advance and
lift up themselves above Christ. Secondly, if Christ be really offered in the
Mass, then he is killed truly and indeed: for a real sacrifice proves a
real death, and when Christ was sacrificed really, he dyed really, as when the
beasts were sacrificed, they were killed. And Hol^^t one of the schoolmen
says. If there had been a thousand hosts n a thousand places, at the same
time that Christ d d hang upon the Cross, (...) l^b. sent ^^. 3.
Christ had been crucified in a thousand places. Wherefore, they that really
sacrificed our Savior Christ, did in that act really and wickedly kill him: so
that the Priests of Baal, if they will be sacrificers of Christ, must
acknowledge themselves therein the real murderers of Christ.

Thirdly, new sacrifices are not to be instituted by men, without commandment
of God, as Moses teaches, Deuteronomy. 12. We must not do what seems good in our
own eyes, but take heed and hear all these words which he commands us. Now
Christ never said, Sacrifice ye my body and blood to God. Fourthly, Christ
took the bread and gave it to his Disciples, he did not offer it up to God the
Father, he took the cup and bad them all drink of it: he did not turn
himself to God, end desire him then to accept the sacrifice of his body and
blood. Fifthly, if the bread and wine remain in their former substance in the
Lords Supper: then bread and wine only are offered, not the body and blood of
Christ, but they remain: for Christ delivered 1 Cor. 10, 16
bread to his disciples, and Paul teaches that it is the bread which is
broken, and that as often as they shall eat this bread and drink of this cup,
they show the Lords death: therefore their real Sacrifice is real Idolatry.
Sixthly, it appears in the institution of the Supper, that Christ consecrated
the bread apart, and the wine apart, and afterward delivered them both apart,
but the body of Christ was never sacrificed without the blood, nor the blood
without the flesh: for Christ offered upon the Altar of the Cross the
sacrifice of his body and blood together, this is the cause that he said, Take
ye, eat ye, drink ye, not take ye to offer and to sacrifice.

Seventhly, the Scripture teaches us one offering and sacrifice for sin once
performed and offered. Heb. 10. We are sanctified by the offering of Jesus
Christ Heb. 10.12.
once made: and ver. 12. This man after he had offered one sacrifice for
sins, sits at the right hand of God. And the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. There is
one meditator between God and men, the man Jesus Christ, who gave himself a
ransom for all men. So 1 Ioh. 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our
sins. Likewise Heb. 9. By his own blood he entered in once unto the holy place,
and obtained eternal redemption for us: not that he should offer himself Heb.
9, 12, 25
often, as the high Priest entered into the holy place every year, with other
blood (for then must he have often suffered since the foundation of the world)
but now in the end of the world has he bin made manifest once to put away sin
by the sacrifice of himself. We have plentiful testimonies of this truth in
this Epistle, as chap. 10. Where remission of these things is, there is no Heb
10, 18
more offering for sin. If then we have remission by the sacrifice of Christ,
all other sacrifices are superfluous, and abrogate his all-sufficient sacrifice.
So Romans 6. In that he dyed, he dyed for sin Romans 6, 10.
once. And 1. Pet. 3. Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust. If then this perfect offering were once only to be offered, then he is
not offered, neither can be offered again in the Mass. And if the only
oblation of Christ once offered by himself be sufficient: al other oblations
and sacrifices are vain and superfluous. For how is that perfect, which is
often repeated?

Eighthly, to make a lawful sacrifice, there is required necessarily a fit
Minister lawfully called of God, for Heb. 5, 4, 5.
no man takes this honor to himself but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron: so likewise Christ took not to himself this honor to be made the
High Priest, but he that said to him, Thou art my Son, this day I begat thee,
gave it him. But Christ is the only Priest of the new testament, his
Priesthood is immortal and eternal, he lives for ever, therefore the popish
Priesthood is a plant never planted by the heavenly Father the Ioh. 15, 1.2.
true husbandman, and the popish Priests were never called of God to sacrifice
the body and blood of Christ, he gave unto them no such authority, Mat. 15, 23.
and therefore in time shall be rooted up. If they pretend the precept and
planting of God, let them show their commission that we may see it, and let
them bring forth their charter that we may try it, otherwise we must take them
for usurpers, and counterfeit Officers in the city of God.

Ninthly, the Apostle teaches, that without shedding of blood is no Heb. 9, 22.
remission: But in the unbloody sacrifice of the Mass, there is not effusion
of blood, he does not suffer, he is not killed, he does not shed his blood, he
does not die: therefore in the Mass is no remission of any sins.

Tenthly, if Christ be daily offered in the Mass, then he does daily satisfy
for sin, for the end of his offering is to make satisfaction, as Romans 4, 25.
Romans 4 25.
He was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our just
ficat on And Gal. 1, 4. He gave himself for our sins that be might deliver
us from this present evil world; But he does not make satisfaction for our
sins, no more then now he dies and rises again, for then Christ would not
have said, Ioh. 1^, 30.
It is finished: nor the Apostle, Heb. 9, 12.
He entered once into the holy place. Wherefore, no more sacrifice for sin
remains to be offered by such as injuriously usurp the Priesthood of Christ.

Last of all, al true Christians are Priests to offer up their bodies an
acceptable sacrifice unto God, which is their reasonable service of God, and to
offer up a broken and contrite spirit, as 1 Pet. 3, 9. Ye are a chosen
generation, 1 Pet. 2, 9.
a royal Priesthood, and an holy nation. And Revel. 1. He has loved us and
washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings and Pr ests unto God
his Father. These are the Priests that now remain, this is the Priesthood
which we profess. Whosoever makes himself any Priest of another order in the
new testament, abrogateth and abolisheth the Priesthood of Christ, being after
the order Heb. 6, 20. Psalm. 110.4.
of Melchizedech, who was both King and Priest.

Now then, as they commit sacrilege against Christ, that presume to offer him
up an unbloody sacrifice to God the Father, to make peace and atonement
between God and man: so they add another iniquity as drunkenness to thirst,
making their oblation not only profitable to take away the sins of the
living but available to cleanse The Mass is no propitiatory sacrifice f^^ the
dead, ^o wit, the price and redemption of ^oules.
the sins of the dead, that are come to the end of their days. Indeed we
deny not, but the Mass may be beneficial to the rabble of Friars and
sacrificing Priests that make it gainefull to themselves, who through their
sale and merchandise of Masses, dwell stately, go sumptuously, fare delicately,
drink wine in silver and gold, abound in pleasures, and heap up great
abundance of all riches: shall we not now say, the Mass is profitable? But
other profit of the Masses the^ these to the Masse-mongers, we know none. We
know, we find, we feel them otherwise many ways pernicious in themselves,
dishonorable to God, and hurtful to the people. For first, the Sacrament was
instituted to no such end and purpose, as to help the dead, and to be a
propitiation for their sins. For Christ said, Take and eat, this is my body:
drink ye, this is my blood: but the dead cannot take any thing offered unto
them: they can neither eat nor drink: wherefore, this Supper being spiritual
meat and nourishment for the soul, cannot avail the dead, who are neither
fed nor nourished. Secondly, it profits as much to be baptized for the dead,
as to receive the Supper of the Lord for the dead: for both Sacraments were
instituted of Christ, and there is the same respect of both. But it can do no
good to baptize one for another, the living for the dead, therefore the living
coming to receive the Sacrament of the Supper cannot relieve the dead.

Thirdly, there is no forgiveness of sins after this life, we have
forgiveness in this life or never. Whatsoever is bound on earth, is bound in
heaven. Here is the time, here is the place, here is the occasion offered to
work, as the wise man teaches, Eccl. 9. All that thine hand shall find to do,
do it with all thy power: for there is Eccl. 9, 10.
neither work, nor invent on, nor knowledge, nor w^sedome in the grave whither
thou go. And Heb. 3. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Wherefore then is a sacrifice offered for the dead, for whom there is
no relief, no redress, no remission? Fourthly, it is vain to offer for those
that have ended their days, and are already come to the end of their race,
Ioh. 9, 4. and 11, 9, 10.
whose estate can never be changed. This the Evangelist John teaches. Chap. 9,
4. The night comes, when no man can wor^e, and Chap. 11. Are there not twelve
hours in the day? If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he
sees the li^ht of this world. And chap. 11.9, 10. If a man walk in the night,
he stumbleth because there is no light in him. And Paul 2. Tim. 4. I have
f^ught a good fight, I have sin shed my race, I have kept the faith, from
henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness. But this is the
estate of all the dead, they are entered into judgment, they are not subject to
any change.

Lastly, if the sacrifice of the Mass could wash away the sins of the dead,
the^ the sacrifice of the Mass should surmount and exceed the sacrifice
offered by Christ himself upon the Cross. For this helps the living, it
avails not the dead: and so we should have other means to take away sin
then his oblation, and there should be another propitiation for the sins of the
world. And thus much of the popish Idol of the blasphemous Mass.

Against private masses in the church of Rome.
of the popish Church, where all is Council. Trid. sess 22. cap. 6.
devoured by the Priest, nothing delivered to the people. For whereas the
ordinance of Christ and ancient order of the Church was for the Minister and
people to receive the Sacrament together: among them the Pressed accompanied with
his boy to make answer, receives the Sacrament himself alone, without
distribution made to others, yea although the whole congregation be present and
look upon him, whereby God is dishonored, the communion is abolished, the
people of God are thereby deprived and robbed of all comfort. How is this a
feast which the Priest prepares for himself, not for others: receives by
himself, not with his brethren: he speaks to himself, and not to the
assembly: he uses a strange tongue, and no man knows what he means: the
people is taught nothing, they understand nothing, they hear nothing, they
receive nothing; and a few childish, apish foolish, and unseemly gestures
excepted, they see nothing: they taste nothing, they partake nothing, neither
comfort of heart, nor memory of Christ, nor benefit of his passion. But Christ
in his last Supper, did not eat up all alone, but after the Disciples had
supped as Matthew Mat. 26, 26.
sets it down, he took bread and blessed, he brake and gave it to them,
saying, take ye, eat ye: neither did he drink alone of the fruit of the
vine, but taking the cup he gave thanks, and gave to them all, saying, Drink
ye all of this. So then albeit a certain number of communicants are not
limited and determined: yet Christ in these words appoints a company to be
present, as appears by the number, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye all, divide
ye it among your selves, do ye this in my remembrance, ye set forth the Lords
death, when ye come together to eat, tarry ye one for another, as often as ye
shall eat this bread.

These words cannot be understood of one particular man, but necessarily
import a great number of men: nay, the Philosopher teaches, that the word
(all) must be verefied at the least Arist. lib. 1. de Cocl. cap. 1.
of the number of three, which is the least and lowest number that would be
admitted to this Supper. Neither do we read that so soon as one was gained
to the faith, that the Apostles administered this Sacrament to him, much less
would they minister to themselves alone, when none were converted in a nation
or City.

Secondly, Christ expressly commands us to do as himself did, when he left
this farewell token and pledge of his love to his Disciples, saying, Luke 22,
19.
Do this in remembrance of me. But he, after the words of consecration, did not
offer a sacrifice to his Father under shows of bread and wine, but gave the
bread and cup to his Disciples, and left his own example as a direction for
us to follow: so that the distribution and deliverance of the signs is of the
substance of the Sacrament, as well as the breaking of the bread or pouring out
of the wine, and it is not lawful in any sort to change the testament of
Christ, or to corrupt the meaning of the testator. Thirdly, the Apostle
teaches how he received from the Lord that which he delivered to the churches,
that the people should eat of this bread and drink of this cup: 1 Cor. 11, 23
and proves that the faithful are made partakers of the Lords Table, not by
gazing or looking on while others eat, but by eating: not by standing still
while others drink, but by drinking, as 1 Cor. 10. We that are many are one
bread and one body, because we are all partakers of one bread. Fourthly, the
same Apostle reproves the Corinthians, which presumed to take the Supper of
the Lord before others, and did not tarry for their brethren when they came
together to be partakers of the Sacrament, as we see, 1 Cor. 11. Every man when
they should eat, 1 Cor. 11.20, 22.
takes his own supper before, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. And
afterward, Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. Now because the Corinthians brake this order and ordinance, he
charge them to come irreverently, to receive unworthily, to eat and drink
judgment unto themselves. Shall they then that are faithful Christians,
patiently bear the injury done them by these sacrificing Masse-mungers, who
never bid the Lords guests, nor call them to his table, nor tarry for them till
they come to this heavenly banquet, but like the Priests of Bell, do eat and
drink up all themselves.

Fifthly, the same Apostle wills and warns all persons which come to this
communion, diligently to prove and examine 1 Cor. 11, 28
themselves, and then to come to this Supper, as we see, 1 Cor. 11. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup: so
that he would not have any excluded from receiving, which have tried their
hearts by examining, and are thereby rightly prepared to this great work.
Lastly, the names given to this Sacrament, noting the nature thereof, do
afford us a good consideration to strike through the heart of this private
Mass, being called sometimes the Supper of the Lord, and sometimes a communion
among our selves. If it be an holy Supper and spiritual banquet, why are none
bidden and called thereunto? If it be a communion, why does the Priest
uncharitably swallow all alone? whereby they make it a communion, but without
company: a supper, but without guests: meat, but without eating: drink, but
without drinking: a table, but without sitting down: a participation, but
without any that are partakers: a banquet, but without feeding thereat, the
people departing as hungry and thirsty as they came. Wherefore, as no man
celebrated the Passover aright, or received profit thereby, but such as did
eat the flesh thereof: so can none come to the supper of the Lord as he ought,
though he look upon others, except he eat of the bread and drink of the cup,
according to the commandment of Christ, the author thereof. But because the
Church of Rome is never mad without reason, let us drive them out of all their
shifts and starting holes, wherein they go about to hide their heads. First,
they ask the question, What if falls into good ground, as we see in the
parable of the sower. Luke 8, 15.
And if it could come to pass which is here imagined, it were better to
abstain for a season then to break the commandment of Christ, according to
the rule of the Apostle, When ye come together to eat, tarry one for another.
1 Cor. 11, 33.
Furthermore, the Priest knows not the worthiness or unworthiness of the
greatest part: if any offer themselves to receive, they must be received, when
their sin is not known.

Secondly, they say that private Masses may be called

What agreement then is there between Christ sitting at the Table with his
Disciples, distributing the bread, and ministering the cup unto them; and the
Mass Priest standing alone at an Altar, and eating all alone, without being
seen of the people? Besides, if a Minister pray alone in a corner of the
Church, yet his prayer cannot be called public, albeit it be made by a public
person, and offered up for all that are absent, and conceived in a public
Temple. The like may be said, of the administration of the Lords Supper.

Thirdly, they pretend that the cause why the people affection that they ought
to have to holy things, Here is a new color set upon a foul and deformed
face. Rome did only tolerate private Masses, but not command them; and that
they desire they should be public and common, were it not for the
slothfulness and the backwardness of the people. Sess. 7.
Howbeit, the Council of Trent not only suffers, but allows and
commands private Masses, wherein the Priest alone communicates. Again, if
they desired that the people should communicate, they would reprove their
negligence, and stir them up to greater diligence: whereas they confirm them
and continue them in it, and apply themselves unto it, and lead them into
error by their own example. Neither have they cause to make such a general
complaint, seeing the people for the most part are more devout and religious
then the Pastors of the Church of Rome, as it was in the days of Hezekiah. 2.
Chron. 30.

Rome leave it not at liberty for the people to eat, or not to eat: but
utterly forbid them and restrain them. Secondly, at our common feasts, no man
is compelled to eat, because there is no absolute commandment of God to bind
them unto it: but in this holy feast it is far otherwise, for we have the
express commandment of God, to take and eat all of us. Lastly, this
comparison of a feast ill besitteth their whole purpose. For who ever saw a
feast, where all the guests that are bidden stand by and eat nothing, and the
Governor of the feast deuoureth and swalloweth up all alone, as it falls out
in the Mass, where no body but the Priest eats? Or who ever heard of a
solemn feast, whereunto no body is invited? But in private Masses, no man or
woman is bidden to come, or received if they come.

when they are negligent? Or should we follow the humor of the people.
Eucharist without Communicants is the service of God: these points they take
for granted, but they never go about to prove them and confirm them. If we
will receive such trash at their bare word, so it is: if not, they have not a
dram of reason to establish it. Furthermore, whereas they add that the
ordinances which God has commanded, ought not to be left for the indisposition
of particular men; I would know whether the Minister should pray in the Church
openly, when there is none to join with him? Or whether he should preach the
word, when there are none to hear him? If he may not, then how should he
deliver the Supper, when there are no guests? I will here conclude with the
complaint that Chrysostom uses in his time, when this corruption began to
creep in: O custom! O presumption! Chrysostom. Homil. 3. in Ephesians.
In vain is the daily sacrifice offered: in vain do we stand at the Altar,
seeing no body communicates. Tell me, if a man that is bidden to a feast wash
his hands and sit down, and be placed at the Table, and yet eat not, does
he not wrong him that bad him? Were it not better that such a one were not
present? So thou art present, thou have sung the hymn, and in that thou have
not retired thy self with them that are unworthy, thou have made profession
that thou art of the number of those that are worthy, how then dooest thou stay
and not partake of the Table?

Lastly, they demand farther, Does the essence of the Paul defines this
Sacrament to be a Communion of the body of CHRIST, 1 Corinthians, chap. 10.
verse 10. and therefore the Church of Rome destroys the definition, and
consequently the essence thereof. But of this we have spoken sufficiently
before.

And thus much of the sole communions and private Masses brought into the
worship of God, against the example of Christ, against the practice of the
Apostles, against the use of the Church, against the authority of the Fathers,
against the light of reason, and against the name and nature of the Sacrament
it self.

Rome, and have raked in the dirt and dunghill of their devices, the savor
whereof has annoyed heaven and earth: now let us observe out of this last
outward part of the Sacrament, how we are directed and instructed thereby to
further our knowledge and obedience. Did Christ command the faithful of his
family to eat and drink that which he delivers, without laying any further
burden or bondage upon them? Then we must understand, It is no precept of
Christ to receive the Lords Supper fasting.
it is no precept of Christ to receive the Lords Supper fasting, before any
other meats and drinks.

True it is, the people whose zeal goes beyond their knowledge, make a great
scruple of conscience in this point to come fasting, August. epist. 118.
which custom we do not condemn, but commend, so it be without superstition
in themselves, and judging of others. But howsoever many make as great a matter
to communicate fasting, as to come in faith: yet this is no necessary rule or
commandment binding the conscience to the observation thereof. For the word of
God and institution of the Sacrament are perfect directions to the Church,
teaching all matters of faith and obedience, yet they teach no such practice.
And our blessed Savior teaches his Disciples what they should do, the
Evangelists deliver what they did, and among al their doctrine we find not
this precept of fasting.

Again, Christ administered it not fasting, the Apostles received it not
fasting: not that we are bound to celebrate the Supper at that time: but to
show that Christ would never have chosen to do it after supper, if that time
had bin simply unlawful.

Besides, the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 11. reproving the abuses crept into this
Sacrament, and laboring to reduce it to the first institution, exhorts the
Corinthians to tarry one for another, and if any be hungry 1 Cor. 11, 36
that he cannot tarry, he must beforehand eat at home, that so he may better
wait for the rest of the congregation. Now he would never have given counsel
and commandment, if it had been unlawful or ungodly to take some little
repast and short refreshing before, in regard of the present infirmity and
weakness of the body. Lastly, he teaches in another place, That the kingdom
of heaven is not Romans 14, 17.
meat nor drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

To conclude, as he wills that he which eats, despise not him that eats
not, and he which eats not, condemn not him that eats: Romans 14, 3.5, 19.
so must it be in this indifferent practice, he that can take it, let him take
it: but let not him that receives fasting, judge him that fasteth not: and let
not him which fasteth not, condemn him that receives fasting, he stands or
falls to his own Master. Who art thou then that iudgest another man's
servant? Let every one be persuaded in his own mind, and look to the warrant
of his own work. Let us follow those things which concern peace, and
wherewith one may edify another. If any list to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God.

Lastly, observe with me that the actions commanded abhor and detest the
order of our Church as the sin of Idolatry. There is nothing necessary to be
observed as a point of faith, but we have fair warrant for it out of the
Scriptures: but for this sitting to be so straightly urged, we have none at all.
Christ says indeed, Take ye; and therefore taking is necessary. Christ says,
Eat ye; therefore eating is also necessary for us. He says, Drink ye;
therefore drinking is also necessary. But he never said to any, Sit ye;
therefore we conclude that sitting is not necessary. Howbeit diverse do make
sitting as necessary in the action of receiving, as either eating or drinking,
albeit we have a commandment for the one, but no commandment for the other.
And albeit it be an argument concluding negatiuely from authority, yet it is
from the authority of God whereas themselves reason negatiuely from the
authority of men in matter of history, that because they speak nothing of
kneeling, therefore it was not used. I am not ignorant how far this point has
been carried in heat of zeal, and what our learned and reverent brethren have
written of the absolute necessity of this sitting at the Sacrament of the
Supper, insomuch that they teach touching our kneeling, that in the outward
act of Idolatry, there is no difference to be discerned between the Papists
and us: whereas they kneel to their breaden God, but we give thanks unto God
for giving to us the Sacrament of his body and blood, and do not worship the
bread nor yet kneel unto it, and therefore there can be no act or show of
Idolatry in us, forasmuch as we have no Idol before us, as they have.

Besides, I would have all men know what an uncharitable and unchristian
censure and sentence they give of our Church, which although it have banished
Idolatry, and is as far from it as themselves, yet is charged with Idolatry,
and sin greater then Idolatry. Arg. 4. Page 62.
For thus they write, What speak we of seeming herein to do the same outward
act of Idolatry that the Papist does? seeing there is also in this so great
appearance of the inward and spiritual Idolatry of the heart, in that this
gesture seems to be both enjoined and practiced even with a superst^tious
intent and meaning to adore the Sacrament it self. Here is a grievous
accusation of private men against an whole Church, but no proof at all of the
accusation. And who made them Judges of the heart, or opened them a window to
look into it? Again, they speak afterward these words, Arg. 4. Page 66.
Add heereunto, that for men to tie themselves in their prayer to adore God,
in or before any creature (without warrant of the word) is Idolatry. And that
it were far less sin, and an appearance of an Idolatry that is nothing so
gross, to tie us in our prayers to kneel before a Crucifixe, then to bind us
thus in praying to God to kneel before the bread and wine. I could wish that
this sentence had perished in the birth, and never seen the light: then should
it not have been graven as with a pen of iron, and remain to be read of every
man, neither should those of the separation allege it, and take occasion to
slander our Church and profession by it. For by this it appears that they
judge our kneeling to be flat Idolatry. If it be as bad or worse then kneeling
before a Crucifixe, it can be no better then Idolatry, forasmuch as kneeling
before a Crucifixe is open Idolatry, and cannot be denied: whereas we do not
worship God in the bread or kneel unto it, as the Papists do to the Crucifixe.
The bread indeed we confess is before us when we pray to God for his blessing
upon it, that it may avail us to the end for which he has appointed it, even
as the meat which we ordinarily receive in our houses, is before us upon the
Table when we do give thanks for it. Now they might as well say, we pray to
our meat or before the meat, as that we kneel unto the bread or before the
bread of the Sacrament. And it is as lawful for us to kneel down at the
Table when we do give thanks, as of custom we stand or sit: and yet we
should thereby be unjustly censured to kneel down to our food which we
receive. I would gladly therefore be resolved of such as stumble at the orders
of our Church, whether they allow of the former saying of these men or not? If
they do not like it nor approve of it, wherefore do the^ join with them in
their opinion, when it is vpholden with so weak proof as with a rotten pillar?

If they do allow it as current, and hold that so many as kneel in the act of
receiving do commit Idolatry, and thereby make the house of God no better then
an Idols temple, how dare they be present at such Idolatrous service, and yet
make no scruple at it? Pharisees that they strain at a gnat, and swallow a
Camel, Mat. 23, 24.
that they stumble at a straw, and leap over a block, being precise in small
things and loofe in greater. Or if they be content to join with us in the
service of the same God, and come with us to the same table, let them
acknowledge that we do bow the knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ephesians 3, 14.
and not to an Idol, and that we do not turn Beth^el into Beth-auen, the
house of God into the house of iniquity, and thereby also renounce and utterly
forsake their rash opinion, who speak, and write, resolve and determine
against the gesture received and commanded to be used in our Church. For if
that which they d^ maintain and publish be true then in stead of partaking the
blessed body and blood of ou blessed Savior, 1 Cor. 10, 20.21.
we should have f^llowshippe w th the devils: in stead of d^in^ing the ^up of
the Lord, we should drink the cup of devils: and in ^tea^ of being partakers
of the Lords Table, we should be partakers of the Table of Devils. But to
leave these, who I hope have learned to leave themselves and to forsake their
assertion, I dare boldly avouch and offer openly to defend, that sitting at the
communion is not more requisite and necessary, then either standing at the
hearing of the word, or kneeling in the action of prayer and calling upon the
name of God, if it be as necessary: so that if they maintain that sitting is
the most convenient gesture at the partaking of the Sacrament, I will join
with them in this also and maintain, that standing is the fittest gesture at
hearing, and kneeling also at prayer. Hence it is, that when Balaam was to
deliver the word of God unto the King of Moab, he said, Rise up Balak and
hear: Number. 23, 18.
and hearken unto me thou son of Zippor, Numb. 23. The like we see in
Samuel, when he was to anoint Saul King over Israel, he said unto him, Stand
thou still a while, 1 Samuel 9, 27.
that I may show thee the word of God. Besides these precepts and
commandments, we have sundry examples of Kings and Princes, sacred and
profane, and of whole assemblies that practiced this gesture. We read in the
book of Judges, Judge. 3, 20.
how Eglon King of Moab rose out of his throne, so soon as he understood that
Ehud had a message to do to him from God. Josiah the good King of Judah stood
in his place by a pillar, while the Priests read in the book of the Covenant,
which was found in the house of the Lord, 2. Chron. 34. 2 Chro. 34.31
2. Kings 23, 2, 3. 2 Kin. 23, 2, 3.
When Ezra the Scribe opened the book in the sight of all the people (for he
was above them in a Pulpit of wood) to read in it distinctly, and to give the
sense, and to cause the^ to understand the reading, all the people stood up.
Nehe. 8, 5. Nehe 8 5.
Can those that urge and press the necessity of sitting, and the unlawfulness
of kneeling under the hard and heavy doom of Idolatry, show so many precepts
and examples thereof? Or are they able to bring any commandment requiring the
one as a duty, and forbidding the other as a sin? From hence then we reason
thus.

If sitting be simply necessary in the act of receiving; then standing is
necessary in the act of hearing, and kneeling in the act of prayer.

But standing is not simply necessary in the act of hearing, nor kneeling in
the act of prayer; Therefore sitting is not simply necessary in the act of
receiving.

Furthermore, we must understand that sitting or kneeling, or standing, are not
(being considered in themselves) of the nature and substance of the Sacrament,
but only accidental things and outward gestures of the body: they touch not
the life and essence of the Supper, but are left at liberty to be ordered and
appointed by the Church, as shall be thought fittest. Is it of the substance
of prayer to kneel always in the very action of it? I think not: for how
the^ did the Publican stand and pray? Luke 18.13. Mar. 11, 25.
And yet he did pray aright and acceptably to God. Or how is it that
Ch^istia^th, Mar. 11. When ye stand praying, forgive: if ye have ought against
any. Others may pray sitting, or walking, or lying, and yet be heard of him to
whom they pray. Tertull^an reports this as the common custom of his time, De
cor^n. milit.
and as a tradition received from the Apostles, that it was unlawful to kneel
at prayer upon any Lords day, or upon any other day between Easter and
Whitsontide. And afterward in the first Nicene council a solemn decree was
made, Cano. 20.
that none might pray kneeling, but only standing upon the Lords day: and
Basile that lived after that council declares that it was retained as an
Apostolical tradition in his time, the true reason whereof seems to be this,
Hospin. defest. Christ.
because on those days is celebrated the joyful remembrance of the Lords
resurrection. Thus did those times determine for standing at prayer, and yet is
kneeling the fittest gesture, (which themselves say is known to be commanded
of God) and we dare not say that their decrees were unlawful and against the
word of God.

Moreover, is it of the nature of hearing to stand? How then notwithstanding
the former precepts and precidents of such as went before us in it, is it said
by Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33.31.
chapter 33. They come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as
my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them? Indeed the
Prophet reproves them in this place, howbeit it is not for the situation of
their bodies, but for not attention of their minds, and disobedience of their
hearts. If then neither standing at the time of hearing the word, nor kneeling
at the time of praying to God, be of the essence of hearing and prayer: how
shall sitting be of the substance of receiving this Sacrament? It can be
therefore no other in it self, then a variable circumstance or ceremony that
may be altered and changed, as occasion shall serve, and the Church determine.

Furthermore, who is able to show that there should be greater necessity of
sitting at the Supper, then there is of dipping in baptism? For dipping
comes nearer to the nature of that Sacrament, then sitting does to the nature
of the other: forasmuch as the continuance under the water serves more fitly
to signify our burying of the body of sin, and going forward to mortify
the corruptions of the old man, and yet notwithstanding children that are
sprinkled with water are truly and rightly baptized. But if we would compare
things of equal nature together, we might affirm, that receiving sitting or
standing, is all one with receiving of it in leauened bread or unleavened, with
white wine or red, or any other color. So that as it skilleth not whether the
bread be leauened or unleavened so that it he bread, and whether the wine be
red or white so that it be wine: so the matter is not great considered in it
self, without the authority of the Magistrate, whether we receive sitting, or
standing, or kneeling, so that we do receive it.

Nay, to show how little reason there is to stand so strictly upon the
necessity of sitting, that men and women will rather abstain from the
Communion, then not follow their opinion, it may well be judged more necessary
to tie us to receive in unleavened bread, then bind our selves to the only
gesture of sitting, because it may put us in mind to keep the feast not with
old leaven, 1 Cor. 5, 8.
neither with the leaven of malice, and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth.

But it will be objected,

Whatsoever is necessarily to be observed in the Sacrament of the Supper, is
either expressed manifestly, or may necessarily be gathered from the
institution.

But that the Disciples sat at the Supper is not manifestly expressed, nor can
necessarily be gathered from the institution. Therefore sitting is not
necessarily to be used in the Sacrament of the Supper.

of these points, whether of a matter not written, we may conclude a matter
not done? Secondly, I demand, whether they can possibly prove the sitting of
the Disciples by any invincible argument, if any man will deny it? I ask this
the rather, because if it were a matter of so great weight and importance, that
we should rather not communicate at all then kneel, and that it were no less
a sin then Idolatry, which is the worshipping of Images, we must have plain
Scripture and evident proof to enforce the necessity of sitting, we must not
be led by conjectures, nor go by probabilities, which in the matters of God do
deceive, and oftentimes it falls out, Arist. Topic.
that many falsehoods are more probable then truths; because we judge of truth
by the nature of it self, but of probality by the opinion of men. Thirdly, I
would know, whether among so many Authors and authorities alleged touching
sitting, or standing at the communion, they be content to stand to a verdit of
twelve men, and so to have the matter pass by a Jury touching the lawfulnes or
unlawfulness of kneeling? This is our country law, and this offer they cannot
dislike, forasmuch as the witnesses are their own, and we will take exceptions
to none of their depositions. They tell us indeed that some were wont to sit,
and some to stand, and that diverse have wished that kneeling might be removed,
fearing that it should be an occasion of Idolatry, but they prove not the point
in question, to wit, that it is unlawful to receive kneeling: or that men ought
to abstain rather then kneel, and not sit. But of this we shall have better
occasion to speak more afterward. Now then, to return to the former matter,
seeing they cannot prove by force of reason but by probability of truth, what
gesture Christ and his Disciples used, how is it that they would gather a
certain doctrine from an uncertain doing? But be it that it were true, that
the Scripture had determined what particular gesture was used, and that both
Christ and his Disciples sat at the Table, I will diduct from hence this
conclusion, which I see not how they can avoid.

If it be necessary for the people to sit in the act of receiving, then it is
necessary also for the Minister to sit in the delivering of it:

But it is not necessary for the Minister to sit in the delivering of it,

Therefore it is not necessary for the people to sit at the receiving of it.

The consequence of the first proposition, if it be denied, is easily proved,
because as the gesture of the Disciples must be a direction to the people, so
the gesture of Christ must be an instruction to the Minister. The Disciples did
take the bread into their hands and did eat it, they took the cup and drank
thereof: these are set down to be examples what the people ought to do. Christ
Jesus took the bread and blessed, he brake it and gave it, he took the cup,
he blessed, he powered out the wine and gave it; thus he did, and thus ought the
Ministers after his example to do. So then if the Disciples sat at the Table
(I speak by supposition) and the people be for that cause bound to sit at the
Supper: then likewise if Christ sat, the Ministers ought not to deliver it
standing, or walking, but sitting. But if the Ministers be not bound to sit as
they deliver it, no more are the people bound to sit as they receive it:
forasmuch as according to their opinion and allegation, there was a coherence
and connection of both these together in the first institution. The assumption
or second part of the former reason, to wit, that it is not necessary for the
Minister to sit, I will not spend any words to strengthen, least I should seem
to fight with mine own shadow, and to go about to prove that which no man
deryeth: and therefore if it must be left indifferent in it self for the
Minister to sit or to stand, it can by no means be made necessary for the
people to sit only. And if the gesture of Christ and his Disciples were al
one, how can they that cleave so strictly to the institution allow, that the
gesture of the Ministers and people should be different? Three demands required
to be proved.
Wherefore, if it may be thought reasonable, I require these three things to be
proved unto me: First, that the Disciples sat at the Table at the partaking of
the Lords Supper. Neither would I have them tell me of likelihoods, and
presumptions, and probabilities: but because kneeling reverently is made flat
Idolatry, or at least is held to be a spice and to bear a show of Idolatry, I
demand plain, evident, and direct proofs, such as may satisfy the
conscience: and so much the rather, because they make it a matter of
conscience, that we may see how they will persuade another, who are or at least
will seem to be so certainly resolved themselves. Secondly, albeit it were
sufficiently proved by strong and undoubted demonstrations, that not only
Christ but his Disciples sat, yet they have not gained and obtained that which
they desire, forasmuch as we come upon them with a second demand, harder for
them to prove then the former, nay I will say, more impossible, to wit, whether
the supposed sitting used by Christ and his Apostles were the same that is used
with us, or not? If they confess it is not the same, how is it that they call
us so much to the institution? Or how is it that the Disciples used one
gesture, and they allow, and require, and practice another? If they affirm
that their siting was as our sitting, they are easily convinced both by evident
testimonies of the Scriptures, and by the clear authorities of godly Writers,
and by the continual practice of those Eastern countries even unto this day.
For if we will speak truly and properly of sitting, as we do account of
sitting, which is done with the body upright, neither Christ nor his Disciples
sat at the Passover, as we have the description thereof set down by the
Apostle John: and therefore after that Christ had testified and told them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, one of you shall betray me: Ioh. 13, 23, 2^
the Evangelist adds, Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his
Disciples whom Jesus loved, Simon Peter therefore beckoned unto him that he
should ask who it should be of whom he spoke? he then lying on Jesus breast,
said unto him, Lord who is it? Whereby by it appears, that their sitting was
not as our sitting, but a kind of leaning or bowing down of the body, not an
upright carriage or situation of it. If then they received the Passover
leaning or lying all along, according to the fashion of those times, and those
places, and those persons, it must follow by good strength of reason, that if
they sat at the Supper, they sat not, as we call sitting, but leaned at it
and lay along, which we would account according to the manners and customs of
our countries wherein we dwell, to be very uncivil, and unseemly, and
indecent. And this is the judgment of the learned. Beza writing upon the
former words touching the Disciples leaning on Jesus bosom, says, This is to
be referred to the sitting down of the ancient, Beza annot upon lib. 13.
that many being set, the last did as it were lean back upon the former, his
feet being laid out from him. And Calvin upon the same words uses these
words in his Commentaries upon John, Calvin. Com. upon John.
It might seem an indecent thing at this day, but such was their manner of
sitting at that time: for they sat not at a table as we do now, but having put
off their shoes and leaning upon Cushions, they sat half upright in beds, or
they lay all along upon little beds with their bodies half way bolt upright.

Thus we see how it was in Christ's time: and thus it appears to have been
before in the times of the Prophets. In the book of Ester Ester 7, 8.
it appears they lay along upon their beds when they were at their bankets
and feasts, chapter 7. Then the King returned out of the Palace garden into
the Palace of the banquet of wine, and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon
Ester was. And in the Prophecy of Amos, Amos 2, 8.
he speaks against the cruelty and oppression of the Israelites, chap. 2. 8.
They lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, and they
dr^nke the wine of the condemned in the house of their God. Whereby it is
plain, and might yet be made plainer by infinite testimonies sacred and
profane, that their sitting was much different from ours, and therefore I
would know whether our received custom of a most humble and reverent gesture of
kneeling, ought to be changed into lying all along observed by Christ and his
Disciples, our shoes being pulled off, and Cushions lying under our elbowes?
From hence then we reason thus.

If we be tied precisely to the example of Christ and his Disciples, then we
must lean and lie down all along in receiving the Supper:

But we must not lean and lie down all along in receiving the Supper:

Therefore we are not tied precisely to the example of Christ and his Disc^ples.

So then, except they can show us that leaning is sitting, and that stooping is
all one with being upright, they can never warrant that manner of sitting which
they require to be used at the Communion. Lastly, I demand to have it proved,
that in every point we are tied to the institution, and that it is not lawful
for the Church in any case to depart from the first celebration thereof. But we
know that Christ before he administered his last Supper, did eat the Passover
with his Disciples, and delivered it at evening, Matthew 26, 20. Mat. 26, 20.
He delivered his Supper also in a private house, and in an upper Chamber, he
instituted it after Supper, when their bellies were filled and hunger
satisfied. But we are not bound, neither has the Church thought fit to have
it received in the same manner, neither tying the receivers to unleavened
bread, nor to private houses, nor to the evening of the day, nor after our
ordinary suppers, and therefore we are not tied to every circumstance in the
institution.

If it be answered that Christ made special choice of these things above any
other, Whatsoever crosses the practice of our Savior, must not be allowed off.

But kneeling crosses the practice of our Savior,

Therefore kneeling is not to be allowed off.



The proposition must be warily understood and limited according to the rule of
the Scripture, or else being generally uttered, it is false, and taken up both
by Anabaptists in the question of the baptizing of Infants, and by the Papists
in the point of unleavened bread. The Anabaptists build upon this foundation,
Christ was baptized at thirty years, and we trow he knew well the right use
of the Sacrament, therefore neither ought we to be baptized sooner. But if this
were a good consequent, and might pass without controlement, then must we be
first circumcised, and afterward baptized, then must baptism be administered in
Jordan or in some river. So in the controversy between the Church of Rome and
us, whether leauened or unleavened bread is to be used, Bellarmine reasons
thus; Christ at his last Supper used unleavened bread, Bellar de Euchar li. 4.
ca. 7
therefore we must also: for it cannot be doubted, but that is far better and
rather to be done which Christ himself did. But if we must give place to this
kind of reasoning, and grant any force to be in it, then it will as well follow
from Christ's example, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper must be received
in an upper chamber, not in the open Church: at evening, not in the morning:
after supper, not before dinner; none of which we will grant, albeit all of
them stand grounded upon the practice of Christ. Besides, it is well enough
known, that the Church of Geneua do not account themselves or any other church
bound in the action of receiving to the platform of the institution, or the
practice of the Disciples, and therefore the people do receive it at the hands
of their Ministers standing, and do eat it walking and passing from them: and
their Elders which are their Governors for discipline, do reach the cup unto
them. From hence we may fitly retort and return the former argument upon their
own heads.

Whatsoever crosses the practice of our Savior, must not be allowed off:

This is their own proposition, I hope they know it and will not deny it. Then
we assume,

But the order of the Church of Geneua, receiving standing, crosses the
practice of our Savior:

Therefore the order of the Church of Geneua, receiving standing, is not to be
allowed off.

Wherefore if we will understand the former proposition aright, we must
restrain it to such things as are essential and have commandment from the
word; for whatsoever crosses the practice of our Savior in any material
point, of which he has said, Do this in remembrance of me, doubtless that is
not to be allowed of. But kneeling in the act of receiving is not in the
number of those thing. Lastly, seeing they will needs tie us hard to the
institution, I will endeavor to unknit the knot in this manner, If we be bound
of necessity to do as the Disciples did, then we must of necessity sit at the
same Table with the M^nister as they did with Christ:

But we are not bound of necessity to sit at the same Table with the Minister,
as they with Christ:

Therefore we are not bound of necessity to do as they did.



The knitting together of the parts of the proposition is apparent, because it
is expressly observed by the Evangelists, that Christ sat down with the
twelve: and again, Behold, Mat. 26.20. Luke 22, 21.
the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the Table. Whereby it may be
gathered, that these men which do so much urge the necessity of sitting at the
Sacrament do not themselves precisely observe the order of the institution, nor
the example of Christ and his Disciples, but do swerve from it and break it,
because according to their practice, they ought to sit at the same table with
the Minister in imitation of the^. Seeing then they build the frame of their
opinion upon the foundation of the institution, why do they make a greater
matter of sitting, the^ of sitting at the same table? How a man may break the
institution sitting.
Or wherefore do they depart from the institution, and fail in the manner of
their receiving sitting, and yet will seem religiously to cleave to the
example of Christ? Let the^ therefore make it manifest, that it is more
necessary for them to sit, then it is necessary to sit at the same Table. Will
they have what they lift to be necessary, and what they list, not to be
necessary? what they please to be indifferent, and what please not the^, not to
be indifferent? But some will say, as has bin often objected and think it
meet to be performed and retained, partly to stir up in our selves and in
others a more religious estimation of those divine seals, Reasons why we
kneel at the Communion
partly to remove all profane thoughts of contemners and despisers of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus, partly to put a difference
hereby from our common bread and wine which we take in our houses and at our
Tables, and partly to teach us to lift up our hearts to God to bless his own
ordinance, that as well we may take his Son by the hand of faith, as receive
his seals by the hand of the body. So then, it is one thing to kneel before a
creature, or where the creature is, and another to bow down unto it to honor
it and adore it. And how can we kneel any where, but it must be before some
creature in heaven above, or in the earth beneath? It is one thing to kneel at
the Sacrament, and another to kneel to the Sacrament. If we should kneel
down at our giving of thanks for our ordinary meats and drinks at home, may
we justly be taxed for kneeling to our meats and drinks? We kneel down to
God only to whom we pray and make request, not to the outward signs to which
we pray not. Again, it will be objected, Rome, which has brought in
transubstantiation: and therefore if we shall kneel as they do, there is fear
of adoration. Thus have I heard many reason. I answer, nuzzle them in their
Idolatry, because they hold our consecration to be no consecration, and
consequently our Sacrament to be no Sacrament, and profess themselves in the
profaneness of their hearts to receive it as ordinary bread. Not to our own
people, who in their kneeling have no purpose to adore the bread, or to bow
down unto it. What offense then can be given by this gesture to any that live
among us, if not to ^he papists, who will never kneel to our bread, much less
to any others? who have learned long ago to renounce their transubstantiation,
their ducking, their prostrating and falling upon al four, their kissing the
earth, their knocking and bouncing of their breast, and all popish creeping and
crouching to the bread to adore it. They tell us that kneeling to the Sacrament
was brought in by Antichrist that man of sin and son of perdition, Honorius the
3. in the year of our Lord, 1220. thereby teaching the people to worship the
bread. But what is all this to the purpose, or what does this belong unto us
who, Honorius the 3. first commanded the people at elevation time to incline
and bow themselves, and when the host was carried about in a solemn procession
to fall down to it. This superstition and abuse we go not about to justify,
or defend, or restore, but condemn it to the pit of hell from whence it came.
Hence it is that Calvin teaches, infiit. ^ib. 4 cap. 17 35.36.
that the Apostles are not read to have prostrated themselves and lie along to
worship the Sacrament: it is the practice of Rome to prostrate themselves
before the bread to adore it. There has bin much written against kneeling at
the Communion, but the weakness of the reasons serves to discover the
imperfections of their writings. For first, their opinion looks one way, and
their proofs another: they go about to tie us to the example of Christ and to
prove sitting, and evermore they conclude standing, so that we may say with the
Poet, Amphora coepit Institut, Horat. de art. Pee^
currente rota cur vrceus exit? Secondly, they tell us that some have wished
this gesture of kneeling to be abolished, but who have pronounced and
determined that it is unlawful? Thirdly, do they bring us any examples either
of Churches in general, or private persons in particular, that did sit at the
communion? which deep silence of those that speak of the Sacrament, argues
that the particular gesture was not thought necessary, no more then eating the
Passover standing, which was afterward altered. Fourthly, they wrest many
authors out of joint, they bring them in to serve their purpose, and then make
them to depose what they list. Thus they serve Calvin in many places, making
him to speak against kneeling at the Communion, whereas he only writes
against the popish adoration. Thus also they often cite many and sundry worthy
defendors of our faith against the enemies of the grace of God: D. Fulke. D.
Sut^ ^sse. D. Willet.
and albeit by their great labors they deserve great praise in the Church, yet
they marshall them among other writers, as if either they disliked the order of
our Church, or else were some simple fellows that regarded not what they
wrote: or as if their opinions and their practices, their books and their
lives, their writings and their doings were dissonant and differing the one
from the other: or as if they did set down certain principles which themselves
do not remember when they come to particulars. Fifthly, they teach that kneeling
in the act of receiving the bread and wine is imposed and observed as a part of
Gods worship, and that it is by all men confessed to be a chief part of
religious adoration: De Actorat. p. 22. 3.
whereas Aretius a learned Divine makes it only an accidental part of
religious worship, and it is a clear case, it is no chief part of it, both
because religious adoration may be and is usually without it, and it is also
usually without adoration. For kneeling is not always joined with divine
worshipping, as appears in the example of Abraham before the people of Heth,
of Jacob to his brother Esau, of the debtor before his creditor, Genesis 23, 7.
and 33, 7. Mat. 18.29. Genesis 48, 12. 1 Kin. 1, 33.
and of the subjects before their Princes: al these bow the knee of the body,
and yet do not worship in a divine manner. Lastly, the authors which they
bring, do speak against them in the particular point for which they bring
the^: such persons then as stand upon the opinion of others, let them hear
with patience the judgment of as excellent Divines as this age has brought
forth. Art. 1 sect 8.
B. Jewel writing against Harding says thus, I deny not certain
circumstances, as fasting, sitting, stand ng, kneeling, and other like
ceremonies observed in celebrating the holy mysteries, are to be moderated and
appointed at the judgment of the Church. If these circumstances of fasting,
sitting, standing, and kneeling may be appointed by the Church, then the word
of God has determined and defined nothing concerning the use of them: for the
Church has not authority to establish any thing against the Scriptures. But
because his judgment may be thought partial, let us hear what others
testify. It is the order of the Church of Geneua to receive standing, as we
noted before, and as Beza himself witnesses. And he has a notable Epistle
written to a friend, resolving him what the faithful ought to do that live
where the bread in the Supper is not broken, neither delivered into the hands,
but put into the mouths of the Communicants; things of greater weight and
importance then is kneeling at the Sacrament: Beza. epist. 2.
things that are not in themselves indifferent: things that are no better then
plain corruptions of the institution of Christ: yet he advises and
counsels that we should not trouble our conscience with these matters, not
give offense to our brethren by refusing to communicate in such places and
among such persons, as if we were in danger to loose the life and heart of all
Christianity. I appeal now unto themselves that cannot abide our kneeling, and
make them Judges in this controversy, whether he that persuades the people
to suffer the bread unbroken to be put into their mouths, rather then
altogether to abstain, would not also advise to receive kneeling, according to
the order of the Church where it is required and commanded, rather then to
break the peace of the Church? To this purpose he says, That which is not in
it self necessary, we ought not to urge farther then is meet. And afterward,
The taking of the Supper is precisely enjoined unto us, but not the manner how
we shall take it. Epist. 12. et 8
And in another epistle, when he was asked his opinion touching the bowing of
the knee in the act of receiving, he thinks of it as of receiving with
unleavened bread, yet to avoid superstition (though it be not evil in it
self) he wishes it were abolished, howbeit it is not of him simply condemned.
With him accords the church of France and of the low Countries, who dare not
pronounce the ceremony of kneeling in receiving of the Elements to be utterly
unlawful, but for the utter rooting of bread-worship out of the hearts of men,
Ob^eruat. upon the Harmo of C^nfest. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 17.
they hold it much better in most places to have it utterly abol shed. Calvin
speaking of this gesture applies it wholly against the Church of Rome that
worship this Sacrament; not against the true Churches of God that receive
kneeling at the Sacrament, but abhor and condemn the adoring of the
Sacrament. Peter Martyr shows that this outward reverence used in kneeling,
is not in it self and it own nature evil, Loc. commu. class 4 cap. 10. sect.
50.
so that we stay not in the Elements, but worship in spirit and truth Christ
Jesus sitting in the heavens. True it is, (to conceal nothing of his opinion)
he takes this prostrating and bending of the knee not to be so fit, unless
often preaching be joined by way of iustruction: so that if the people be
taught that they are not to worship the outward elements, then there is no such
fear of Idolatry, but this gesture may be used and retained; and this is our
case at this day. Besides the judgment of this godly man and learned Divine,
we have the consent of the Churches of Bohemia, who far from superstitious
adoring the outward signs, bow their knees at receiving of the Sacrament, as
appears in the Harmony of the Confessions, sect. 14. Hum of the Church sect.
14.
This Sacrament without adoration and that worship which is due to God only,
yet with due reverence and religion must be received and administered, and with
that especially which is greatest of all, namely faith and examination of a
man's self. And not far after it is added, The Sacrament is reverently with
all godliness distributed, and the people of the faithful most commonly
falling down on the^r knees, do receive this Sacrament with thanksgiving, with
gladness, w th singing of hymns and holy Psalms: and they show forth the
Lords death, and admonish themselves of all his benefits, to the confirmation
of their faith, in a true Communion with Christ and his body. Thus we have laid
before us the judgment of the best Divines of our age, and the lawdable
practice of sundry churches of our time, among the which none do simply
condemn the use of our Church and the practice enjoined to our people. And
albeit they say, it is best to follow his doings who did all things well, yet
do not pronounce that they do evil who receive it kneeling, or otherwise then
the Disciples took it. But the question which I handle, is not, what gesture
is the fittest or unfittest for the Magistrate to command, but whether the
gesture of kneeling be lawful or not lawful, whether the Sacrament be
profaned by it, or not, and whether we ought to submit our selves to it where
it is imposed, and whether we should abstain from the communion, or may with a
good conscience forbear the use of it where we are not permitted to sit or
stand at our own pleasure.

Having finished in this manner these profes for the lawfulness of kneeling,
and disproses of the contrary, I received from a godly, learned, and reverent
Divine, a collection of certain reasons, together with an answer of certain
objections, whereof I have thought good to make the gentle reader acquainted,
that is desirous to settle his conscience in this point.

Touching kneeling at the Communion.
Argument 1. No set gesture is commanded. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor. 11, 23.
delivering what he had received of the Lord, mentions not any gesture at
all. Therefore any decent and seemly is left free to be used of us in it self.

Argu. 2. The Conscience is not bound in any thing which belongs not to Gods
kingdom. Now the kingdom of God, that is, the kingdom of grace, consists
not in meat and drink, that is, in outward things, To. 14. Romans 14, ^7.
such is every gesture of the body. Therefore no gesture simply and in it self
belonging to Gods kingdom, as hindering or furthering us in the service of God
and in the duties of religion, any may be used without scruple of conscience.

Argu. 3. A most reverent gesture is fit to be used in that action which is
performed with prayer. Such is the action of receiving this Sacrament being
both given and received with prayer: therefore a most reverent gesture is fit
for it, which is kneeling.

Argu. 4. It seems in the primitive Church they used to kneel at this
action, because the Pagans objected to the Christians that they worshipped
Ceres and Bacchus: (August. contra Faustum) Aug. con. Faust.
which they did (as it is probable) seeing them use that reverent gesture at
the Lords Table in receiving the bread and wine.

Argu. 5. Peter Martyr thinks that kneeling may lawfully be used, where there
is no opinion of transubstantiatiation, Loc. com. class. 4. ca. 10. sect. 50.
Loc. com. clas. 4. c. 10.
Many godly men bend the knee and adore at the hearing of those words, The word
was made flesh, yet those words are not to be said to be adored, but the things
themselves signified thereby. Now what should hinder the same to be done in the
Sacrament, so that the signs themselves be not worshipped? Art. 1. diuis. 8.
against Har^^.
B. Jewel leaves receiving the Supper fasting, sitting, standing, kneeling,
and such circumstances to the discretion and determination of the Church, The
like might be said of the Churches of Bohemia. (These ex^mples and authorities
I put down briefly, because they are handled at large before.)

Object. 1 Christ and his Apostles at the first institution

An. First consider the special occasion. They were now Mat 26.26. with 20.
As they did eat* Jesus took the bread, and when he had blessed, etc. compared
with the 20. v. He blessed as they did eat: now they did eat sitting:
therefore he blessed sitting. If then we be tied to his example in sitting at
the Sacrament, then the Minister is also tied to it in blessing with prayer the
bread and wine, and so he may not kneel at that prayer which contains the
blessing of the bread and wine. Thirdly, why are we not likewise bound to the
circumstance of time by his example to celebrate it at night? as also to sit in
that manner, leaning one upon another, as well as to this gesture?

1 These. 5, 12,
but here is appearance of popish adoration of the bread. Therefore we should
abstain from kneeling.

Answer. Calvin. Comment. in illum locum. Calvin. Comment. in 1 These. 5, 22.
Secondly, if we take it as a general rule, it must be restrained, and not
extended to al things which come near evil. Our abstinence from flesh in time
of Lent and other days being commanded by authority, may seem to be drawn
within the compass of that precept, if we restrain it not. For it has an
appearance of the superstitious religious fast of the Papists. There is
abstinence from flesh in both, yet the end is far different: they to worship
God, we for politic and civil respects. So here the outward gesture is like
in both, they kneel, and we kneel: but the end is different, they to adore
the bread, we to adore God. Besides, in the primitive church, the christians in
prayer turned their faces to the East, which was an appearance of worshipping
the Sun, and so were they charged to do by the Gentiles: Tert. in Apol.
yet in it self it is not unlawful to turn to the East in prayer. The fact
of Paul in joining with the Jews in a work of the ceremonial law, Act. 21.
to wit, purifying, might as well (as this gesture) be drawn within the
compass of the former precept, as making for the confirming of the Jews in
the necessity of keeping the ceremonial law. Many such instances might be
brought to this purpose. I take it therefore that this gesture of kneeling
cannot be said to be the appearance of evil, but only in respect of the
circumstances, as if among Papists receiving with adoration, a Protestant
should receive and kneel, here indeed is appearance of evil. Or a person
that is doubted of, whether he be a Consubstantiast or Transubstantiast,
should receive with kneeling, and would not receive otherwise, this would breed
great suspicion, and kneeling would prove in such a person the appearance of
evil. But being used of us renouncing these doctrines, it is not so. Wherefore
that precept must thus be understood, whatsoever has in it self an appearance
of evil, is to be avoided simply. But not so, that which may have some such
appearance by reason of some circumstances of time, or place, or persons.
Remove those circumstances, as they are in this case removed with us, and the
thing then may be used, and yet no appearance at all of evil.

These reasons and answers to objections I received from a grave and judicious
Divine which I have here set down, which I dare be bold to affirm, are of
more force and greater importance then any thing that ever I have read or heard
objected against our kneeling at the Communion. And therefore if we will not be
wedded to our own judgment, or carried away violently as it were with the
stream of self-love and a preiudicate opinion, let us yield our selves to the
strength of these arguments, and acknowledge the weakness of the contrary
objections. Now that I might omit no defense of those that are otherwise minded
unanswered; and thereby leave those of weaker judgment, that rely too much
upon them, unsatisfied: let us particularly examine the arguments, which are as
the grounds and foundations whereupon they build. First they object, The first
argument
that kneeling at the Communion is an humane invention of no necessity, used
and abused to Idolatry. I answer, that touching the administration of the
Sacraments, there is and always has bin aliquid humani, that is, something
left to man to order and appoint. In all times of the Church, God has had his
Sacraments, and at all times he has left somewhat arbitrary, whereof he has
spoken nothing, but left it to the discretion of men. Take the first Sacrament
for an example in a settled Church, I mean Circumcision. The cutting off of the
foreskin is appointed, and the day of the administration of it is limited; but
by what Minister, or by what instrument, or with what prayers, or with what
words of institution it is to be practiced, is neither expressed, neither can
be collected. The like we might say touching the Passover, who is able to tell
us how it was consecrated, snd with what prayers it was solemnized? yet we may
not think that they were as dumb shows that had no word to inform the
consciences of such as were partakers of the^. We see also that it is left to
the judgment of the Church what prayers shall be used both at baptism and at
the Lords Supper. In baptism, dipping or washing; once or often: in the
Supper, what bread it shall be, of what matter, of what form, of what quantity
we are to take: and touching the wine, of what color, and in what cups it
shall be put, and sundry such like circumstances every Church determines
freely. Therefore all inventions of men are not mere corruptions of the
matter. The like we might say of the precise times of celebrating the
Sacraments, which are not tied to certain days, all which are as weighty as
sitting is. And touching things abused to Idolatry, we are not bound by and by
to leave them for the abuse, but retaining the use remove the abuse. For who
knows not that the bread it self has been and also is shamefully and
grossly abused to Idolatry? and yet we are not to depart from the institution of
God for the superstition of man. If any allege against these things, Calvin
in that learned and worthy work of his Institutions, moving the question,
whether kneeling at time of solemn prayer be an humane tradition that a man
may refuse or neglect at his pleasure, answers thus, Calvin Instit. lib 4
cap. 10. sect. 30.
I say it is so an humane tradition that withal it is divine. Gods it is, so
far forth as it is a part of that beauty whose care and observation is
commended unto us by the Apostle: and it is man's or of men so far forth as it
specially designeth what was showed in the general. The substance of which
answer I take it to be this, that in the general it is divine, but in the
special it is humane. So touching the communion, this gesture may be called
divine in some part, because it is enjoined by the church which we are
commanded to hear, required by the Magistrate to whom we must be obedient for
conscience sake, Mat 18, 17. Romans 13, 5.
and administered with a solemn and effectual prayer, The body of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul to
everlasting life, etc. and in former time, as the Minister did use this prayer,
so the people did testify their consent, and join with the Minister saying,
Amen: Hist. li. 7. cap. 9.
Hence it is that Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history witnesses, that
bowing the hand they did receive the body of Christ, and answered, Amen. And
albeit this be not enjoined and commanded, yet I doubt not but every right
receiver and true religious heart does testify his assent secretly unto God,
and desires that inwardly between God and his own soul which the Minister
outwardly utters and expresses. Thus may kneeling be said not unfitly to be
divine: and inasmuch as it is appointed by men and from men, I confess it may
be said to be humane. Lastly, it were no hard matter to give sundry instances
of sundry humane traditions that have been abused to Idolatry, and yet are not
merely unlawful, nor in themselves evil when they are retained and received.
Of this sort is prayer toward the East an ordinance of man, and such an action
as has been very superstitiously abused: yet if it were imposed upon us by
authority, I see not but we might and ought to submit our selves unto it with
all obedience. Of this kind also is the setting of the Lords Supper upon an
Altar, which God never appointed, nor Christ himself with his Disciples
observed, and it is that which has been and at this day is greatly abused in
popery: yet if it were appointed that in every church we should have Altars, as
in some reformed churches is practiced, why might we not content our selves to
receive upon Altars, provided that all superstition be abandoned and removed?
Thus much of the first reason, which is the ground of all the rest, and
therefore we will pass them over briefly.

The second argument.
Secondly, it is objected that kneeling is commanded with mystical
signification. I answer, the people of God in all times have used such actions
and gestures, as that they used them as helps of their weakness, and
furtherances of themselves in true piety. Thus they used to rent their clothes
to testify their sorrow and heaviness of heart, and some their displeasure
and indignation conceived at that which they did see and behold with their eyes.

This was an humane tradition, and yet it had a mystical signification,
declaring the renting of the heart. Neither does the Prophet simply reprove it,
but comparatively correct it, Joel 2, 13.
saying, Rent your heart, and not your garments, that is, rather this then
them. For this cause also we uncover the head, lift up the eyes and hands in
prayer. Now kneeling has no other mystical signification at the Communion,
then this and the former gestures have in prayer, showing the humble and
grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ with all thanksgiving,
being of our selves unworthy (as we profess) to gather up the crumbs under his
Table, and to receive the least of his mercies.

The third argument.
Thirdly, it is objected that kneeling is imposed as a necessary part of Gods
worship. I answer as before, the kingdom of God consists not in this or
such like ceremonies. It is a wrong done unto our Church to lay any such
imputation upon it: forasmuch as it does no where and upon no person impose it
is as a necessary part of the service of God. For then it were utterly
unlawful to alter or change it, or to bring in any other gesture in stead
thereof: because it is not in the power of any Prince or people to abrogate any
necessary part of the service of God. Howbeit we noted before out of the
defense of the Articles against Harding, written by the reverent Father in God,
Bishop Jewel of famous memory, that coming to the Communion fasting, and in
receiving, to sit, or kneel, or stand, may be disposed and determined by the
Church: yet he never thought that the church had any authority to destroy and
abolish any necessary part of Gods service and worship. If any of the ignorant
sort do judge otherwise, it is their fond opinion, not the Churches
resolution. It skilleth not what any private person holds or may hold
touching this point, neither may the whole Church be justly charged with it,
and bear the blame of it.

The fourth and last argument The fourth argument.
is of less validity then the former. For as the first encounter has the
greatest force, and the surest guard is placed in the forefront; so having
sustained the shocke of that battle, I doubt not but to put to slight the
poor remainder. It is objected, that the action of kneeling swarueth from the
general rules appointed to direct indifferent things, which should not be
ungodly, nor offensive, nor unfit, nor ridiculous, nor unprofitable, nor
indecent. I answer, I have proved already, that this gesture contains no
wickedness not impiety; it is not childish or ridiculous, neither has it in
it any show or color thereof; neither is it offensive, except peradventure any
take offense at it. And touching the indecency or unfitness of it, albeit I
cannot see how it can be rightly so accounted among us, where the people are
taught and instructed how to use it, yet if this were granted, it cannot prove
the unlawfulness of it.

Thus I have run over as briefly as I could these reasons, and opened the
weakness of them to the faces of such as urge them. I have not purposely
concealed any weight or force that they may carry with the^ for mine own
advantage, but propounded the^ to the view of al me^ as sincerely as I could,
for the cause noted in the end of this discourse: neither do I know any learned
writers beside themselves against it. It is true, that some of late opposing
the order of the church, do pretend sundry testimonies and authorities of many
Authors, and paint the margins of their books with almost infinite quotations,
but what do they all make either for them, or against us? Do they speak
against the lawfulness of kneeling, or show that it is against Gods word, or
hold that all men ought to deny to yield unto it? no such matter. Nay, either
they are silent in the point for which they are alleged, or else they are
witnesses directly deposing against those that allege them. Let them without
all circumlocution or multiplying of words inform us, either by text of
Scriptures, or decree of Councels, or constitution of Emperors, or sentence of
Fathers, or judgment of Martyrs, or determination of Divines, who have ever
taught or published, that kneeling at the Lords Supper is utterly unlawful.
This as yet they have not done, and by reason of their deep silence in this
matter I am persuaded they cannot do. Let them or any for them prove unto us
directly, that we ought by no means to submit our selves to this gesture, or
that we may disturb the peace of the Church for it, either out of Calvin, or
Beza, or Iunius, or Vrsinus, or Bucer, or Bullenger, or Bucanus, or Piscator,
or Paraeus, or Polanus, or Peter Martyr, or Aretius, or Gualter, or Musculus,
or in effect any of elder or later times: or show unto us, that they have
advised and counseled any, either utterly to abstain from, or for a time to
forbear the receiving of the Communion, rather then to kneel at it, and then
they shall speak more to the purpose, and yield unto us better satisfaction.
But if they be not able to bring us one sentence or syllable out of these
Writers which are produced by themselves, or out of any other whose praise is
in the Church for their worthy labors, because their judgment is plain, let
them freely confess their error, and readily yield unto the truth. These are
those pillars of the church that have carried the burden of the building, and
those laborers that have borne the heat of the day; who albeit they have
written much of the Sacraments, and themselves lived where they received either
standing or sitting, yet never wrote against kneeling, nor condemned those
Churches that practiced it, knowing very well that we are no more bound to
follow them, then they are to follow us. Indeed they have all of them abhorred
kneeling to the bread, but none of them have abhorred kneeling at the receiving
of the bread: and therefore let them that have been so earnest heretofore for
sitting at the Communion, and to reason for the practice a^^ in the maintenance
of it, lay their hand upon their mou and not so eagerly pursue that cause, but
be content to submit themselves to the order of the Church; and let them learn
to give thanks to God the Father, that we have the Supper of the Lord so
sincerely administered among us, and that they may so reverently receive it,
which in so pure and holy a manner is not either delivered or taken in some
other Churches, where notwithstanding they ought to Communicate that live in
them. So long as we may take the bread and drink of the cup of the Lord
with hearing the word preached, with prayers and praises offered to God, let us
not strive and contend in indifferent things, (as we have proved this to be)
which are to be ordered by the higher powers; but yield obedience to the truth,
and be content to join with our brethren, as in the action of the Supper, so
in the gesture of the body, that so with joy of heart and comfort of Spirit,
with one mind and with one mouth we may glorify our Father which is in heaven.
And if the best reformed Churches be only the competent Judges in this case,
Page 50.
to whose judgment we are to conform our selves, as themselves confess, the
question will soon be at an end, forasmuch as there is no Church under heaven
that we know, nor learned writer before our times that I can understand by the
relation and observation of others, to have simply condemned the gesture of
kneeling at the Sacrament as unlawful. I deny not but some have held this
ceremony needless, unprofitable, in expedient, and fit to be abolished, but
not impious, unlawful, Idolatrous in it self. It is well said of Beza Beza
epist. 2.
in his second Epistle, that albeit the Sacraments be instituted by Christ, and
that by man's authority nothing ought to be added to them or detracted from
them, yet not every declining from the institution is to be accounted a
corruption, so that the intent and purpose of the Author of them be observed.
When the Lord Jesus did ordain his last supper, it is most likely that the
disciples received the bread and the cup not at the hands of Christ, but one of
another, forasmuch as he took the cup and gave thanks, and said, Take this and
divide it among your selves, Luke 22, 17.
and that all of them did drink of one and the same cup: what then? Shall we
say that those Churches offended, or that the commandment of Christ is
transgressed, or that the institution is violated, where one does not deliver
the Sacrament to another, but all receive it at the hand of the Minister, and
where they drink also not of one, but of diverse cups? No, in no wise: because
the taking of the Elements is necessarily required, but the manner is not
precisely appointed and prescribed. And hereby also we see farther, that we
are not seruilely bound to cleave to the example of Christ in the
administration and participation of the Supper: albeit on the other side we
have no purpose to oppose our selves any way against him; but inasmuch as he
has left it free, we have made choice of that we think fit. Thus I have
finished the point which I intended, to bring back our deceived brethren and
sisters to a willing submission to the orders of our Church in this behalf. I
have of purpose abstained from speaking of many other points which I might have
touched, and peradventure had been fit to be observed, least I should
exasperate any way those that are contrary minded, and thereby drive them
farther from that whereunto I go about to persuade them, and so wound those
whom I desire to win. For I am so far from going about to kindle the coals
of contention, and moving them any way to anger, or bringing them to trouble,
whom I mind to gain to the truth* that if I have let fall any thing from my
pen, that they which are contrary to me in opinion and to our Church in
practice, might take to be spoken to their disgrace, or uttered in contempt of
their persons, I do here freely condemn it my self, before it come into
other men's hands to be read of them: I seek for verity, I strive not for
victory. In the matters of God we should be far from bitterness, and
especially in things of this nature we ought to be patient toward al men. In
all controversies I account it an heavenly direction worthy to be followed,
set down by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4, 31, 32.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be
put away from you: and be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. And to conclude, I
say with the same Apostle in another place, Gal. 6. Gal 6, 16.
As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God.

Thus much of the duties and rites to be practiced of the Communicants, as
likewise touching the rest of the outward parts of the Lords Supper.

CHAP. VII. Of the words of Consecration in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
ALthough we have spoken before sufficiently of consecration, Book 1. ca. 8.
what it is, and how it is wrought, to satisfy all such as are sober minded
and simple lovers of the truth: yet because special points are here to be
observed, and that the adversaries turn the true consecration into a certain
magical incantation, to work a miraculous or rather a monstrous
transubstantiation: it shall not be amiss to assume and handle this point
again, that thereby the truth of God may be cleared, the ignorant instructed,
the adversaries satisfied, and consequently their mouths stopped. Consecration
is a change or converting of the outward elements into another use, by
observing the whole institution of Christ, which gives it his effect. We
confess a turning and changing, not of one substance into another, not by
abolishing of natures, not by close pronouncing of certain words: but in the
use and in respect of us, The use of the elements is c^anged: the substance is
not changed.
and in regard of the promise of God. The water which flowed out of the rock
in the wilderness, signified the same to the Fathers, which the wine
represents to us in the Supper. Notwithstanding, it was a common watering to
the beasts of the field, and to the people of God; the cattle drank thereof as
well as the people, and therefore there could be made no change therein but in
respect of men, Number 20, 10.
to whom God gave his gracious promise; which teaches us to account of the
outward signs otherwise then of common meats and common drinks. The
Tabernacle and the Arc, and all the instruments thereof were made of common
matter, before they were sanctified of God to that purpose. The stones hammered
in the quarrey, the timber hewed in the Forest, the gold tried in the furnace,
were common stuff, before they were laid in the building of the Temple, Mat
23, 16.
and so made holy and sanctified to God and man. The sayings and sentences Act.
17.28. Tit. 1, 12. 1 Cor. 15, 33.
of the heathenish Poets were profane, before they had passed through the Pen
of God, and were taken up by the Holy Ghost. So we teach of the bread and wine,
before the institution of Christ is used and observed, they are common: but
afterward they are holy. We confess and deny not, but say plainly there is a
change in the Sacraments: the elements which before were ordinary meats, now
become spiritual in respect of the use: before they served only to feed the
belly, now they serve to seal up the nourishment of our souls.

The discussing of this question, Two means of consecration, to wit, the word
and p air
together with the foundation of this consecration and sanctification of the
creatures, is taken out of 1 Timothy 4, 4. Every creature of God is good, and
nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it is
sanctified 1 Timothy 4, ^, 5
by the word of God and prayer. These are the two means, the word and prayer,
whereby the Elements are changed, though not transubstantiated, yet they have a
dignity and pre-eminence, which they had not before, they are no Just. in Apol.
2
more common bread, common wine, common meat, but a Sacrament of Christ's body,
a warrant of Gods promises, an holy mystery, and seal of the covenant between
God and us. The first means of this consecration and setting apart of the
creatures to our use, is by the word of God. If we have the evident and
express word to warrant our use of the creatures of God, we may use them for
our necessity and comfort: if we have no word to bear out the practice, they
are not sanctified unto us. The tree of knowledge of good and evil, was not
sanctified unto Adam, though it were good in it self (as all Genesis 1.31.
creatures are) because he had a word of commandment not to eat of it: Genesis
2, 17.
Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for
in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death. After the fall
and after the flood, all creatures were not sanctified, some were accounted
Genesis 7, 2.
unclean, all might not be eaten, all might not be offered: as under the law,
Leuit. 11, 3.
among the beasts, only they were clean that did chew the cud, and divide the
hoof: and among the fishes of the Sea, only such as had skales and sins
were called clean, the rest were unclean unto them, because the word did not
allow but restrain the use of them.

So likewise for this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not every creature is
sanctified, not a lamb, not any flesh, not any fish, not oil: but only bread
and wine. These two are consecrated, all the rest are cancelled by the word.
For albeit flesh be more like unto flesh then bread is, yet would he not make
choice of any of that kind, because he respected not the color and outward
form, but the force of nourishment and strengthening of the body, which is
greater in bread, then in the flesh of any creature.

The second means whereby the creatures are sanctified, is by prayer. For
albeit that God by the coming of his Son into the world has sanctified all
meats and drinks, that nothing of it self is unclean, Romans 14.15
but to him that counts it unclean: yet something must necessarily be done
on our parts, otherwise that which is holy, we may profane: and that which is
good, we may turn into evil: and therefore the Apostle adds prayer, which
is both a thanksgiving to the Lord that he has sanctified and prepared them
for us, and likewise a petition that they may be healthful for us, and we
thankful for them, whereby our food, our apparel, and all the succors of
this life are sanctified to his glory and our comfort.

These be the two means of consecration: if these or any of them be wanting,
there can be no true consecration. If then in the time of the law they should
have eaten swines flesh, which indeed Leuit. 11, 7.
part the hoof, but chew not the cud: they should have sinned, because it was
not sanctified: and therefore albeit they had prayed for a blessing all the day
long, and given thanks never so much, yet could it not make their p^actise
lawful, which the word of God has made unlawful. Or if they had offered a
clean and holy sacrifice, and not made humble and earnest prayers to God to
accept them and their oblations, it could not have due effect, but the word of
God had been hindered by their unworthiness. So in the administration of the
Lords sacred Supper, we use the word of God, which warranteth us to take the
bread and wine; out of this word we allege the promises of God to the true
believer: and heereunto we join prayers and thanksgiving, that God would
accept us and bless us in the participation of his own ordinance. Thus albeit
we have no forged transubstantiation, we have a true consecration: if the word
of God and prayer of the Church can work it, which are the means left unto us
for this purpose: if we be Ierom 20, 7.
any way deceived, it is the Scripture which has deceived us.

that Christ observed, and charged us to do: we show forth plainly the death of
Christ as if Gal 3, 1.
he were described in our sight, and among us crucified: we speak openly in a
known tongue, and the people understand us: we pray unto God to accept us,
and render him thanks for the work of our redemption: Lastly, we take the
outward elements and join the word unto them, and thus they are made to us a
Sacrament.

Nay, if to offer up to God, our selves, our souls, our bodies, our alms for
the poor, our prayers and thanksgiuings unto God the Father for our
redemption, be an oblation and a sacrifice: we have both a Sacrament and a
sacrifice in our Churches, though we offer not up Christ's body to be a
propitiatory sacrifice for the redemption both of the quick and dead unto his
Father. We offer up as much as We offer up as much as Christ commanded us.
Christ commanded us to offer: but that sacrifice was once offered up upon the
Cross: he was the Priest, he was the Altar, he was the sacrifice, there is no
other sacrifice left to be offered for sin: and he which presumes to offer
him again, is an enemy to the Cross of Christ, treads the Son of God under
his foot, counts the blood of the new Testament unholy, and has renounced
salvation by Jesus Christ.

Now if we cleaving precisely to the institution of Christ, do not consecrate:
what may be thought of the popish Priests, who whisper their words closely,
that no man hears? use a strange tongue, that no man understands: bring in
private Masses, whereat none communicate: deliver dry Communions, wherein no
man drinks: exhort no man, speak to no man: and if they do consecrate, they
consecrate only for themselves, and not for others? Wherefore we detest the
opprobrious and blasphemous speeches of the profane Papists, who in 2 Samuel 16,
7. 2 King. 18, ^5
the spirit of Shemei and of Rabshaketh, rail falsely, vilely, and slanderously
against our Communions, affirming that they are no other then common bread and
wine, without grace, without virtue, without sanctification, bare signs of
Christ absent, no better then our common breakfasts, dinners, and suppers. Thus
they speak basely, proudly, and scornefully of our communions, but all the
world knows they speak untruly. We hold an effectual consecration in both
the Sacraments, though we deny a real conversion into the body and blood of
Christ: the water in baptism is no more common water, Gal. 3.27.
it is not void of a spiritual effect, it is not without grace and
sanctification. So the bread and wine are changed, not from one substance into
another, but from one use to another; not in themselves, but to us: not in
their own nature, but in their end; and thus they are not the same they were
before.

Hosich. in Leuit lib. 2 ca 8
among diverse, the remainder was accustomably used to be burned; Euagri. lib.
4. cap. 8. Niceph. lib. 17. cap 25.
among some it was given to little children that were in the schools; among
others, they did eat it in the Hieron com. in 1 Cor. 11.
common assembly at their feasts of love: so that out of the sacred use of the
Sacrament they did eat it as common bread, they did drink it as common wine.
We see in baptism, the water remaining and not used, is no part of the
Sacrament, but may be applied to common uses. So it is in the Lords Supper (for
the Sacraments of the new testament are alike and of the same worthiness) no
more is consecrated then is received and applied. This also is evident by Number.
10, 10
the rock in the wilderness: where the waters flowing from thence,
represented the blood of Christ to the Israelites that drank thereof, not to the
beasts and cattle that were watered by it. So much was consecrated water as
they received, not all the rest. So when John Mat. 3, 6.
baptized in Jordan, not all the River but all that which was applied was
sanctified. So when he baptized in Ioh 3, 23.
Fnon, because there was much water there, not the whole stream was hallowed,
but so much as he used. Wherefore, whatsoever remains after the celebration
of the Sacraments, may be applied lawfully to common and ordinary uses, and
therefore all superstition touching any of them is to be avoided.

Moreover, if the sanctification of every creature, whether Paul says, 1 Cor.
10, 16
The cup of blessing which we bless: How the signs in the Sacrament are
blessed.
when prayer is made to God, that they may be healthful to us, and we
thankeful for them unto him that is the giver of them.

Lastly, if in the Sacrament there be a consecration it warns us to be
careful to use and receive We ought often to receive the Lords supper.
oftentimes this Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For here are not bare signs,
bare tokens, bare figures without fruit and without grace: they are
consecrated signs, and hallowed elements, effectually sealing up remission of
sins. And what is more plain then that which the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor.
11. 1 Cor. 11, 25 26.
As often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come? Thus the Lord Jesus speaks, Do this, as often as ye
shall drink it, in remembrance of me. And have we not many worthy and
effectual Reasons re^dred to move us to frequent the Lords Table.
considerations, to move such as profess the same doctrine, to resort
oftentimes to the same Table of the Lord? It is the commandment of Christ, so
that we ought to make some conscience of this duty, as of other commandments
prescribed unto us. It is a commandment of God Exo. 20, 13
Thou shall not steal. Few but do make some conscience thereof, because it is
Gods commandment. So is this here, often to come to the Lords Table: yet what
little account is made hereof all the year long, every one sees, and the
faithful soul agreeueth. The high God possessor Genesis 14, 12.
of heaven and earth has required and commanded it: yet who regards? The
Lord has spoken, and yet who obeys? If a father should command a duty of his
son, or a master of his servant, he could not patiently endure to be
disobeyed: Mal. 1, 6.
and shall we not think that God will require his laws at our hands? Again,
to his commandment he has annexed a promise, which makes our sin and
unthankfulness the greater, if we show not our selves ready in yielding to this
duty. Besides, seeing this Sacrament is a special prop to stay up our says,
and brings with it Christ and al his merits and heavenly treasures: we are
utter enemies to our own selves, to our own souls, and to our own
salvation, if we neglect so great mercy offered unto us. Wherefore, it is not
left free unto us, and committed to our discretion to receive or not receive,
this were no lawful liberty, but unlawful licentiousness. Herein the
faithful find very great comfort, and an effectual means to strengthen
their faith. Even as the sick man that feels his sickness, and knows his
own weakness, should have a special care to look to his stomach, that thereby
he may receive nourishment and gather strength: so we are all spiritually
diseased, assaulted of Satan, tempted of the flesh, overcome oftentimes of
sin, and must seek strength of faith from this heavenly nourishment. God of
his compassion: has set up his Sacrament as a sign upon an high hill, whence
it may be seen far and near on every side, to raise up such as are fallen,
to strengthen such as stand, to comfort such as are weak, and to call unto him
such as run away from him, whereby he gathers them under his wings. It is as
the brazen Serpent, Number. 23, 9.
that coming unto it with a faith to be healed, we might live and not perish.
It is as a banner displayed, that every Christian Souldior should resort unto
it as unto his own colors, to fight the battles of God against sin and
Satan. It is as a royal feast of the great King, whereunto we must go
cheerfully, as guests invited to a comfortable supper, to be had in often use
and continual remembrance, to put us in mind of his continual mercy laid up
for us in the blood of Christ, and to ratify and seal up the same far more
lively then the bare word only.

When the words of Christ's institution are spoken, Mat. 26, 26.28.
This is my body which is broken for you: this is my blood which was shed for
you: When these words, I say, are read unto us out of the Scriptures, they
confirm our says: but much more when the Sacrament is seen with our eyes,
that we behold the bread broken and look upon the wine poured out: but most of
all when we taste and handle, when we eat and drink the outward signs. We
see when one makes a bare promise to another, with words only between
themselves, he begins to doubt (to whom the promise is made) of the
performance thereof: if he add an oath for confirmation, the promise is more
assuredly ratified: but if he give his hand writing and seal it to the party,
the matter is made out of doubt. Thus we do reason and help our faith. We
have the promises of God, we have the oath of God, we have the words and
writings of God, we have the seals and Sacraments of God, these are not
reserved in the Lords keeping, but are put into our own hands to see them, to
keep them to use them for our comfort and assurance. I speak after the manner
of men, if we have a free promise from an honest man, penned fairly in
writing, ratified under his own hand and seal, and all given unto us to lock
and lay up, we doubt not of the possession, nor of our just title unto the same.

Now let us consider the Lords doing, and see what he has done for us: who is
not as man, that Number. 23.
he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should deceive. God sent his
Son Gal. 4, 4.
into the world to take our nature upon him, to be like us, Heb. 4:15.
even in his infirmities he named himself Mat. 1, 21.
Jesus, that is, a Savior, because he should save his people from their
sins: after his death he sent his Apostles to preach the glad tidings of
remission of sins and everlasting salvation: he ordained his last Supper
immediately before his death to testify and assure them unto us, not only by
sounding them in our ears, but by beholding, tasting, smelling, feeling, and
feeding to seal them in our hearts, and also daily to be repeated and
ministered unto us. Seeing then we have both his promises and oath, his word and
writings, his seals and Sacraments in our keeping; what would we have more? He
would not make half so much ado in assuring his promises, if he loved us not:
he would not set such authentike seals to his deed and obligations, unless he
meant good earnest. His bare word and naked promise is very good payment: but
he respects our weakness, whose merciful kindness must not be neglected
through our unthankfulness. Thus much of consecration, and the uses thereof.

CHAP. VIII. Of the first inward part of the Lords Supper.
HIther to we have spoken of the outward parts of this Sacrament, by doing
whereof consecration is performed: What are the inward parts of the Lords
supper.
now follow the inward parts to be considered. For in Sacraments we must
consider not what they be of themselves, but what August. cont. Maxim. in li. 3.
they signify unto us. These inward parts are four in number, to wit, first
the Father, secondly the Spirit, thirdly the body and blood of Christ, and
fourthly the faithful. All these have a sacramental relation to the outward
parts, and declare the inward truth of them. The actions of the Minister are
notes of the actions of God the Father: the word of institution is made
effectual by the holy Spirit: the bread and wine are signs and seals,
representing the body and blood of Christ: the outward actions of every
receiver do note out the inward actions and spiritual works of the faithful.
Thus then the agreement answers aptly, and the proportion falls fully
between the parts. The agreement between the outward and inward parts.
As the Minister by the words of institution offers unto the Communicants the
bread and wine to feed thereupon corporally and bodily: so God the Father by
the Spirit offers and gives the body and blood of Christ, to the faithful
receivers to feed upon them spiritually. Hence it is, that the outward actions
of the Ministers, and the outward actions of the receivers are said to be
signs of the second kind, and therefore may fitly be called parts of the
Supper.

Now then, let us remember the sensible and external actions of the Minister,
that thereby we may consider the spiritual and inward actions of God the
Father. And first of all, the taking of the bread and wine into his hands, and
the consecrating or blessing of them by repeating the promise, by prayers, and
thanksgiuings, does seal up these holy actions of God the Father, by which he
from all eternity even before the foundation of the world, did separate, elect,
ordain, choose, and call his Son to perform the office of a Mediator
between God and man: and when the fullness of time came did send him into the
world, to perform that office, whereunto he was appointed, This we see proved
unto us in many places, as John 6. Labor not for the meat which perishes,
but for the meat that endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man
shall give unto you: for him Ioh. 6, 27.
has God the Father sealed, that is, has installed him into his office, to
reconcile men unto God, and to bring them to everlasting life. And Gal. 1.
Jesus gave himself, that he might deliver us from this present evil world,
Gal. 1, 4.
according to the will of God even our Father: So that whatsoever Christ did,
he did it by the will and appointment of his Father. According to the testimony
of the Apostle, Heb. 5. Christ took not to himself this honor, to be made the
High Priest, Heb. 5, 5.
but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day I begat thee, gave it
him. And as the Father ordained him to that office, so in time he sent him, as
the Evangelist witnesses, Luke 4, 18.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor, bind up the broken hearted, preach liberty to
the captives, etc. So likewise 1 Ioh. 4. Herein is that love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and Ioh. 4, 10.
sent his Son to be a reconciliation for our sins. And Gal. 4. When the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, and made
under the law, that he might redeem them that are under the law. Thus we see
the inward actions of God the Father, answering to the outward actions of the
Ministers, who being rightly called of God, do work with him, and are the
dispensers of his secrets.

Romans 5, 5.
seeing the love of God is thus shed abroad in our hearts through the
Holy Ghost, Romans 8, 16.
who bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, by whom
we Ephesians. 4, 30.
are sealed unto the day of redemption.

Deuteronomy. 8, 3. Mat. 14, 4.
God has appointed to this purpose, Ezekiel. 14, 13 Leuit. 25, 26
as a staff to sustain us: so is the soul fed by no other means then God
has before ordained* The cause of our salvation is in the love of God toward
us, which is notably represented by the taking and blessing of the outward
elements. He might have left us to our selves, to work out our own
destruction: but his mercy is greater then his justice.

Thirdly, by these outward actions of the Minister, we Mat. 17, 5. and 3, 17.
in whom he is well pleased, to be the Mediator for the pardon of our sins.
Hence we see the infinite love of God toward us, and let us labor to
comprehend Ephesians. 3, 18.19.
the length, breadth, height, and depth thereof, that spared not his own Son,
Romans 32.
but gave him for us all unto the death: hence we see that exceeding compassion
of the Son, that loved his enemies more then himself, and accounted not his
own life precious to himself: hence we see the gracious and glorious work of
our redemption, wherein the mercy and justice of God Psalm. 85, 10.
meet together, and kiss each other, teaching us to take sweet delight and
comfort in the meditation thereof day and night with all thanksgiving: hence
we have assurance of salvation and consolation in all troubles and tentations:
hence we see the greatness of our own sins that could not be pardoned, but by
the death of the Son of god, and therefore we must hate them with an unfeigned
hatred as our greatest, most dangerous and deadly enemies: and lastly, hence we
see, that if God the Father thus loved us, we ought earnestly to love him
again, and to serve him in all duties of holiness and true righteousness:
neither ought we to love him only, but for him all our brethren, as the
Apostle reasons, 1 Ioh. 4, 11.
Brethren, if God so loved us, we ought to love one another.

Thus we have showed, how the taking of the bread by the Minister, signifies
the Fathers appointing of his Son: the Ministers blessing, the Fathers
separating and setting apart his Son to his office: the Ministers delivering
of the bread, the Fathers giving of his Son. If then we draw near to the
Lords table with faith, reverence, and repentance, nothing can be more sure and
certain to us, then the taking and receiving of Christ, for when we receive
the bread from the Minister, we withal receive the body of Christ offered by
the hand of God the Father, so that as we are assured of the one, we need not
doubt of the other.

Exodus 12, 45
as it was figured by the Passover, and performed at his passion: the
verifying and accomplishment whereof, we read John 19, 36. I answer, Esa. 53,
4.5.
he was tormented and even torn with pains, as Esa. 53. He was wounded for
our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Lo what is meant by the
breaking of the bread: his soul was tormented, his spirit was crushed, his
hands and feet were pierced, he sweat drops of Water and blood, and cried out
aloud upon the Cross, My Man. 27, 46.
God, my God why have thou forsaken me. Wherefore let these rites be rightly
marked and observed of us for our comfort and consolation: Let us when we see
the bread broken and wine poured out, meditate on the passion of Christ how he
was wounded and torn for our transgressions. Although not a bone of his body
was broken in pieces, yet he was broken with afflictions, bruised with
sorrows, and tormented with bitter anguish of his soul, by whose stripes we
are healed, by whose condemnation we are justified, by whose agonies we are
comforted, by whose death we are quickened. Whosoever rests in the outward
works done before his eyes, never attaineth to the substance of the Sacrament.
Thus much of the first inward part.

CHAP. IX. Of the second inward part of the Lords Supper.
THe second inward part is the The second inward part of the Lords Supper, is
the holy Spirit.
holy Spirit, who assures us of the truth of Gods promise. As we have in the
word of truth, the forgiveness of sins, increase of faith, grows in
sanctification, a great measure of dying to sin, and a greater care to live in
newnes of life, promised unto us: so does the Spirit work these things Romans 8,
15. Gal. 3, 2, 5.
in the hearts of all the faithful. This appears in many places, Romans 8. Ye
have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father: the same
Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. To
one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, and to another the word of
knowledge, by the same Spirit: to another is given faith by the same Spirit:
all these things works one and the self same Spirit, distributing to every
man severally, as he will. So then as we are weak in faith and slow to
believe: so we have the Spirit given unto us to help our infirmities and to
open our hearts to receive the promises. For the Lord Jesus reigning
continually in his Church, and performing the office of a Prophet, does make
the words of his Ministers lively by his Spirit in our hearts, and causes them
to be of perpetual force and efficacy, assuring us of his promises made unto
us, and uniting the sign with the thing signified. This truth being cleared,
the uses offer themselves Iam. 1, 21.
the word of that is grafted in us which is able to save our souls.

Indeed every person present may hear the words of institution, may see the
wine poured out, may eat of that bread and drink of that cup, as they may also
hear the sound of the voice that comes unto them: but the whole force,
effect, and power, rests only in the Spirit of God, sealing up the truth and
substance of those things in the hearts of all the Children of God.

Abraham the Father of the faithful, that Ioh. 8, 56.
he rejoiced to see the day of Christ, he saw it and was glad. For as we cannot
see him with our bodily eyes, nor hear him with our bodily ears, nor touch
him with our bodily hands: no more can we taste or eat him with our bodily
mouths. By the hand of faith we reach and apply him: by the mouth of faith we
receive and eat him. Let us believe in Christ, and we Aug. tract. in John. 26.
and 27.
have eaten Christ: let us not prepare our teeth and our belly, but a lively
faith working by love. Wherefore albeit the humane nature of Christ go not out
of the highest heavens: yet we that live upon the earth are partakers of his
body contained in the heavens, and his flesh and blood are communicated to us
as truly and effectually, as if he were there present with us. If any say, How
can this be? 1 Ioh. 17, 20.
whereby we receive and apply Christ with all his gifts unto our selves, as
Ioh. 17. Father I pray thee for such as believe in me, that they may be one,
as thou O Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.
Heereunto comes the saying of Paul, Ephe. 3. Christ dwells in our hearts by
faith. Likewise Acts 13. By him every one that believes is justified, that is,
absolved and discharged. And John 3. So many as believe in him shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. Thus we see our fellowship with Christ, is
from the Spirit, and by our faith. The Spirit is the principal worker: faith
is the means and the instrument. Neither must this conjunction seem unto us
impossible, through the great distance and distinction of place.

For there are diverse manners of presences: that which is present to the sight
is not present to the hand, Molin. de Eucharist. cap. 2.
and that which is present to the ear is not present to the eye: that which is
present to the body is not present to the soul; and things present to the
soul are oftentimes absent from the body. Things are said to be present with
us according as they cause themselves to be perceived of our senses or of our
souls. Whereby it appears very plainly, after what fashion Christ may be
said to be present with us in his Supper, to wit, according as he communicates
himself unto us, which is to our spirits, not to our bodies, and therefore his
presence is spiritual, and not corporal. And the Apostle tells us, Romans
8. Romans 8, 9, 11.
that the Spirit of Christ dwells in us, which teaches us how we are united
to Christ, namely, by the bond of one and the same Spirit dwelling both in him
and in us. Thus is the conjunction wrought between him and us: so that there
is another presence which is true and in deed, besides that which is bodily.
This is that which we read in the Apostle John, 1 Ioh 4, 13.
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit. And Paul says, Romans 8. Romans 8, 9.
He that has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. For as by one and
the same soul all the members of the body are knit and coupled with the head
and so do live: in like manner all the faithful albeit they remain upon the
earth, and their head be in the heavens, are really united with him through one
and the same Spirit, and being united do live thereby. Ioh. 6, 63.
The like we may say of faith, whereby Christ dwells in our hearts,
Ephesians 3, 17. Ephesians. 3, 17.
And our Savior teaches, that by believing in him we eat his flesh and
drink his blood, John 6, 35. Ioh. 6, 35.
If then any ask how we may obtain and hold fast Christ Jesus, seeing he is
absent from us? Or how we may put forth our hands to take him sitting at the
right hand of his Father in heaven? I answer with Austine, August tract. 50,
in Johan.
fide mitte, et tenuisti: Send forth thy faith, and thou hold him fast. Thus
Christ being absent from us, is present with us: for except he were present
with us, he could not be possessed of us, nor communicated by us. These are the
two hands given unto us, which the soul has, to wit, the Spirit and faith.
The hands of the body lay hold on bodily things; the hands of the soul lay
hold on spiritual things. There is a presence also to the sight.

We see the Sun daily with our eyes, which though it be situate in the
heavens, and separated from us in place co^municateth his effect and power to
us that dwell on the earth, neither do we marvel thereat, and yet is the Sun
but a creature subject unto us, and distributed to all the people under the
whole heaven to serve their use. Shall not Christ then the Son of
righteousness make us truly partakers of his flesh by the unsearchable power of
his Spirit, and the supernatural gift of a lively faith, who can as easily
join together things far off, as those that are nigh? Are not the faithful
severed in place, and scattered through the world, joined as nearly together
as the members are, 1 Ioh. 1, 3.
to become one body whereof Christ is the head? As the Apostle teaches, That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may also have
fellowship with us, and that our fellowship also may be with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ. We see this likewise lively laid out before us in
the estate of marriage, though the husband and wife be sundred for a time and
separated one far from another, yet the band of matrimony does so join and
unite them, that the wife is one flesh with her husband, albeit he be a
thousand miles distant from her; so is it between Christ and the faithful, he
loved the Church and gave himself for it, and they are members of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bones, which coupling and combining together with Christ
is wrought (as we have showed) by the Spirit principally, by faith
instrumentally, by both most effectually. We need not therefore any carnal
and bodily presence of Christ to join us to him, seeing it is truly and
certainly performed by these means, whereby we grow to a perfect man in him.
For as the Sun is more comfortable to the world by his refreshing beams and
sweet influence being absent, then if his natural body and compass lay upon
the earth: so the flesh of Christ being in the glory of his Father, much more
comfort and refreshes our souls and bodies by his heavenly grace and
spiritual influence, then if he were present fleshly before our eyes. And as
the Sun, not discending from heaven nor leaving his place, is notwithstanding
present with us in our Chambers, in our houses, in our hands, and in our
bosoms: so Christ being in the highest heavens, not coming down, nor
forsaking his glorious habitation, yet Mat. 28, 20.
nevertheless is present with us in our congregations, in our hearts, in our
prayers, in our meditations, and in the Sacraments. But of this we shall have
occasion to speak more in the chapter following, and we have already spoken
somewhat of it in the former books.

CHAP. X. Of the third inward part of the Lords Supper.
THe third inward part is The third inward part of the Lords Supper, is the
body and blood of Christ.
the body and blood of Christ, that is, the body of our Lord delivered unto
death for us, and his blood shed for the remission of sins, and consequently
whole Christ. This is the chiefest part of this Sacrament. For the body and
blood of Christ signified by the bread and wine are thus made and separated to
be the lively meat of our souls, and have that force and efficacy of feeding
in our souls, which bread and wine have in our bodies. This is the cause why
Ioh. 6, 48 50
Christ often calls himself the bread of life, Ioh. 6. I am that bread of
life: this is that bread of life which comes down from heaven, that he
which eats of it should not dye; I am that living bread, if any man eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever. Thus every receiver is given to understand,
that as God does bless the bread and wine in his Supper, to preserve,
strengthen, and comfort the body of the receiver: So Christ apprehended and
received by faith does nourish us, and preserves body and soul unto eternal
life. He dyed in the flesh, that he might quicken us: and he poured out his
blood, that he might cleanse us from our sins. Wherefore How the sacramental
rites do serve to strengthen our faith.
whenever as the Lords guests we see the bread on the Lords Table, we must
set our minds on the body of Christ: when we behold the cup of the Lord, we
must think upon the blood of Christ: when we look upon the bread broken, and
the wine poured out, we must consider how the body of Christ was pierced,
punished, crushed, crucified, torn, tormented, and his blood poured out for
our sakes: when we feel, that by bread our bodies are nourished and
strengthened, and by the wine our vital spirits are comforted and refreshed,
we believe that by the body of Christ delivered to death for us, we are fed to
euerlesting life, and that by his blood poured out upon the Cross, our
consciences are sanctified, and we feel his quickening power, which does
confirm us in our communion with him. Thus is this part of the Supper
spiritually to be applied: thus are the bread and wine made a Sacrament to us,
and not bare signs: thus the memorial of Christ's death is repeated, which
albeit it were once finished on the Cross, and now his passion is past long
ago: yet to the faithful in regard of the force, it is still fresh and always
present. Now it is not without cause and good consideration, that Christ would
have the bread first delivered as a sign of his body, and then afterward the
wine as a sign of his blood, severally and apart administered, because his body
and blood are not represented to us, as his humanity now dwells glorious in
the heavens, but as he was offered up a sacrifice on the cross, his blood
being shed out of his body. For to the end it may be nourishment to us, it
must be crucified. For as corn of it self is not fit food for us, unless it
be threshed, winnowed, ground, and baked for us: so is it touching Christ, he
must suffer, be crucified, and dye, that we may live by him, and reign with
him.

This is the truth which in this point is to be considered. Against the real
presence.
he is not personally, locally, carnally, corporally, naturally, really,
substantially, and sensually present in the Sacrament. The question is not The
true state of the question set down.
whether the words of Christ be true, for they are known, confessed, and
believed, so that as he is the truth, so all his words are words of truth:
neither is the question whether the Sacrament be a bare sign or bare figure,
we say Christ is truly represented, sealed, and exhibited: neither is the
question whether God be omnipotent and almighty, this is a part of our faith
and an Article of christian belief: neither is the question simply of the
presence of Christ, whether he be truly and undoubtedly present in the
Sacrament of his last Supper, we acknowledge and receive as much. For Christ is
present among us sundry ways, by his Spirit, by his grace, by his divinity, by
faith dwelling in our hearts, he is present in his word, he is present in the
ministry of baptism, he is present in the Sacrament of his body: we only deny
that gross and fleshly presence which many go about to fasten upon us. But the
whole question is of the meaning and understanding of the words of institution,
and of the manner of his presence. We confess and teach the people committed
unto us, that Christ's Confess Gal. lic. art. ^7. Confess. Anglic. art. 12. Call
instit. lib. 4. cap. 17.
body and blood are truly, verily, and indeed given unto us, that we truly
eat and drink them, that we are relieved and live by them, that we are made
bone of his bone, that Christ dwells in us, and we in him: yet we say not
that the substance of bread and wine is abolished, or that Christ's body
descends from heaven, or is grossly and corporally present in the Sacrament:
we are taught to lift up our hearts to heaven, Col. 3, 1, 2, 3
where Christ sits at the right hand of God the Father, and there to seed
upon him. But here is the state of the question and controversy between us.
The Church of Rome teaches, that after Con. Trid. sess. 13. cap. 1.
the words of consecration the bread and wine are abolished, and the body and
blood of Christ come in place, so that they make them corporally present, not
only in the Sacrament to be eaten with the mouth, but in the pixe, in the
Mass, and in their solemn processions, where is neither eating nor drinking.
Yea Berengarius in his recantation was taught to say, and forced to subscribe,
that De con did. 2. ego Bereng.
Christ is in the Sacrament sensibly (or sensually) is touched with the
fingers, divided, broken, and rent with the teeth, and not only the accidents.
Moreover, they make it to be eaten, not only of evil men, but of beasts, and
to fill up the measure of blasphemy, to be cast out into the draught, as some
of them have taught and affirmed. Thus then the difference stands between
us, they hold that Christ's body, and blood are carnally eaten of wicked men
without faith, of brute beasts without reason: but we deny that Christ is thus
present in the Sacrament, for his body cannot be under so little a quantity of
bread and wine: besides, it is impiety to avouch that the person of Christ or
his body and blood can be truly received of Dogs, Swine, and Mice, be
chewed with the teeth, swallowed down the throat, digested in the stomach,
and be cast out into unclean places. This we deny, this we do not believe,
this we abhor and detest from the bottom of our hearts. What is it then we
teach and profess? We deny that the body and blood of Christ are carnally
contained under the shows and shadows of bread and wine: we deny them to be
eaten and drunken of wicked men or unreasonable creatures: we deny that they
are truly and properly both in heaven and on the earth, in pixes, and on the
Altars. These are Aug tract. 25 in Johan.
meat for the mind, not for the mouth: for faith, not for the teeth: for our
belief, not for the belly: for the soul, not for the body. For this cause
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1 Cor. says well, Vbi cadauer, ibi aquilae, etc. that
is, where the carcass is, there are the Eagles: the carcass is the Lords
body, because of his death: he calls us the Eagles, to show that he must fly
up on high that will come near to that body.

This carnal eating of Christ is Sundry reasons rendered to refel the real
presence.
confuted and convinced by many reasons. First, Christ sat down at the Table
and the Disciples with him, afterward he took bread, gave thanks, brake it,
gave it, and said, This is my body: likewise he took and gave the cup and
said, Drink ye all of this: whereby we see, when the Apostles received Luke
22, 19.
the Sacrament, Christ sat at the Table with his true body: but the body which
they took, sat not at the Table, therefore they took the sign of his body.
Likewise the blood which they received was not in the body which sat at the
Table, therefore it was not properly Christ's blood which was not as yet really
and actually shed. The same body could not sit at the Table, and not sit at
the Table: the same body could not be in their hands, and out of their hands:
the blood of Christ could not be out of his veins in the cup, and in his
veins within his body: he could not sit visible at the Table, and be
invisible in the mouths and bellies of the Disciples. Wherefore the real
prsence brings with it real contradictions which cannot stand together.

Secondly, the end of the Lords Supper, is to call his death to a continual
remembrance, as Luke 22. Do this in Luke 22, 19.
remembrance of me: and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. Ye show the Lords death until
he come. Now to what end should we need the remembrance of Christ, if he were
corporally present in the Sacrament, if he were taken in the hands, if he were
holden in the mouth, if he were eaten with the teeth? And to what purpose
should we show the Lords death till he come, if he come daily and be present
bodily in the Sacrament. Besides, the wisest among the Philosophers teach us
that Arist. lib. de memoria.
sense is of things present, but remembrance is of such things as are abse^t:
as hope is of such things as are to come, not seen, Romans 8, 24.
and this the Apostle teaches.

Thirdly, Christ received a true body with all the natural properties of an
humane body, like to us in all things sin Heb. 4, 15.
only excepted, and is therefore called the son of David, the son of Mary,
the son of man, our brother partaker of flesh and blood, he is said to have
taken upon him the seed of Abraham, and not the Angels nature Luke 24, ^9.
to be visible, Luke 24, 39. Behold my hands and my feet, for it is I my self,
handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. For
if he may be in many places together, in some place visible, and in some
invisible: in some to be handled, in others not to be handled, he can have no
true body of a true man. And if this were not a strong reason, It is not felt
and seen, therefore no humane body: the Disciples might have answered unto
Christ, why do thou bid us behold thy hands, and see thy feet, and handle
thy body, and thereby to try thy humanity, seeing thou have a body which cannot
be seen, touched, or handled?

^ourthly, Christ has left the earth with his bodily presence, and is ascended
up into heaven, far above all principalities and powers, and is sit down
Act. 1, 9. and 3 22.
on the right hand of his Father, as Act. 1. While they beheld, he was taken
up. And Mar. 26. After the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into
heaven, and sat at the right hand of God, So Act. 3. Whom the heavens must
contain, until the time that all things are restored. Likewise Phil. 3. Our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a Savior. And again, Luke
24. As he blessed them, he departed from them, and was carried up into heaven.
So Ioh. 12. The poor always ye have with you, but me ye shall not have
always. I am come out from the Father, and came into the world: again, I
leave the world and go to my Father. If these things be true, that Christ is
Catechism. Triden. in exposit. Simbo. Apostol.
departed from us, if he be no longer among us, if he be taken up into heaven,
if he must be contained there until the restoring of al things, if we must
look for a Savior from heaven to change our vile bodies, if he be carried up
to his Father and have left the world: then he is not now present with us, his
body is not in every Altar, he does not lurk and lie under the shows of bread
and wine. For to be departed from us, and not to be departed from us; to be
contained in heaven, and not to be contained in heaven; to leave the world, and
yet to remain in the world; to sit at the right hand of God, and to lie under
every Altar, cannot stand together any more, then to be a man and no man, to be
Christ and not Christ, to be a Savior and no Savior, to be God and not God.

Fifthly, Christ reproves the Caparnaits, because they thought his body was to
be eaten in fleshly manner, with the mouth of the body, and should descend into
the stomach, which is the way that all other meats do pass: when they heard
him preach of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, they said, Ioh. 6, 60.36.
This is an hard saying, who can hear it? They murmured and departed from him,
because they thought they must eat him with the mouth and teeth, chew him, and
swallow him up. But Christ expounds himself, and declares that he meant not
carnally but spiritually. I^ is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits
nothing: the words that I speak unto you are spirit and life, that is, the
flesh of Christ thus eaten, thus chewed, thus digested bodily, carnally, and
grossly, cannot profit: but truly and spiritually taken it is meat indeed.
Whereby it appears, that the flesh and blood of Christ are not bodily
nourishment, for then we should hold his body in our hands, eat it with our
mouths, tear it with our teeth, swallow it down our throats, concoct it in
our stomachs, and have it distributed to our fleshly parts.

Now to show What it is to eat the body of christ spiritually.
what it is to eat spiritually, and to pull off the garment of this similitude
that the truth may more plainly appear, by spiritual eating we do not
understand, that which is fained, standing in a conceit, opinion, or
imagination; neither that the body and blood of Christ are turned into a
spirit, but we mean by spiritual eating such a communion and participation of
Christ, as is wrought by the powerful working of the Holy Ghost, inasmuch also
as it is attained by faith only, and pertains to a spiritual and eternal
life. And howsoever the benefit of this conjunction reach unto the body, which
thereby is mortified, and sanctified, and afterward shall be glorified: yet
this fruition of Christ is not called corporal, but spiritual, because this
food does not pertain to the maintaining of this present life, but it is
referred to the life which is eternal. Now this life everlasting is called
spiritual, albeit the bodies themselves shall be partakers thereof which
therefore 1 Cor. 15, 44
by the Apostle are called spiritual bodies. Thus then stands the
comparison, as there is a present life that is bodily, Sadcel de Spirit. Mand.
cap. 1.
so there is another life to be thought upon which is spiritual and eternal:
as we are borne to this present life, so are we borne again to life eternal:
as this bodily life is sustained by bodily meat and drink, so Christ with all
his merits and mercies is the food of the spiritual life: as the body has
Comparison between the bodily and spiritual eating.
his mouth, whereby the meat and drink is received, and so passes into the
body by bodily feeding: so the soul has her mouth, namely faith, which
apprehendeh the most holy nourishment of the body and blood of Christ: and
lastly, as the meat by a natural force is concocted and digested that it may
pass and disperse it self into the whole body, so the efficacy of the Spirit
beginning faith in us, does so powerfully and mightily work in our soul, that
it quickens us through Christ, to whom we are nearly united. Thus we see we
have no carnal communion with Christ, nor bodily eating of Christ. Wherefore
let the capernaiticall Papists, or popish Capernaits, prepare their faith, not
their teeth, their souls, not their bellies, to eat the flesh of Christ, and
drink his blood. And if they be ashamed of the name of the Capernaits, let
them also be ashamed of the error of the Capernaits: but if they cleave to
their error, they must be content to borrow their name, for the name and
opinion must go together.

Sixthly, Christ exhorts the people to beware of false Prophets, that come in
sheep clothes, Mat. 7, 15.
but indeed have Wolves hearts, saying, If any shall say unto you, Lo here is
Christ, or there, Mat. 24, 23.
believe it not: behold he is in the desert, go not forth: behold he is in the
secret places, believe it not. And the Apostle Paul exhorts, Col. 3. To seek
those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. But
if Christ lurk and lie hid under the accidents of bread and wine, the^ we
might believe such as say, Lo, here is Christ, there is Christ, he might be
pointed out with the finger on every Altar, and so often as the Priest lifts
up his Idol, he might say to the people, behold here is Christ whom we have
newly made, look upon him whom we have newly fashioned: but then we must
answer with Christ, believe i^ not.

Seventhly, the Fathers under the law, did eat the same spiritual meat and
drink the same spiritual drink that the 1 cor. 10, 1, 2
Corinthians and other Christians did, though they had differing signs, they
had the same Christ signified. But they did not eat the flesh of Christ and
drink his blood bodily, for as yet he was not come in the flesh, therefore he
is not present in his natural body in our Sacraments. This Paul sets down,
1 Cor. 10. They did all eat the same spiritual meat, they did all drink the
same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed
them, and that rock was Christ. Where the Apostles purpose is to prove Aug.
tom. 6. tract. in Ioh. 26 and in Psalm. 77 Gratian can. inquit. 80.
that the Israelites were not in feriour to the Corinthians in respect of the
Sacraments of Gods favor, and therefore had no more to boast of, then the
Israelites had: whereupon he says, they had the same meat, the same drink,
the same Christ. Now if they did not eat the same in substance which the
Corinthians did eat, then the Israelites were far inferior to them touching
their Sacraments, and so the Apostles reason should be of no force.

Eighthly, Christ is in such sort in heaven in his humanity, as that he is not
on the earth Mat. 9, 15. Ioh. 13. etc.
with his body, and consequently not in the Sacrament, as we see, Mat. 9. Can
the children of the bride-chamber mourn as long as the bridegroom is with
them? But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them,
and then they shall fast. But if he were remaining on the earth and contained
in the pixe, the bridegroom could not nor would not be taken away. And the
same Evangelist, Mat. 26, 11.
chap. 26. says. Ye have the poor always with you, but me ye shall not have
always. Likewise Ioh. 13. Ioh. 13, 1. and 14.2, 3.28. and 17, 11, 12, 13.
When Jesus knew that his hour was come, that he should depart out of this
world unto the Father, he rises from Supper, and cha. 14. I go to prepare a
place for you, but I will come again: If I go away to prepare a place for you,
I will receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also: and
verse 28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away and will come unto you.
And chap. 17. Now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I
come to thee. Again, Act. 1. Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gazing into
heaven? This Jesus which Acts 1, 11.
is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as ye have seen him go into
heaven. If then Christ according to his humane nature be not on earth, how can
his true body be on every Altar? How can they eat him with their teeth? How
can they swallow him down their throat?

Ninthly, such an eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ must be
holden, as is profitable and comfortable to the receivers: for nothing is more
available and fruitful then these, being rightly received Mat. 26, 26.
having thereby remission of sins assured, and eternal glory sealed up unto
us. But no fruit to our faith can come unto us by this kind of bodily eating
the body, carnal drinking the blood of Christ: for wicked men have as great a
portion in this as the godly. Nay, by their own doctrine it may be eaten of
Birds, of Beasts, of Mice, of Dogs, of Hogs, of vermin: to whom no profit, no
comfort, no benefit can come: whereas God would have the flesh Ioh. 6.50.
of the Son of man to be eaten of those to whom it shall be available to
life and salvation, as Ioh. 6. I am the living bread which came down from
heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread
that I will give it my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

Tenthly, nothing can be more gross, barbarous, or inhumane then to devour
man's flesh, and to drink man's blood. What does more transform men into savage
and cruel beasts? Nay worse then beasts which devour not their own kind?
What is more contrary to the pureness and holiness of Gods law Psalm. 12, 6 and
19, 9.
then this? The words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver tried in a
furnace of earth fined seven fold. The fear of the Lord is clean: the law of
God is spiritual, holy, just, and good. And the Gospel brings salvation to
all degrees, and teaches us, that we should deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and that we should l^ue soberly, r^ghteously, and godly in this present
wo^ld. But what can be more repugnant to godliness, sobernes, and righteousness,
then to tear with the teeth Cyril. anot. 11.
and jaws man's flesh, and to drink his blood, from which the Capernaus
abho^red? What more crosses the religion of Christ, the law of God, and the
light of nature, then man to devour man, and the bowels of one to be in the
bowels of another? And are not their stomachs strong to digest this meat? Did
not God in the law command Leuit. 17, 13
to abstain from eating the blood of beasts and from strangled? Did not the
Apostles for a time renew it Act. 15, 20.
among the Christians, in respect of the weakness of the Jews, because Moses
was read in their Synagogue every Sabbath day? To what end should this be done,
if the Church had tasted the blood of Christ with their mouth, or swallowed his
body in their bellies? And do not the Scythians and all the Gentiles that are
not utterly void of humanity, abstain from man's blood, and from devouring his
flesh? Wherefore these men are worse Hom Odis. li. 10. Virg aeneid. l^b. 3.
Plin. not hist. lib. 7. cap 2. ^^^d M^t. li. 3.
then the Scithians, Barbarians, and Gentiles, yea worse then the Canibals and
Indies that eat their enemies: but these devour Christ, whom they call their
Lord and Master, like Acteons hounds (to compare one fable with another) only
here lie the differences, they devoured their Lord under the shape of a Stag
or Heart, they eat their master under the forms of bread and wine: these
fastened their mouths upon their master because they thought him absent and
not present under that shape, they openly confess their Master to be present,
and yet odiously profess to devour him with their jaws, and swallow him in
their stomachs, wherefore these men are more cruel then they: yea herein they
pass the Idolatrous Gentiles; for the Egiptians did not eat those creatures
which they adored as Gods: but these do devour their God and Savior like
bread.

Eleuenthly, if Christ be present in the Sacrament bodily and carnally: in what
body shall he be present? Whether in his glorified body as he is in the
heavens, or in his mortal body as he was upon the earth? In one of these he
must be present necessarily, if he be present fleshly. Whatsoever they
answer, they are taken on both hands, and are stroke^ down as with a sword
that has two edges. Dare they say he is present in his mortal body? This
cannot be. For it is certain he has not now a mortal body but a glorified
body: this corruptible has put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15, 54
this mortal has put on immortality, and death is swallowed up in victory.
This the Romans 6, 9.10
Apostle confirms* this the Scripture teaches, this Christian faith
believes* Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: death has no more
dominion over him: For in that he dyed, he dyed once to sin, but in that he
lives, he lives to God. Likewise Heb. 7, 25. This man because he endures
ever, has a Priesthood which cannot pass from one to another, seeing he ever
l^ueth to make intercession for them. And chap. 9. of the same Epistle, he is
entered into heaven, not that he should: offer himself often, but he was once
offered to take away the sins of many. These testimonies duly considered, he
cannot be present in a mortal body. What then, will they be helped to say he
is present in his glorified body? Then he cannot now be present in the
Sacrament of the Supper, as he was present to the Apostles, sitting at the
table with them, and preaching unto them of his death: he cannot be present in
the same body that he did deliver to his Disciples in the institution of his
last Supper. For the body of Christ was then mortal and not glorified, then he
had not suffered death upon the Cross, he was not risen and ascended into the
heavens, to sit at the right hand of his Father: so that they must seek
another place then these words of Christ, Mat. 26, 26.
This is my body, this is my blood, to build their real presence and
transubstantiation, for they pointed out his mortal body, because his body was
not yet glorified, when the Sacrament was instituted. Besides, what a miserable
glorified body should this be, to be subject to the pleasure of every Priest,
to come at his call, to stay till he commands, nay to suffer himself to be
torn with the teeth of every receiver? Wherefore the presence of his glorified
body, cannot be grounded upon these words of Christ touching the Sacraments,
This is my body. Neither let them say as Camp^on that boasting Champion like
another Goliath, 1 Sa. 17.10.
challenging the host of God, sometimes said in the Tower-conference, that
this is a fallation, Confere^c^ day 3.
inasmuch as his glorification makes it not a diverse body, and that a man
whole, and a man sick, at sundry times make not a several man. This
Jesuitical device has no color of reason, but a trick of evasion. For we
speak not of the difference between Christ's glorified and mortal body, but of
the meaning of the words, This is my body: whether Christ understand his
natural and mortal body wherein shortly he was to be glorified, or whether he
understand it of his body glorified? Either it must be understood of the one,
or of the other, or of both: or rather indeed of neither, except they will have
the words taken and spoken one way to the Disciples, and another way to us.
Thus the meaning of them when they were first uttered should be, This is my
mortal body: but now spoken to us, they should be taken in another sense of us
to the end of the world, This is my glorified body. So then the same words
spoken to the Disciples should be false as we are to understand them: and the
Disciples should be deceived, understanding them as we do take them. What is
this but to bring us back again to the reproachful comparisons and
blasphemous assertions Pighi. Hierar. lib. 3, cap 3. Consur. colon dial 4. pa
112. Cusan. epist. 2. and 7.
of sundry popish writers, to compare the Scriptures to a nose of wax, and a
rule of lead, that they may be expounded diversely, and framed to times, so as
at one time they may be understood one way, and at another time they may be
interpreted another way. These things being duly considered, we may safely
conclude, that Christ is not present in his natural body.

Lastly, the presence of Christ in his natural body, abolisheth the light of
reason, and confounds the nature of things, and brings in an heap of
absurdities and impossibilities. For what is more repugnant to reason, then for
a man to bear himself in his own hands? that a man should eat up himself?
that another should eat him, yet he remain untouched, untasted, and
uncorrupted? that one and the same man should be visible and invisible, present
and absent, in the teeth of the Disciples, and at the table with the Disciples,
be a man of stature, and yet be contained and comprehended in a little Cake and
cantle of bread?

Now as by these reasons and sundry other that might be alleged, the real
presence is sufficiently convinced: so the arguments brought to maintain and
uphold it, are easily Objections alleged to maintain the real presence are
answered.
answered. For as the doctrine is false: so the reasons are weak and foolish.
First they object the words of institution, for the defense of this cause. For
as in questions of the supremacy, of Peter's pretended, of the Popes usurped,
(which are many) they always allege the words of Christ to Peter, Pasce oues
meas, Bellar. tomo. primo.
feed by sheep: so do they deal in controversies of the Supper, where we
miss not Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. His words (say they) are true
therefore we must believe them: he is a man of his word, therefore we must
credit him: if then we be deceived holding his body to be present, he has
deceived us. I answer, Genesis 17, 11.
as circumcision is the covenant: the lamb is the Passover: the cup is the
new testament; the breaking of the bread is the communion of the body of
Christ: the rock is Christ: baptism is the washing of our new birth. Are not
all these places like to the words of Christ's institution? Or can they deny
them to be understood figuratively and not properly? So the meaning of those
words is, that the bread which he had taken, broken, and given, is a sign and
figure of his body: it is now no longer common bread, but a representation of
his body truly offered to all, and truly given to all the faithful. Our
Savior Christ spoke many things unto his Disciples figuratively, not
literally to be taken: he said Math. 5, 13.
they were the salt of the earth, the light of the world, a city set on a
hill: he speaks of cutting off the hand, and pulling out the eye: he calls
himself John 10, 9.
a door, John 15, 1.
a vire, John 14, 6.
a way: are not these figurative and metaphorical speeches? Again, the
circumstances of the text, the nature of a Sacrament, and the Articles of our
faith will not suffer us to take them properly: besides this, that they should
command us an horrible and wicked thing, to eat man's flesh, and drink his
blood, and therefore when we are commended to eat his flesh and to drink his
blood, it is a figure (as Austine, teaches) requiring of us to be partakers of
his passion, and to keep in remembrance that his flesh was crucified for us.

Moreover, the Evangelists never say the bread is transubstantiated into his
body, or the wine into his blood, or that the body and blood of Christ are in
the bread, or under the bread, or with the bread: all the circumstances teach,
that the bread is a Sacrament of his body, the wine is a Sacrament of his
blood, as circumcision was a sign of the covenant, the lamb a sign of the
Passover, the rock a figure of Christ.

Lastly, as Christ speaks to the evil servant, Luk 19, 22
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee: so the adversaries themselves give
sentence on our side, and one arch-papist condemns another. Bishop Fisher
writing against Luther, affirms that Fish. cont. capti. Babylon.
no man can prove by the words of the Gospel, that any Priest in these days
does consecrate the very body and blood of Christ, and therefore Lindan. pa.
nopl. lib. 4.
Liudanus among the rablement of traditions which he reckons, rehearses the
real presence. Likewise Tonstall, another Bishop of the same birth holds,
that it were Tonst. lib. 1. de Sacr p 46.
better to leave every man to his own conjecture, as they were before the
counsel of Lateran, then to bring in such questions. And Biel a man of the same
stamp, not inferior to the rest, Gab. Biel in can. lect. 40.
confesses that it is not found in the canonical Scriptures, that Christ's
body is in the Sacrament. And let them tell us their opinion whether that
Hildebrand held this bodily presence, Ben. in vit. Greg. 7.
when he cast the Sacrament into the fire, contrary to the liking of certain
Cardinals present with him? Thus we see, Counsels, Fathers, Reasons, Doctors,
Schoolmen, Bishops, Cardinals, Popes, and others of the adversaries
themselves fight against the carnal presence of Christ; and the Scriptures
themselves overthrow it.

Except ye eat Ioh. 6, 53.
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
I answer, Ioh 6, 54.
no man can attain eternal life: but many have eternal life, that never are
partakers of the Lords Supper as the thief crucified with Christ, and many
others. Besides, how absurd is it for those to imagine that Christ naming
bread, speaks of the Sacrament of the Altar? for they would have no substance
of bread to remain, but only the figure, show, and likeness of bread: so that
according to the device of their newfound doctrine, he might more truly say,
I am no bread, or, I am the shows of bread, then as he does, Ioh. 6, 32.
I am the true bread. Moreover, if Christ promising to give bread for the
redemption of the world, had pointed out the Sacrament of his Supper: then he
should have given his flesh for the salvation of mankind, not upon the Cross,
but in his last Supper. Wherefore then served his death? What need was there
to shed his blood on the Cross?

Furthermore, if these words be referred to his Supper, then the Supper may be
celebrated without material bread and wine, without giving of thanks, without
blessing, without consecration, without breaking and distributing of the bread,
without pouring out, and delivering of the wine, and without remembrance of the
death of Christ. For in this place we have no mention of these things. And
shall we imagine that the Sacrament is spoken off, where neither the matter,
nor form, nor word of institution nor Minister, nor external rite is once
remembered? Lastly, to eat the flesh of Christ and to drink his blood, is
nothing else but to come to Christ, and to believe in Christ, as appears in
the Text, Ioh. 6, 35, 4^.
I am that bread of life he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never th^rst. And speaking of faith he says. No man can
come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. This truth Ble^
sect. 84. super cam^^^*
is so clear and evident, that many of the adversaries are driven to confess
it, howsoever some of them seek to cast mistes before the eyes of men, that
they may not epsy it, among the which are Sanders and Bellarmine. And as we
have showed before, how the Schoolmen and Doctors of the Church of Rome are
together by the ears in sundry controversies about the Supper: so are they
about the true interpretation of Ioh. 6. Some understanding it of the
sacramental eating, some of the spiritual eating, Hos C^^^ de ^u^^^.
and some of both.

Thirdly, they object the omnipotency of God: that he his blood: he is able to
make it really present in heaven and earth, and wheresoever Mass is said: he
is able to make a body to be in many places at once, and yet not occupy a
place. I answer, A^swere.
when all other reasons fail, they slye to Gods omnipotency as unto a
sanctuary and place of refuge. But this will not prove a real presence. For
albeit God be omnip^tent and almighty: must he therefore do all things, yea
offer violence to his own body, to maintain their a^^urd and heretical
opinions of the real presence and of transubstantiation? Must his power attend
upon their fancies and dreams? Cannot he be omnipotent except their positions
and assertions be granted? There is no ^e^e of Gods power, albeit we withstand
their carnal presence. For touching the omnipotency of God, Two rules to
obseru^^ (...) Gods o^^^po^ency.
we must observe these two rules and conclusions. First, Gods power is never to
be opposed and set against his express w^ll, plainly and certainly known:
for God is not contrary to himself. Now then it is not enough to prove that
God can turn bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, unless they
prove he will turn them into his flesh and blood. We our selves can do many
things which we do not, and which we will not do: so we must know it is with
God; he c^uld have added wings to man, he might have made many worlds if it
had pl^ased him, Christ of Mat 3.9.
the stones could have raised up children unto Abraham. Christ could have
prayed to his Father in his afflict^on, to send him Mat. 26, 3.
more then 12. legions of Angels, but how then should the Scriptures be
fulfilled? Wherefore we ^^e not to reason of his power, unless we be assured
o^ his w^ll revealed in his word; as we see Christ disputing against the
^^du^es says, Ye are deceived, not knowing the ^^r ptures, n^ the power of
God. Mat. 22, 9.
Where we see he joins the Scriptures and the power of God together: so that
he is truly said to be omnipotent. A (...) 1^.
because he can bring to pass whatsoever he will: neither can the effect of
his will be hindered or res^^ed. Now it is the known will of God that Christ
should have a true body, that he might be a true man with his quantity and
dimensions. The second rule to be remembered is, No contradiction is in God.
that in God there is no contradiction: and that whatsoever necessarily
implies a contradiction, is an argument not of power, but of weakness. This
the Scriptures decree, this the Fathers d^liuer, this their own Schoolmen
determine. For 2 Cor. 1.59.
in God is not yea and nay: he abides saithfull, he cannot deny himself: he
cannot dye, he cannot lie he cannot deny his word, he c nnot sin, he cannot
deceive, he cannot be deceived. These and such like he cannot do: which if he
should do, he were not omnipotent. For this Aug de trin. cap 15 l^b ^^. (...)
l^b. 2. cap 1^.
were a token of impotency, not of omnipotency: of debility, not of ability: of
want and weakness, not of strength and power. For in every contradiction
Arist (...) ^^terp li 1 ca. 5.
there is ^a^shood and a lie which cannot agree to God, who is truth it self,
and therefore he cannot make affirmation and negation, truth and falsehood yea
and nay to be true together which things are impossible. Yea the popish
Schoolmen Thom contra gent. lib. ^ cap. 84. ^n^ lib. 2. ^a. 25.
confute this popish fancy of the real presence, when they teach that God
cannot do any thing wherein a contradiction is employed, and that al other
things he can do, and therefore is omnipotent. Now who sees not that herein
is a manifest and notable contradiction? that Christ's body is made visible and
invisible together; finite and infinite; circumscribed and uncircumcised; to
have dimension and to want dimension; to be compassed in one certain place,
and to be in a great number of Sacraments in many places; to be included in a
litte bread on earth, which is contrary to the nature of a man's true body, and
not to be contained therein; as sitting in heaven, and there having the
natural properties of a true body, which cannot be brought within so narrow a
compass as the wa^er-cake. Wherefore, the absurd conceit of the real presence
cannot be maintained without many contradictions. For if Christ's body be
visible how can it be invisible? If it have all the properties of a natural
body, how can it be without the properties of a natural body? If it be finite
how can it be infinite. Lastly, if it be an inseparable and necessary adioynt
to a true body to be contained in one certain place: how then can it be true,
that his body is in ten thousand places without any circumscription? So then
Gods omnipotency cannot build up the monstrous work of the real presence:
inasmuch as the body of Christ cannot be brought within the slender compass of
a piece of bread, without falsehood and destruction of all the properties
incident unto a true and natural body.



Moses, of the Prophets, of Christ, and the Apostles: and therefore the I was
said unto Christ Ioh. 1, 18.
Show us a miracle, teaching that miracles are to be judged by sight and sense.
When Moses turned E^o ^^, etc
the waters of the Egiptians into blood, the sight perceived, the taste
discerned it. The miracles Ioh. 2 9.
of Christ appear evidently, and were apprehended by the senses of the body.
He turned water into wine: the taste judged thereof 'the dumb spoke, the ear
heard them speak. The lame walked, the dead were raised: the eyes perceived
the motion, all marvelled and were astonished. In like manner, if the bread and
wine were changed, either the eye or taste should perceive it, and all the
Disciples would be astonished.

Again, after the Gospel was plentifully confirmed and had taken root, and
the Apostles were dead, such miracles ceased, as experience teaches. Besides,
the holy Supper is an ordinary Sacrament of the Church: but every miracle is
extraordinary, or else it is no miracle: so that unless we will turn ordinary
into extraordinary, and make miracles as common as Sacraments, No miracle in
the Lords Supper.
we must remove miracles from the Supper. Furthermore, if the real presence
were wrought by a miracle, every Priest should be a worker of miracles and
wonders, and an ordinary calling should always be accompanied with
extraordinary gifts. But their office of Priesthood has not this gift (in
their own judgment) generally given unto it. Wherefore miracles being
Chrysostom. in 5. Cor. ca. 2. hom 6
now ceased, are not found in the Supper. Lastly, Augustine gathering all the
miracles written in the Scripture, Aug. de Trin. lib. 3. cap. 10.
yet speaks not of this: nay he not only omitted it, but flatly denies any
miracle to be in the Sacrament, when he says, It may have honor or reverence
as an holy thing, but cannot be wondered at as a strange or miraculous thing. If
then it be a miracle, it must be in the number of lying miracles spoken off by
the 2 These 2, ^.
Apostle: so that transubstantiation and the real presence are real
contraries or contradictions, repugnant to the Scripture, to faith, to reason,
to learning, to sense, to nature, to Gods ordinance, absurd and impossible: and
therefore of all Gods people to be abhorred and abiured, being a renewing of
the old heresy of The errors of Eutiches and Marcion.
Eutiches, who held that Christ's body after his incarnation, was made equal
with his divinity: and likewise of Marcion, who held that Christ appeared not
in the very natural body of a man, but only in a fantasy or show of a man's
body.

To conclude this use, we do not exclude all presence of Christ out of the
Sacrament: but distinguish the manner of his presence: which we have showed to
be in the Supper truly, not grossly: effectually, not fleshly: spiritually not
bodily: sacramentally, not carnally: mystically, not naturally.

The former use was touching knowledge and faith, instructing from emptiness:
Secondly, an exceeding appetite to be filled and sati^fied: such have Deuteronomy
28.53 57.
killed, dressed, and deuouted their own children, rather then they would
starve King 6, 29. Lam 4, 10,
this pain has been so great, this longing has bin so extraordinary. So
must it be with us in the spiritual hunger after Christ: we must be inwardly
pained in soul for sin, and for the wrath of God kindled for our sin: and
then have an hungring desire and longing appetite, that we may possess Christ,
and lay hold on him to our salvation. Whosoever comes to his ordinary meat
without hunger, it were better not to eat: it ingendreth gross and evil
humors, and brings a surfeit to the body. So whosoever desires not Christ
with an hungry soul, earnestly longing after him, and craving nourishment from
him, cannot be filled with good things. The want of this hunger is a cause why
so few receive Christ, and profit not by the means ordained to that end, as
the word and Sacraments: these come to them of custom rather then with
conscience, and for fashion rather then with faith: these men are not fit to be
Christ's guests, that hunger not after him. Wherefore E^ay 55, 7,
the Prophet calls all such as faint in their souls through hunger and
thirst of this food, Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, and ye
that have no silver, come buy and eat: come I say, buy wine and milk without
silver and without money. And the Apostle, Reu. 22, 17. Let him that is athirst
come, and let whosoever will, take of the water of life freely. Likewise the
Evangelist, Luke 1, 53. He fills the hungry with good things, and sends
the rich empty away. But where is the desire of these things? Where is the
hunger after this heavenly food? Where is the thirst after the waters of life?
Truly of all gifts this is the greatest: yet the greatest number care nothing
for Christ nor for his gifts. As the Israel tes in the wilderness loathed Number
11, 5. etc.
Manna, and desired to return into Egypt: such are there among us, no desire,
no affection, no zeal this way: they spend their cogitations and endeavors to
gain honor, they thirst after silver and gold, they delight in earthly
pleasures, they covet houses, lands, and wealth of the world: these things they
abound in, these things they make their happiness and their heaven. Such as
these there are thousands in the bosom of the Church, that hunger more after
these transitory things, then after heavenly: Such are Heb. 12, 16.
profane persons as Esau, who preferred a mess of pottage before the
blessing: and as the Gadarens, who preferred their swine before Christ, and
therefore besought him to depart out of their coasts, But let us learn better
things: for all these shall vanish and come to nothing. And what shall it
profit Mat. 16, 26.
a man if he win the whole world, and loose his own soul? Let us not labor
for the meat that Ioh 6, 27.
perishes, but for the meat that endures to everlasting life, which the Son
of man shall give unto us. All the dainties and delicates in the world cannot
be compared to that which is here offered to be eaten of the soul. Therefore
let us remember whenever we come to his table to be partakers of this Supper,
to come with a great longing after life and salvation from him, as we desire
bodily meat when we are hungry, and drink when we are thirsty: then shall we
by him be satisfied and saved, otherwise we cannot lay hold on him: we may
recei^e the outward sign but we cannot receive the graces o Christ offered
unto us.

Lastly, consider with me, that if Christ be an inward part of the Sacrament of
the S ppe^, as it were the hidden Manna, Revel. 2, 17.
then no man by nature, I mean which is a mere natural man, does know,
desire, o^ seek after him, to be fed and nou^ished by him to eternal life,
but he is concealed from the wisest men of the world, and such as have deep
understanding in earthly things. Nay, there are many brought up in the bosom
of the Church, and presume to approach to the Table of Christ, that do not know
Christ to be their heavenly ^ood, for if they did know him aright, they would
quickly feel the spiritual want of him. They would understand that they do
not more want the air to breathe, the earth to tread upon, the Sun to shine,
their meat to put in their bellies their garments to cloth and attire their
bodies, then they stand in need of Christ, to make him as their food, and to
put him on as their apparel, A man that is not hungry knows not what meat
and drink means, or at least considers not the necessity of them: so a man
that seeleth not what lack he has of Christ, does not indeed know what Christ
is, nor what benefits he has obtained for him. What a shame is this, that any
should be found so simple and ignorant! and what danger is this unto
themselves! Alas, alas, how many silly souls and ignorant people are
there, that bless themselves in their blindness, and think themselves happy
men, who never selt the want of Christ, they were never troubled in mind to
find him, they were never hunger-bit for him, they never regarded to know
Christ and him crucified for the redemption of their souls, for the remission
of their sins, and for their deliverance from the gulf of hell? It is noted
touching the church, when Christ had for a season withdrawn himself from her,
Can. 5, 4,
her bowels were moved for him, her soul failed and fainted within her, and
she was sick of love to f^inde him again. We must account all things but dung
that we may win Christ, after the example of the Apostle, Phil. 3. Phil. 3, 8.
We must not labor for the meat that perishes, but for the meat which
endures to everlasting life, which the Son of man will give unto us, Ioh. 6,
27. Ioh. 6, 27.
We are bound to endeavor earnestly, and to use all good means to have him as
the most excellent food and most precious gift in the world, far above all the
riches of the whole earth. Let us seek him where he is to be found, Where
Christ is to be found.
that is, in the word and Sacraments: in them he is as it were daily crucified
before our eyes, Gal. 3.1. Consider herein I pray you the profaneness of this
wretched world, of which we spoke in part before. He is the most worthy portion
that can befall us, the most royal feast that ever was prepared, the most
costly banquet that ever was furnished: he is the bread that ca^e down from
heaven: the water of life; the meat and drink that endures to everlasting
life: the heavenly Manna given to eat: (...) 12.^.
the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, which yields fruit
every month, and the leaves of it are for the healing of the Nations: yet not
one among an hundred does seek after him, or any whit seem to regard him, or
this Sacrament, which may fitly be called the marriage Supper of the Lamb. We
are like the Israelites in the wilderness, who preferred the Onions and
garlic of Egypt before Angels food more sweet then honey. Such Onion-mungers,
or rather earth-wormes are we, that delight our selves in serpents food,
breaking our brains, bestowing our studies, and employing our wits and
thoughts day and night, to obtain the treasures of this life and the riches of
this world, but care not to be rich in God through Jesus Christ. How can we
persuade our selves that this will be answered at the day of judgment, thus to
disgrace and dishonor the Lord Jesus, like Judas that sold his master for
thirty pence, or like the Jews that preferred a murderer before the Lord of
life, or like Esau that sold his birthright for a mess of pottage. Hence it
is, that many have fat and full bodies, and abound with plenty of outward
things, that have poor, and lean, and staruen souls, like to perish and pine
away. The wise man says, Prou. 29, 18.
When vision fails, the people perish: and Christ charge Peter again and
again, to feed his sheep and his Lambs, to wit, Ioh. 21.15.
with wholesome doctrine of the word, and sound nourishment by the Sacraments.
For the soul has need of meat and drink as well as the body, and does
oftentimes decay and dye eternally for want of this spiritual food as well as
the body does through the want of temporal food. 1 Samuel 30, 12*
This has made the faithful from time to time acknowledge, that there is no
bodily food so sweet, so delicate, so delightsome, and so to be desired as the
immortal food of the soul. The Apostle says, All flesh is as grass, 1 Pet.
1, 24, 25
and all the glory of man as the flower of grass, the grass withers, and the
flower thereof falls away, but the word of the Lord endures for ever, etc.
The Prophet David declares as much. Psalm. 19. Psalm. 19, 10.
The judgments of the Lord are more to be desired then gold, yea then much
fine gold: sweeter also then honey and the honeycomb. And Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84, 2.
My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and
my flesh cries out for the liu ng God. Likewise in another Psalm, Psalm. 41,
1, 2.
As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God. Wherefore we ought all of us to be more careful to seed our souls then
our bodies, and to frequent with great desire and delight the heavenly and
precious feasts that are kept and solemnized in the house of God. We are
content to take long walks, and wearysome iournies, and great pains to feed
our hungry bodies, Genesis 42, 1, 2.
as we see by the example of Jacob and his sons in the time of famine. God
has richly prepared his Table for us, and given us his own and only Son to
be meat indeed and drink indeed: howbeit it is not made ready for such
carrion-creatures as hop below upon the earth, and mind only their back and
belly, but it is furnished for Eagles that fly up aloft to heaven and mind
especially spiritual things. Woe then to the fearful negligence, or rather
open and odious contempt of many dissolute professors that come sildome to the
Lords Table: some once a year, some scarce so often, if they could tell how
handsomely to shift it off and to cover their fault that they might not be
espied: some cut off themselves quite and clean from the house of God and the
place of his worship. Let all such take heed, least when they would enter into
the kingdom of heaven, they be shut out and cut off from Gods mercy for
evermore.

Thus then we see, that so often as we resort to this Sacrament, we must call
to mind that we are going to a spiritual feast appointed to feed the soul,
and not to fill the body. He that tastes of this banquet aright, has eternal
life. John 6.54.
Now such as the meat and drink is, such also is the manner of eating and
drinking; the meat is spiritual, the partaking of it therefore must needs be
spiritual. For the flesh of Christ which is meat indeed, and the blood of
Christ which is drink indeed, has the consideration of meat and drink, not
as it is flesh and blood, or in regard of the substance thereof, for so it
should be corporal food, but as they were given for the life of the world,
inasmuch as he suffered for all the elect of the whole world. He suffered the
most bitter death of the Cross, and was as it were broken with pains that
cannot be expressed; he sweat drops of blood in great measure, Math. 26.31.
and 27.46. Mat 26, 31. and 27, 46.
and complayneth that he was forsaken of God and men; his Soul was exceeding
sorrowful even unto death. Revel. 19.15. Revel. 19, 15.
and he trod the wine press of the fiercenes and wrath of almighty God. If the
Church did lament and complain thus. Lament. 1, 12. Lamen 1, 12.
Have ye no regard, O all ye that pass by the way? Consider and behold, if
ever there were sorrow like my sorrow which was done unto me, wherewith the
Lord did afflict me in the day of the fierceness of his wrath: much more may
Christ renew this complaint, to whom it does more fully and fitly agree, then
unto any other: for he was in such great distress as never was any, and in
that distress he had no man to regard him, no man to pity him, no man to
comfort him, no man to care for him. Now whereunto tend al these his sorrows
and sufferings, but to make us a feast of his own flesh? For all this he
endured for our sakes, that he might be made a most pleasant meat to refresh
us, and a most comfortable drink to quicken us, according to the testimony
pronounced from his own mouth: He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood
has eternal life: Ioh 6, 54.
which he has given to death for the life of the world.

Seeing therefore Christ Jesus has done so great things for us, shall we do
nothing again unto him? Or rather shall we do nothing for our selves? Shall
we absent our selves from the feast that he has furnished? And will we not
taste of the meat which he has prepared at so dear a rate? Doubtless we
deserve to perish for ever, and are worthy to have our souls famished unto
death, that refuse to come to his holy Supper.

And if we will not suppe with him here in his Church, he will never suppe
with us hereafter at his Table. If we will none of his banquet provided on
earth, we shall be sure to be shut out of his banquet that he will make in
heaven.

And if we will not be his guests to eat the bread of the LORD set forth for
them that will receive it, we shall never eat bread in his heavenly kingdom.

Thus much of the third inward part of this Sacrament, to wit, the body and
blood of Christ.

CHAP. XI. Of the fourth inward part of the Lords Supper.
THe last inward part of this Sacrament of the Supper remains, which is the
The fourth inward part of the Supper is the faithful receiver.
faithful and Christian receiver. As every Communicant sensibly and outwardly
takes the bread and wine given unto him: eating the bread and drinking the
wine for the nourishment of his body: so the faithful receiver apprehends and
lays hold on Christ by the hand of faith, and applies him particularly, that
the feeling of his true union with Christ may daily be increased, Ioh. 1, 12.
according to that saying, Ioh. 1. As many as received him, to them he gave
prerogative to be the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. And
1 Cor. 10. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
body of Christ? Wherefore when we do faithfully and worthily take the bread
and the cup into our hands, we must consider that withal we take and receive
Jesus Christ himself offered unto us. When we eat the bread and drink of the
cup, and so apply them to our bodily uses: we must consider that we apply
Christ Jesus to our selves, even to our souls particularly, that he is meat
indeed, and that he is drink indeed unto us, if we bring with us the hand of
faith. For faith is like Faith is like the mouth of a vessel.
the mouth of a vessel: if you pour liquor upon it all the day long, unless
the mouth of the vessel be open to receive it, the water is spilt on the
ground, and the vessel remains empty: so may a man come to the Lords Table
every month, receiving the bread and wine that represent whole Christ, yet
except he bring with him faith, which is the mouth of the soul, he receives
not Christ unto a spiritual life, to be his righteousness and sanctification.
And this is the reason why we receive a little portion and a small quantity as
well of bread as wine, Council Nicen. ex Biblie. vatican.
because the end of our eating and drinking serves for the sanctification of
the Spirit, not for the filling of the body.

Now let us see what uses are offered to our consideration, Moses entreating of
things Leuit. 11, 4.
clean and unclean, notes out four sorts of beasts, some only chew the
cud, and some only divide the hoof, some neither chew the cud nor divide the
hoof, and some both chew the cud and divide the hoof: or, as in the days of
the Gospel, some were circumcised in heart not in flesh, as Gal 2, ^.
Titus; some were circumcised in the flesh not in the heart, as Esau, Judas,
and many others: some were circumcised neither in flesh nor in the Spirit, Ephesians
2, ^^.
as the Gentiles: and some were circumcised both in the flesh and in the
Spirit, Act. 16, ^.
as Timothy: so there is a difference among receivers, Four (...) o^ receivers
some receive Christ only spiritually, not sacrame^tally: some only
sacramentally, not spiritually: some neither receive him spiritually, nor
sacramentally: and some receive him both spiritually and sacramentally. Of
these we will speak briefly and in order, as they have been propounded.

The spiritual eating is by faith, whereby we are made one with Christ, and
partakers of his benefits without the Sacraments, Ioh. 6, 5^.
whereof Christ speaks, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. Thus to eat him, is to believe in him: and
therefore he uses these words, Ioh. 6, 2^.^3 35.
as being of one force to believe in him and to eat him: to drink him, and to
come unto him, This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom be has
sent: I am that bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he
that believes in me shall never thirst. Again, Ioh. 6, ^^* 40.
Christ attributes the same fruit and effect to them that believe in him,
that he does to them which eat his body and drink his blood: therefore by
eating and drinking he means nothing but believing. He that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, has eternal life: And in the 40. verse of the same
Chapter he says, This is the will of my Father, that every one that believes
in the Son, should have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day. Hereby we may see that Christ attributes the same to believing, which in
the other place he did to eating and drinking: so that the meaning of Christ
is, that to believe in him is to eat him. And thus many receive Christ, eating
and drinking his body and blood, that never came to the Sacraments. Here
peradventure some will object,

Notwithstanding we must confess to the glory of God and the great comfort of
many persons, that the faithful soul may and does often feed upon Christ to
salvation, beside the use of the Sacrament. For the spiritual grace is not of
necessity tied to the outward signs, as if without them God cannot or does not
sometimes bestow the same. We see in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 10, 2, 44
Cornelius and his company was sealed with the Spirit of God before the
receiving of the outward Sacrament. Abraham believed the promise being strong
in faith, Romans 4, 18.10 18.
and under hope believed above hope before circumcision was given unto him.

Thus also the believing thief upon the Cross, though he did never receive
the Sacrament of Christ, yet he did eat the body and drink the blood of Christ
to eternal life: so that he believed in him, Luke 23, 10
and was the same day with him in Paradise. He was not crucified for the
profession of Christ, but was condemned for the merit of his transgression:
neither did he suffer because he believed, Lamb s^nt. lib. ^. did. ca. 1.
but he believed while he suffered. He was not baptized, he received not the
Lords Supper, yet his Romans 10, ^0.
faith saved him, spiritually eating the true food of everlasting life, as Romans
10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation: for the Scripture says, whosoever believes in him
shall not be ashamed. According to that in the Prophet, The just shall live
Hab. 2, 4.
by faith. And Ioh. 11. I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes
in me, though he were dead, yet he shall live, and whosoever lives and
believes in me, Ioh, 11, 25 26.
shall never dye. This ministers great comfort in trials and tribulations, to
consider that howsoever by sickness, by persecution, by imprisonment, we may
be separated from the Supper of Christ Romans 8, 35.
yet we cannot be separated from Christ: though we may be hindered from eating
him sacramentally, yet we cannot be hindered from eating him spiritually:
though we may be kept from eating the bread and drinking of the cup of the
Lord, yet we cannot by the malice of Satan or violence of his instruments, be
kept from feeding upon Christ by faith to salvation. And in this case God will
accept the will for the deed, if there be in us a desire to be partakers
thereof: for as the word of God is not bound, so his grace is not tied up.

Again, other receive Christ only sacramentally and not spiritually, who are
partakers of the outward Elements of bread and wine, and so receive the bare
signs of the body and blood of Christ. For as they are said to eat the true
body of Christ spiritually, which receive Christ with the mouth of the soul,
that is, by a true faith, and are truly joined to him: so they eat him
sacramentally, that handle, eat, and drink the signs and seals of his true
body: but because they want faith, they want the means to receive Christ
himself.

Thus many have bin baptized, that were never regenerated and inwardly purged,
Act. 8, 23.
appears in Simon the sorcerer whose heart was not vptight, so that albeit he
were partaker of the Sacrament of regeneration and repentance, yet he remained
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. So many have resorted to
the Lords Supper, that never drew nourishment or strength of faith from him to
life and salvation: and thus many thousands in the world come to the
Sacraments: but because they come unworthily, they depart away unprofitably.
Let no man therefore slatter himself in the work done, but labor to come
aright, that so he may find comfort to his soul.

Moreover, some neither receive Christ spiritually nor sacramentally: and such
are they that never come to Christ nor receive the sacraments of Christ: such
are they that live cut of the bosom of the Church, as it were out of the Arc
of Noah, as Infidels, Jews, Turks, Sarizens, Persians, and such like, these
must needs perish in the deep floods of Gods endless judgments. For as
Christ is the fountain of life, and the wellspring of all C^^. 1, 19 and ^, ^.
heavenly treasures that accompany salvation, and the Sacraments his
instruments whereby these graces are conveyed unto us, and the Church the
parties to whom both these belong: so such as are without Christ, without the
Sacraments, without grace, without the Church, and consequently without the
privileges that pertain to the heirs of his eternal kingdom, lie in
darkness and in the shaddowe of death, Mat ^5, 26.
and are as Dogs to whom the childrens bread does not belong.

Lastly, other receive Christ both spiritually by faith, and sacramentally with
the mouth, who are partakers both of the signs and of the things signified,
who ^^g Tract. ^5* ^4 Johan
eat of the bread of the Lord and the bread which is the Lords. And thus the
Apostles that sat at the table with Christ at his last Supper, did receive
him, applying the outward part to their bodies, and the inward part to their
souls. Also thus all the faithful that come to the table of Christ to the end
of the world, do receive him spiritually and sacramentally to the great
comfort of their own souls: and thus must every one of us seek to come to
Christ whenever we come to the Sacrament of Christ. Wherefore, we see what
difference and distinction is to be made between those that receive Christ,
that we be not deceived in the manner of the receiving of him.

Again, seeing only the faithful are the inward part of Ioh. 2, 16. Luk 19,
46.
house of God should be made a den of thieves. God did shut out of his Ezekiel.
44, 9.
sanctuary every stranger uncircumcised in heart and in the flesh: he commanded
also the Priests to put a difference between the holy and profane, between
the clean and unclean. Hitherto belongs that saying of Christ, Matthew 7.
Give ye not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine, least they tread you under their feet, and turning again all to rent
you. If therefore such as remain in gross and open sins of blasphemy,
swearing, contempt of Gods word, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, drunkenness, maliciousness, and such like, offer themselves at
any time with the rest of the members of the Church to partake this Supper, and
as it were infectious leapers come into the Lords host Leuit. 13, ^. 45, 46.
Number. 5, ^, 3.
to be admitted to the sacrifices: it is the Pastors duty to use the power of
the keys, and bar them from this Sacrament, until there appear in them the
testimonies of repentance, and the confession of their offenses. Should not the
shepherd sever the rotten and infected sheep from the rest of the fold? Does
not 1 Cor. 5, 6.
a little leaven sower the whole lump? Will an housholdder admit into his house
every one that vanteth himself to be of the household? The Idolaters by the
light of nature, Hesiod liber oper and dier. Eustath. in Iliad lib. 1. Virg.
Aeneid. lib. 2. and 6.
would not suffer all to approach to their sacrifices, their heathenish
sacrifices, but cried out that profane persons should be packing and get them
thence, and not i presume to offer with unwashed hands. Such as have a very
clear fountain and spring of waters committed unto them, if they see filthy
swine come toward it, Chrysostom hom. 83 in Mat cap 37.
must not suffer them to trouble the spring and annoy the water. Shall they
then that have the sacred and hallowed spring, not of common water, but of the
precious blood of Christ springing up to eternal life committed unto them,
Zeph. 3, 4.
suffer such as are notoriously defiled with sin, to profane the blood of
Christ, and make a mock of him to their own destruction? Wherefore such as
are open wicked persons are not without open repentance to be admitted to the
Sacram. of the Supper, but to be separated from the Church as dead members from
the body, as withered branches from the tree, and as rotten sheep from the
flock, 1 Co. 5 7.
that the rest may be preserved in sound doctrine and in innocence of life and
conversation.

Revel. ^3.8
representing the lamb slain from the beginning of the world: but such as did
eat thereof unworthily, it was to them an instrument of destruction, and as
the messenger of death. Judas was one of the twelve, and did eat the Paschall
lamb with the rest, but he did not eat Christ with the rest: he did receive
damnation to himself, Ioh 13.2.
Satan entering into him, and procuring the confusion of soul and body. It
seems he received not the Supper of the Lord, Ioh. 13, 30.
forasmuch as the Evangelist notes, that as soon as he had received the sop,
he went immediately out. Wherefore Luk 22, 21.
that which Luke affirms, chapter 22. Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is
with me at the Table, albeit it be set down after the supper, yet was vttred
before supper, acording to the usual manner of the Scripture, which
tra^sporteth things done before, to that which is afterward, as appears
plainly in the words following. And therefore it is a sure and certain rule,
that all things are not set down in the old and new Testament in order as they
were done; but oftentimes that is set down after, which was done before; and
before, which was done after, Besides, after that the Supper was ended and a
Psalm sung, Mat. 26, 30.
Christ went out into the mount of Olives; now if Judas had stayed till the
Supper had bin ended, he could not have made such preparation at a sudden to
get together those that should take Jesus: for there came with him a great
multiude with swords and staves from the chief Priests and Elders of the
people. The council and convocation of the chief Priests, and the Scribes,
and the Pharisees, and the Elders, and their sitting in judgment determining
what to do, required some time, and before Judas could receive a band of men
from them, it must take up more time: to omit the time spent in departing from
Christ and in returning unto Christ again, which could not be done speedily,
and therefore no doubt he was gone before. As then Christ bad him do quickly
that which he did, so he stayed not, but was glad he was gone from his sight
and company.

Thirdly, it cannot be but the guiltiness of the conscience of Judas did
accuse him and sting him who had been with the high Priests and couenanted
with them to betray his Master, especially seeing Christ our Savior was
evermore speaking of it, and putting his Disciples in mind that one of them
should betray him. Ioh. 8, 7, ^
It is noted touching the Scribes and Pharisees, that when Christ willed him
that was without sin to cast the first stone at her that was taken in
adultery, They being convicted by their own conscience went out one by one,
beginning at the eldest, even unto the last. So likewise he feeling an hell and
horror in his conscience, and knowing that (notwithstanding his secret
plotting) his devilish dealing was detected and his profane heart espied,
could not abide to have his sore touched, but no doubt made all have to be gone
out of the sight and presence of his Master.

Lastly, this was done by the special providence and appointment of God, who
would show thereby, that wicked men and hypocrites which lead a life unworthy
the profession of the Gospel, are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. And
this is the judgment of sundry writers Hill in Mat c. 30 and lib. 8. de
Trinitate. Clem Romans con. lib. 2. cap. 61.
both old and new. But inasmuch as he was present at the Passover, which was a
figure of the passion of Christ, God by this ore fearful example teaches,
that he never suffers the abuse of his Sacraments to go unpunished. The
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own judgment: Zanch. de redemp. lib. 1. cap. 19. and ^6. Beza in
Ioh. 13. and Tractat. de excem.
for this cause many are sick and weak among you, and many sleep: Ungodly
persons that lie and live in sin, together with all impenitent persons,
attribute too much to the outward sign, and rest therein as in the comfort of
their souls. Adam thought after his fall, if he could reach out his hand and
take the fruit of the tree of life and eat thereof, Genesis 3, 22.
he should live for ever. For these words used in that place, Least he put
forth his hand to the tree of life, and eat and live for ever: do respect the
purpose and intent of the man, not the event and issue of the matter: inasmuch
as the eating of that fruit all the days of his life could not give grace, or
restore him to that life he had lost, and to that high estate from whence he
was fallen. Now as he imagined if he could but taste of the tree of life
again, it should go well with him: so his posterity in all ages, dream of a
secret power inherent in the Sacraments, whereas by taking the same unworthily,
and by judging of them corruptly, sin is increased, God is offended, and the
punishment is doubled. The Arc was a testimony of Gods presence, a witness of
his love and league with man, and an assured sign that God would make his
dwelling place among them, that he would abide with them, that he would walk
before them, that he would be their gracious God, and that they should be his
people: but the Priests, Elders, and people, attributed overmuch unto it, and
far greater things then they ought, they said, 1 Samuel 4, 3.
Wherefore has the Lord smitten us this day before the Philistims? Let us
bring the Arc of the covenant of the Lord out of shiloth unto us, that when it
comes among us, it may save us out of the hands of our enemies. Even as the
Church of Rome, when any judgment or calamity is upon them, carry forth their
breaden-God on procession, hold him up to be seen, and adored, and thereby
think to have themselves delivered, and Gods wrath to be appeased. These never
thought of turning to God with all their hearts, and of changing their lives:
but ascribe salvation and deliverance to the Arc it self, and attribute power
to the outward sign, which of it self and in it self was no better then a
few boards joined together, and therefore through their vain confidence 1 Samuel
4, 10 etc,
they were destroyed, the Arc was taken, the two sons of Ely were slain,
and the whole host was discomfited. Thus is it with the Sacrament, and with
such as come without faith to the Sacrament. The Sacrament indeed is holy, the
sacramental rites are holy, the bread and wine are holy: but let them be
received of persons that are profane and unholy, they make the Sacraments to
themselves unholy, so far are they from conferring grace and holiness to all
receivers of the^. For can the Sacraments make him holy that is unholy? Or a
godly man that is ungodly? Or make him to fear an oath, that is a blasphemer?
They cannot: nay to such the Sacraments become unholy, and the receivers grow
more unholy, as Judas did after the partaking of the Passover. Wherefore God
as a just Judge would drive Adam out of the garden of Eden, least putt^ng forth
his hand to the tree of life, he should Genesis 3, 22.
take and receive it unworthily, thereby Mercer in 3. cap. Genesis Aralis. Franc.
Iun. in Genesis
profaning the Sacrament, and so eat to himself judgment. The sacrifices
were holy ordinances of God, yet when men that lived ungodly came unto them,
they turned to be sin to them: so is it with all those that come without
faith and feeling to the Supper of the Lord, let us not therefore be faithless
but faithful.

Lastly, if the faithful only receive with profit: then because Wicked me^
do not rec^iue Christ.
through want of faith and repentance they offend God, repel Christ from them
and all his benefits, and draw unto themselves temporal and eternal
punishments. For no man can eat Christ, and withal eat his own damnation.
Again, whosoever eats the flesh of Christ and drinks his blood, shall live
for ever, and has Christ dwelling in him to salvation (for Christ can never be
separated from his saving graces) but the ungodly shall not live for ever by
Christ with God. For Christ is not eaten with the teeth or mouth, as in the
Gospel he directly determines, Ioh. 6. Whosoever eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life: my flesh is meat indeed, my blood is
drink indeed, Ioh. 6, 14.
he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him.
But Infidels and wicked persons have not eternal life, neither abide in
Christ, therefore by the doctrine of Christ our Savior, A^g. tract. in (...).
25.
they neither eat his flesh, nor drink his blood. We must open the eyes of
our faith to behold him, and the mouth of our soul to receive him: for by
faith only we are made partakers of him, which the ungodly want, he that Ioh.
4, 14.
drinks of the blood of Christ shall never be more athirst.

Thirdly, we know that Satan the Prince of darkness rules in all the hearts
of the children of disobedience, and sits in their Consciences 2 Cor. 14, 4.
as the God of this world, and fills them full of iniquity, as we see in the
example of Judas. Now if these receive the body of Christ: then Christ and the
devil should dwell in one subject together, and be joint possessors of one and
the same house: Luke 11, 21.
but this cannot be: these cannot be at one: these can never be friends
reconciled: there is no 2 Cor. ^, 14
fellowship between righteousness and unrighteousness, there is no communion
between light and darkness, there is no concord between Christ and Bell all.
Fourthly, the Apostle teaches, that where Christ is Romans 8, 9.
he works mortification and dying to sin, Romans 8. If any have not the
spirit of Christ, the same is not his: and if Christ be in you, the body is
dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life for righteousness sake. But the
wicked are not dead to sin, they are dead in their sins and trespasses: and
they have sin not only remaining but reigning in them, therefore Christ
cannot be in them. Fifthly, where Christ is, there are all things necessary to
salvation: and to whom God gives his Son, Rom 8, 31.
to him he gives justification, sanctification, redemption, repentance,
remission of sins, and eternal life, as Romans 8. If God be on our side, who
shall be against us? Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to
death, how should he not with him give us all things also? But the wicked have
not these gifts accompaning salvation, they are not justified, they are not
sanctified, they are not regenerated: therefore they cannot have Christ from
whom these flow. Sixthly, we are charged to try and 2 Cor. 13, 5.
prove our own hearts, whether Christ be in us or not, that thereby we may
discern of our estate and standing in the faith. 2 Cor. 13. Prove your selves
whether ye are in faith: examine your selves, know ye not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? To what purpose serves
this trial and examination, if Christ may be in us and yet we remain
rejected? Wherefore Christ cannot be in us, if we be not approved, but refused
of God. Seventhly, if such as eat the bread of the Lord unworthily, do withal
eat the body of Christ, it will follow from hence, that to eat is no longer
to eat, but to reject and refuse. For these two (take ye, and eat ye,) are
joined together by Christ himself: so that the eating it self is a kind of
receiving. As then he that refuses the bread cannot be said to eat the
bread* so they which reject the body of Christ, cannot eat the body of
Christ: for if they did eat it, they would also take it and receive it.
Lastly, the Apostle charge the Church of the Corinthians, not to eat things
sacrificed to Idols in 1 Cor. 10, 20.
the Idols temple, because they cannot be partakers of Christ and the devil,
nor drink of the cup of Christ and of the cup of devils. 1 Cor 10, 20. These
things which the Gentiles sacr^fice, they sacrifice them to devils and not unto
God and I would not that ye should have fellowship with the devils, ye cannot b
e partakers of the Lords Table and of the table of devils. Where he shows
that a man may come poluted with Idol sacrifices to the Lords Supper, but then
he cannot be partaker of Christ indeed and in truth. Thus we see the doctrine
of the Church of Rome stricken to the ground, which hold it as a principle of
their faith, and teach it to others, that wicked men do receive and eat Bell.
de Sacra. Euch. li 1 c. 14 Lumb. lib. 4. sen. did. 9. ca. 2.
Christ himself in the Supper, making Christ indeed to be no Christ. For
whereas we have showed, that this Sacrament consists of the outward signs
which are bread and wine, and the inward truth represented by them which is
Christ's body and blood, according to the doctrine of the holy Scripture, and the
common consent of all antiquity: the Romanists have turned this truth topsie
turuie, and have laid a new plat-forme of the parts of the Supper. Hence it is,
that they have abolished the signs of bread and wine, Bellar. de Sacra. Euch.
lib. 1. cap* 13.
and make Christ Jesus an outward part, as it were thrusting him out of the
doors to be received of all both good and bad, and the grace of Christ to be
the inward part taken only of the faithful. Thus they make a diuorcement and
a separation between Christ and his saving graces, which can never be parted
and divided. For whosoever receives Christ, partaketh the merits and graces of
Christ: and whosoever enjoys the graces of Christ, imbraceth withal Christ
himself. Besides, if Christ be the sign, and the sanctifying graces of
Christ the thing signified, according to the rule of the Church of Rome: what
shall we say of the accidents and shows of bread and wine, whereunto shall
they be reduced? What part shall they act and play in this Comedy? Wherefore
we hold it as a strong truth, which we have euinced by sundry reasons, that
wicked me^ are not made partakers of Christ.

CHAP. XII. Of the first use of the Lords Supper.
HItherto we have spoken of all the parts of this Sacrament, as well outward as
inward, which is the first point to be considered in the doctrine of them as we
showed before: now we are to handle* the uses or ends of the Lords Supper,
which are Three ends o^ the Lord Supper.
principally these three: first to show forth with thanksgiving, the death,
Cross, and sufferings of Christ. Secondly, to teach us our communion and
growth with and in Christ. Thirdly, to declare our communion and growth in and
with our brethren. In these three stands the knowledge of those rich and
great benefits which are bestowed upon all worthy communicants, which have
sanctified and prepared their hearts for this holy action. These things being
duly considered, The false ends o^ this ^acrament rehearsed and ^e^elled.
do directly condemn the Church of Rome, who burying these true ends of the
Lords Supper, the commemoration of his passion, the merit of his cross, our
communion with Christ, and our fellowship one with another, have altered it
like the ship-mans hose into all forms and fashions, and make it profitable
for all purposes, for peace and war* for tempests and calm weather, for the
fruits of the earth, and distemperature of the air, for the whole and sick,
for men and beasts, for the living and for the dead. And to begin with the
last, as none of the least corruptions of this Sacrament, it was concluded in a
Counsel, that as a prayer therein is made for the living, Con Cabi^. c^^. 33.
so the remembrance of the dead is to be made in all Masses. It is adjudged an
excellent remedy against storms and tempests of the sea, and therefore al
seamen are warned in times of danger to call to their minds and remember to
sing the Masses which are accustomed to be sung for tempests. And as they make
it good in storms: so they make it serve their turn in the day of battle to
save them from the sword of the enemy; for the Priests are charged to say the
Masses used for them that go to wars. Besides these abuses, they make it
available to purge and clear offenders suspected of any crime, Number. 5, ^9.
like the bitter and cursed waters, making trial of the suspected wife,
whereupon the Counsel of worms determines, that If any in the Monestary be
suspected of theft, let him be purged by the taking of the Sacrament. Thus
Sybicon Bishop of Spire in the Counsel of Mentz, did by it purge himself of
adultery, about the year 110. an use never intended by the Spirit of God, nor
practiced by any of the Apostles, to institute it to discover secrets. Like
wise, sometimes it is taken to be good against inchanters and enchantments:
sometimes to be good for the remedy and recovery of sickness, to deliver
souls out of purgatory, to preserve from the plague, to save cattle, to cure
the fever, to recover again things lost, to take away tooth ach, to clear the
eyes, and what not. For we shall hear of greater impieties then these. They
make the Lords Supper a sacrifice not only profitable to save men from death,
but available to deliver their Pigs and their swine from diseases. For they
have a Mass commonly called the Mass of Saint Anthony. The Mass of Saint
Anthony A^an. de Sacra. Euchar. cap. 32
Yea if a poor woman's hen be sick and ready to be lost, she may procure a
mass to be said for it. And no marvel, for although no good redownd hereby to
the party, yet some gain shall return to the Priest, who if he see no money
will say no Mass. But all this is nothing in comparison of that which now you
shall hear. For these miscreants and monsters do abuse the Supper of the Lord
to cover and conceal most vile and shameful practices and horrible designs
plotted among them, and so make the Sacrament of God a sacrifice of the Devil.
It is now grown to be a common custom, See the treatise of the powder trea^on.
when they consort themselves together and attempt unnatural villainies and
rebellions for the destruction of Prince and people, and for the overthrow of
the Church and true religion, to combine themselves in one for further
secrecy, by taking the Sacrament, as appears by sundry examples in the late
powder treason: as if Christ had ordained it to hide falsehood rather then to
help our faith. Neither is this only a fault in practice, but an error in
doctrine. For whatsoever is revealed to the Priest under the seal of
confession, they hold to be so sacred and secret, T^^^ (...). 10.
that it ought not to be broken up or made known to others, thought it should
concern his own life and save the whole kingdom. And furthermore they teach
that in treacheries and conspiracies against Kings and Princes, they may bind
their consorts and confederates to keep silence by receiving of the Sacrament,
as appears by the late examples of Garnet, Oldcorne, and other Jesuits.

Thus is the holy Supper made a provocation to treason: as if it had been
institued not to testify our piety toward God, but to manifest our disloyalty
toward Princes: not to show the death of Christ, but to procure the mur^hering
of Kings: not to declare openly out profession, but to conceal privily
wickedness and rebellion.

All these fancies and supposed ends of this Sacrament agree not with the
institution of CHRIST, nor with the former uses set down, which now we come
to handle and to prove out of the doctrine of the Apostles themselves.

Touching the first and principal end that is, the remembrance, meditation,
and showing forth the death of Chrst with all thanksgiving: this he commanded
to us at his last departing from us, which ought much to stick in our minds,
because the last words of a dear friend ready to part from us, do oftentimes
leave behind both deep impressions and devout affections in us. Indeed when we
read of the passion and death of Christ, it does much move us: to hear it
opened and expounded, it moves in a farther degree: but more then these, to
have before our eyes a visible representation of the crucifying of Christ in
his last Supper, does move us most of all. The institution of this Sacrament
he did in wisdom reserve till the approaching of his death, that we might not
forget him when he is gone from us. So God the Father after the universal flood
drowning the whole world, for a remembrance of his mercy in delivering Noah and
his family from the waters, and of his promise made Genesis 9, 14.
never to destroy it so again: left to them and all posterity the Rainbow.
When he had justly smitten the first borne of the Egiptians, and graciously
saved the first borne of Israel: he commanded Moses Exo 13, 1, 2*
to sanctify to him all the first borne that first opens the womb, to
remember the day in which they came out of the land of Egypt. When he had
miraculously sed the Israelites with Manna from heaven, that men did eat
Angels food, Exodus 16, 32
he would have a golden pot full of it to be reserved in the Arc of
remembrance, for the better remembrance of so great a work. So likewise being
delivered by the precious blood of Christ from the floods of sin that have gone
over our heads, and eased of the heavy burden that pressed down our hearts:
we have received baptism to keep us in remembrance thereof, that we are
cleansed from the filthiness of sin. Again, being nourished with Christ's body
crucified, and his blood shed for us, we are commanded to use this mystery, to
continue an holy remembrance of his death and passion to our endless comfort.

This end, to wit, to be to us a remembrance of Christ's sacrifice on the
Cross, is taught by the Apostle, So often as ye shall eat of this bread and
drink of this cup, Luke 22, 19
ye show the Lords death till he come. In like manner the Evangelist Luke of
the bread says, Do this in remembrance of me: and of the cup, Do this as often
as ye shall drink it in remembrance of me, by declaring his death. And we
declare the Lords death, when we publicly confess with our mouth, and believe
with the heart, that our whole hope and affiance for life and salvation is
surely set in the Lords death, that we may glorify him by our confession, and
exhort others by our example to glorify him, because his death is our life,
his passion is our salvation, his suffering is our rejoicing. We our selves are
the principal and proper causes that he was torn and tormented: our sins
wounded him, we our selves crucified him: we, even we are the causes, for he
was chastised for us, that by death he might deliver us from death, and from
Heb. 2, 14.
him that had the power of death. Our evil motions, our vile thoughts, our
corrupt words, and our sinful works, did set on work Pontius Pilate, Herod,
Annas, Caiphas, Iuda^, the Gentiles and the Jews, who were but instruments, as
the Cross, nails, the hammer, and spear: these were as our servants and
workmen, in the evil action of his crucifying. We are all of us ready to
accuse and condemn these men, we complain against them, and pronounce
sentence upon them, because they offered so great injuries to our sweet
Savior. We lay all the blame upon others, we stick not to call Pilat a
corrupt Judge; Herod a time-seruer and a man-pleaser: Annas and Caiphas
brethren in evil; Judas the son of perdition: the Jews and Gentiles
notorious offenders: but all this while we have forgotten our selves.
Wherefore, to speak the truth, not Satan the tempter, not Judas the traitor,
not Caiphas the High Priest, not Pilat the chief Judge, not the Jews that
conspired against him, not the false witnesses that accused him, not the band
of men that scorned him, not the passengers that nodded their heads at him, not
the souldior that pierced him, not the executioners that railed at him, and
nailed him on the cross, are so much to be accused and reproved for his
sufferings, as we, we I say our selves and our own sins. Not that we can
excuse those cursed instruments that crucified the Lord of glory, who shall
receive according to their works, Z^ch. 12, 10. Job. 19, 37.
when they shall see him whom they have pierced, but to teach us chiefly to
accuse and condemn our selves. We bound him with cords, we beat him with
rods, we buffetted him with fistes, we crowned him with thorns, we reviled him
with our mouths, we railed at him with reproaches, we nodded at him with our
heads, we thrust him through with spears, we betrayed him with a kiss, we
pierced his hands and feet with nails, we crucified him between two thieves,
we condemned him through false witnesses, we poured shame and contempt upon his
person, we judged him as plagued and smitten of God. For inasmuch as our faults
and offenses procured these things to be done unto him, we were the dooers by
them, and the dealers in them, and the causes of them. And surely, then we are
profitably grounded in the doctrine of the Who they are that profit aright by
Christ's passion
passion of Christ, when our hearts cease to sin, and we are pricked with an
inward grief of those great and grievous transgressions, 1 Ioh. 3, 6. Esaias 53,
5, 6.
whereby as with spears, we pierced the side and wounded the very soul of the
immaculate lamb of God, as Ioh. 3. Who so sins, neither has seen him, nor
known him. And the Prophet Esaias teaches, cha. 53. He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed: the Lord has laid upon him
the iniquity of us all. Seeing then Christ was slain for our sins, let us kill
sin in our selves; seeing he died for us, let us labor that sin may be dead in
us: seeing he was crucified for us and our salvation, let us crucify our own
lusts that they reign not in our mortal bodies: seeing his heart was pierced
with a spear, let us have our hearts thrust through, pierced and pricked with
unfeigned sorrow for all our iniquities. This is the right use, this is the
true end, this is the sound comfort following and flowing from the death of
Christ.

To conclude, we must learn and hold for ever, that we have the beginning and
chief cause in our selves, which did crucify Christ and crush him with most
bitter sorrows: let us then be revenged of our sins, and do al despite we can
unto them: let us endite them, arraigne them, accuse them, condemn them and
nail them to his cross: let us kill them, mortify them, and bury them in his
grave for ever. This is the first end of the supper, which is signified by the
breaking of the bread and pouring out of the wine, declaring unto us, that as
the body of our Lord was broken, and by violent means afflicted, so his blood
gushed out and flowed plentifully out of his gaping and bleeding wounds. This
must be our meditation whenever we come to the Lords table.

For the passion of Christ, as the breaking of his body upon the cross, the
pouring out of his blood, and the separating of the Soul from the body, must
be both spoken of by the Pastor, and remembered by the receiver in the Supper if
the one would deliver it faithfully, and the other receive it fruitfully. We
must call to mind that Christ humbled himself to death for us, even to the
accursed death of the cross, that he apprehended and felt the whole wrath of
God upon him in Soul and body, whereby he was brought into a grievous agony;
his body being rent with nails, beaten with scourges, pricked with thorns,
pierced with a spear, and his Soul pressed with the burden of all our sins
which were cast upon his shoulders, he standing as a pledge and surety in our
places. What shall we return unto him for this mercy, and what love ought we
to render for this great love? Shall we not crush the very head of sin, that
has thus crushed our head? Let us not therefore wound him that has cured us:
nor pierce him with our sins, that was killed for our sins, or crucify him
by the lusts of the old man who was crucified to make us new men. And thus
much of the first end of the Lords Supper.

CHAP. XIII. Of the second use of the Lords Supper.
THe second use of the Lords Supper is our spiritual union and communion with
Christ. 1 Cor. 10 16,
This the Apostle declares, The cup of blessing which we bless* is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? Whereby he means, that the faithful which
come conscionably and worthily to the lords table, are joined and united wholly
to Christ, by the bread Sacramentally, by faith instrumentally, by the Holy
ghost spiritually, and by them almost effectually. For we take the bread in
our hands, and likewise we take the cup into our hands as Christ commanded,
saying, Mat. 26, 26.
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, divide ye, Neither do we lay them apart, or
hide them aside, or reserve them in a box, or abstain from them: but when we
have taken them, we eat them, we digest them, we are nourished by them, and
they are turned into our substance. So Christ, being eaten of the godly by
says, is united to them by his spirit (as we have showed before) whereby they
are made one with Christ and he one with them. And as meat plentifully
prepared, daintily dressed, and only seen upon the table, does not nourish
the body, or take away hunger: so if the Gospel be preached, and the
Sacraments administered, except we apply the promises of the gospel, and
believe that Christ with all his gifts is ours, they profit nothing toward
our salvation. Such therefore as lawfully and worthily come to the Lords
Supper, as to a table richly furnished, and to a banquet liberally provided,
must not only generally believe that Christ suffered in the flesh and dyed for
sinners, but Gal. 2, 20
particularly for themselves, yea communicates himself and all his gifts
unto them abundantly, as certainly as themselves eat of the bread and drink
of the cup.

This union and communion is near, and wonderful great: and therefore the
Apostle fitly calls it a mystery, even Ephesians. 5, 32.
a great mystery, speaking of Christ and of the Church. For what union can be
greater then that which is between the thing nourishing, and the thing
nourished? We have nothing in Adam, but that which conueyeth death unto us: so
that it is needful to be joined to one which may give life to us, that as we
dye in Adam, Romans 5, 19.
so we may live in him. This union cannot by reason be expressed, or fully
understood. As Christ in the days of his flesh, had a double kindred, one
earthly and carnal kindred, the other spiritual, that by faith received his
word, and believed in his name, of whom he said, Mat. 12, 44.
Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do my Fathers will,
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, sister, and mother: so is it in
this union and fellowship with him, one is outward and bodily, which al
mankind has with him, in that he is partaker of our flesh and blood, the
other inward and spiritual, whereby we are made partakers of him and of all
his saving graces to everlasting life. As Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary
and united our nature to him, taking upon him, Heb. 2, 16.
not the Angels nature, but the seed of Abraham, every reprobate has this
union with him, in that he took upon him the shape of a man: but there is a
mystical and marvelous union, whereby he dwells in us by faith, whereby we
are truly coupled to him, made partakers of him, delivered from sin, and made
heirs of everlasting life, quickening and sustaining us, as food which
preserves the life of the body. If the arm joined to the body have no life,
no sense, no benefit of vital spirits, it is no part of the body, though it be
united to it: so the wicked living without faith, are as it were senseless,
they have no forgiveness of sins, no sanctification, no salvation, and
therefore are no true members of Christ. If he pour not life and grace into
them, they are not his members: if he kill not sin in them, they are not
united spiritually unto him. The bodily union with him shall profit nothing:
it is the Spirit that gives life.

Seeing then the receiving of the bread and wine which Genesis 20.16.
and looks for nourishment, food, fellowship, protection, and government from
him: so being made one with Christ, we are endued with his heavenly gifts and
blessings. This must be our comfort in all dangers and tentations in all trials
and assaults, to consider that we are one with Christ, we are not only dear
unto him, but nearly joined with him, as members to the head, as the wife to
the husband, and as the branches to the vine, and therefore can never be
separated from him in life or death. We have in him a communion of goods, so
that as he has taken upon him our sins and the punishments of them, so he
has again communicated to us his righteousness and life, and we may through
his free gift challenge as our own whatsoever is his.

We see in the corporal marriage, so long as one is rich, the other cannot be
poor. The Lord is our shepherd, Psalm 23, 1.
what then can we want? Christ Jesus is rich to all that call upon him, he is
become all things unto us; the light by which we see: the life by which we
live: the way wherein we must walk: the door by which we must enter: the
garment which we must put on: the food whereby we must be nourished and
strengthened. Of our selves we are void of all good things. We live in darkness
and in the shadow of death: we are borne dead in sins and trespasses: we
wander wide out of the way: we have no entrance into Gods kingdom: the shame
of our nakedness appears to the loathing of our persons.

But through CHRIST JESUS, both these defects are taken away, and all the
merits of his passion are made ours through this union which we have in him
sealed up unto us in this Sacrament.



Saul make hauock of the Church at Damascus, the head in heaven cries out by
and by, Acts 9, 4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? This puts us in mind of two things,
one concerning Christ, the other concerning our selves. First, is there such an
union between us? Are we so nearly knit together as the husband and the wife,
Similites expressing the vn^o^ between Christ and us.
as the head and the members, as the foundation of the house and the rest of
the building, as the Vine and the branches, as the nourishment and the thing
nourished? Let us learn hereby, how Christ is affected toward us, he
suffers with us when we suffer, 1 Cor. 12.16,
and accounts our chastisements as his own, even as when one member
suffers, all the members suffer with it. This is a notable comfort unto us in
all sorrows, to consider that he is very compassionate and pitiful toward
us: he has a feeling of our miseries, and his soul is after a sort grieved
for them. Secondly, as this shows how he is affected toward us, so it
teaches how we should be affected toward him. If we be feeling members of his
body, there is nothing done against him, or committed to the prejudice of his
glory, but we should be grieved more then if it were done unto our selves.
Psalm. 139, 21.
The Prophet did hate them that hated the Lord, and was grieved with those that
rose up against him. Rivers of waters did run down his eyes, Psalm. 119, 136.
because men kept not his law. But alas, where is this feeling to be found on
our parts? When the Lord is spitefully abused and wounded even as it were unto
the heart, who is wounded with him, or accounts himself euilly entreated? We
are as senseless men, and have not a tear to shed on his behalf, which
argues against us, and proves to our faces, that the spiritual life is very
weak in us, if there be any life at all.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the third use of the Lords Supper.
THe third use of the Lords Supper is a spiritual communion and growth with
our The (...) Supper is the band of charity.
brethren, to be one body with them, flowing from the Communion which we have
with Christ. For as the union between brethren and sisters of the same blood
and of the same flesh, springs from the near conjunction they have from
father and mother as from a fountain: and as the unity and concord among
servants of the same society, arises by me^nes of the same Master: so the
faithful that have communion with Christ, have likewise communion one with
another. This Paul testifies evidently, writing to the Corinthians, ^o^. 1^, ^7
We that are many are one bread and one body, because we all are partakers of
one bread. This is to be understood of that communion and fellowship which the
members have one with another, who receive food and nourishment from the same
Table, thereby professing themselves to be of the self same family and
household. Besides, by the uniting together of many grains is made one bread:
of many clusters of grapes, one wine is pressed out: so out of many members
grows up one body of the Church* which is the body of Christ. This makes
much to the reconciling, renewing, and maintaining of friendship, that we are
all partakers of one bread made of many corns, and drink of the same cup of
wine made of many clusters, 1 Cor. 12, 13
as the Apostle sets down, 1 Cor. 12 We are all made to drink into one
Spirit. Wherefore we are not only to look to our union with Christ, but also
our joining our selves with them who are of the same mystical body, be they
never so many that receive with us this holy Supper: in respect whereof, this
Sacrament has been called a communion.

life from Christ, but to impart it to others as freely as we received: This
is taught us in many places: 1 Pet. 4, 10. 1 Cor. 12.7.
Let every man as he has received the gift minister the same one to another.
And in another place, The manifestation of the Spirit to given to every man to
profit w thall: God has tempred the body together, least there should be any
division in the body, that the members might have the same care one of another.
So then the gifts that we have received, of understanding, wisdom, zeal,
exhortation, reprehension, and whatsoever gifts external, internal, or
eternal: let us consider that we are stewards not masters of them, and
therefore must render and give an account unto the author and giver of them,
when he shall say, Give an account of thy stewardship, Luke 16, 12.
for thou may be no longer Steward.

Again, is the Lords Supper the bond of charity? And Aug. tract. 26 in Johan.
must be united in Christian love, gentleness, meekness, and patience one
toward another, supporting one another, bearing the burden one of another,
being alike affected and disposed, guided by one spirit, nourished by the milk
of the same word, acknowledging one Father, professing one faith, living in one
body, walking in one calling, looking for one kingdom, worshipping one LORD*
meeting at one Supper, and washed with one Baptism for our regeneration and
sanctification Ephesians. 4, 1, 2, ^ Ruth. 1, 16, 1^
according to the saying of the Apostle, Ephesians 4. Walk wo^thy of the
vocation whereunto ye are called, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spir t
in the bond of peace, there is one body and one Spirit, even as ye are called
in one hope of your vocation, There is one Lord, one faith, one bapt^sme, one
God and Father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all. And
in the same Phil. 2.1 ^.3
Epis^le to the Philippians, If there be any consolation in Christ* i^ any
comf^rt of love, if any fellowshippe of the Spirit, if any compassion and
mercy: fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, beein^ of
one accord and of one judgment, that nothing be done through contention.

And Luke Act. 4. describing the Act. 4, 3^.
notes of the Church of Christ, says, The whole multitude of them that
believed were of one heart and one soul, neither any of them said, that any
thing of that which he possessed was his own, but they had all things common.
Let us acknowledge our selves to be fellows of one household, and members of
one body: and evermore bring with us this fruit of love to the Lords Supper,
otherwise we shall never be the Lords guests. If brethren that are the children
of the same father, malice and malign one another, will not the father be
angry? And if fellow-seruants brought up in one family fall together by the
ears, will not their Master be displeased and offended? Seeing the^ God has
vouchsafed to call us his children, to admit us into his house, to nourish us
at his own Table, and to preserve and reserve us to his heavenly kingdom: he
will take from us all these privileges and prerogatives if we be hateful and
hating one another, and deal with us, not as with his own children, but as
with his vttter enemies:

(...). 4, 10.
drawing near to the Table of the Lord again and again, so we should labor
to increase in love and as it were to double our affection toward our brethren.
It is a vain thing solemnly to profess before God and men and the holy
Angels and all the world, that we come in love and are in charity with all
persons, if by and by we be ready upon the least occasion to take up hatred and
contention, and to fall out one with another. For we shall need no ^^her witness
against us to seal up our condemnation, then this Sacrament of the Supper,
except we shun and shake off these vipers, not from our hands, but from our
hearts. All such as come with envy, hatred, rancor, malice, and desire of
mischief, are as a generation of vipers, seeking to eat out the bowels one of
another: because these are as it were the poison or venom of the mind. Let us
not make the seal of righteousness to be a sign unto us of certain
judgment hanging over our heads, 1 Cor. 11, 18.30.
as it fell out among the Corinthians, who nourished divisions among them and
therefore were justly and sharply chastened of God many ways. Do not the
members of our natural body love one another? Yes they seek the good one of
another: the foot enuyeth not the hand; nor the hand the eye; nor the eye the
heart. It would be strange in nature to see the hands beat and tear the face
or the feet: then what is it but even monstrous in religion for one Christian
to devour another, to pray upon another, to swell against another, and to do
hurt one to another. There is no difference of grapes when they are all in the
wine press: so there is no difference of Christians (in respect of Christ)
coming to his Table; so that being made one body in Christ, there ought to be
no division or contention among us, but we should be knit together in love with
so firm and fast a knot as may not be broken. Thus much of the third and last
end of the Lords Supper.

CHAP. XV. Of Examination before the Lords Supper.
WHat the Supper of the Lord is, what are the parts and uses thereof, and what
an heavenly banquet it is for all worthy receivers, has hitherto been
sufficiently declared: now it follows to set down Examination necessary
before we come to the Lords Table.
the way and means how we may come worthily. For the whole fruit of this
Sacrament stands in the right partaking thereof. The right manner stands in
preparing our selves to come, and in examining our selves before we come. No
great thing can be done well, without good care and endeavor. In all humane
Cicer de ^s^sic lib. 1.
things of any importance, nothing is attempted or atchiued without some
preparation more or less going before, according to the nature of the matter.
Before men sit down to eat or drink their ordinary food, before they sleep,
before they wash, before they walk, before they work, some preparation goes
before. Before the rem. 4, 4.
ground is tilled, it is prepared. Before the law was delivered, before the
Exo. 19, 10.
Sabbath was sanctified, before the sacrifice was offered, before the Passover
was killed, before the word was received, before prayers were uttered, the heart
was in some sort prepared. One of the greatest duties required of us, is to dye
well: whereunto all our life should be a preparation, and every day should be a
meditation of death, that we may not be found unready and unprepared Mat. 25,
13.
when the bridegroom shall come. So the Supper of the Lord being an excellent
mystery and the food of our souls, whereby we receive Christ's body and blood:
there is required of every one, a trying, proving, and examining themselves,
least seeking comfort by their coming, they bring upon themselves judgment
through want of preparing. This truth delivered, has the witness and consent
2 Chr. 35.6.
of many Scriptures for the confirmation thereof. The Prophet 2. Chron. 35.
says, Kill the Passover and sanctify your selves, and prepare your brethren,
that they may do according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses. And
the holy man Job, when the days of the banketting of his children were gone
about, sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered
burnt offerings according to the number of them all. Also the wise man Eccle.
4. Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God, and be more
near to hear, then to give the sacr^fice of fools, for they know not that
they do evil. Likewise the Prophet Jeremy, Lament. 3. Wherefore is the living
man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin: let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the Lord. To the same purpose the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 4. Tremble and sin not, examine your own heart upon your bed and be
still: and Psalm. 119. I have considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy
testimonies. The Apostle Paul is very direct in this point, as Gal 6.4. Let
every man prove his own work: and then shall he have rejoicing in himself
only, and not in any other. Also 1. Cor. 11. Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup: where he speaks of
purpose of the Lords Supper. So then it is a duty required of all persons that
come to the Lords Table, or any other exercise of religion to search their own
hearts and consciences narrowly how they be affected and disposed touching the
discharge of this duty.

And if we would farther consider the necessity of this examination: we should
find it stands upon many sufficient Reasons of this duty of examination.
reasons and causes as upon certain foundations that cannot be removed. Do we
not see men when they come into the presence of some honorable and noble
person, Genesis 41, 14.
to address themselves to do it with all reverence? Joseph being sent for, to
come before Pharaoh King of Egypt shaued his head, and changed his raiment: and
Prou. 23. When thou sit down with a Ruler at meat, consider diligently
what is before thee. Therefore when we sit at the Lords Table to sup with him,
and are admitted to be his welcome guests: we ought much more to be careful to
sanctify our souls with all solemnity. Consider with me a little our own
practice. We will not put our ordinary meats in a dish unwashed, nor our
common drinks into a cup uncleansed: and shall we put the signs of bread and
wine which are chosen instruments to conueigh Christ unto us, into unsanctified
souls, unprepared hearts, and filthy consciences? Does not our Savior Christ
reprove such hypocrisy, when he says, Mat. 16, 3.
Ye can discern the face of the sky, and can you not discern the signs of
the times? And if that upper chamber, where the Supper was first administered,
were trimmed and garnished: should not our hearts be prepared, into the which
it is received? Shall Christ himself offer to come into our houses: and shall
not we sanctify our hearts to entertain such a guest? This were too great
carelesnes and contempt.

Moreover, weigh with me the profit that comes to our selves to move us to
this examination. The comfort is great, the fruit is excellent, the benefit is
unspeakable to those that partake the mystery of the Supper worthily, they
receive Christ they receive remission of sins, they receive salvation, they
receive assurance of eternal life. For, if the woman diseased Math. 9, 20.
with an issue of blood, lo twelve year, coming behind Christ, and touched
only the hemme of his: garment, was made whole; then assuredly the spiritual
receiving of the body and blood of Christ shall not bring less profit, if the
faith be equal, which notwithstanding is wholly lost without preparation.
Ponder with me also how by neglect of this trial of our selves, not only this
profit is lost, but the Sacrament it self is after a sort defiled. For,
howsoever it be in it self by the ordinance of God an holy and heavenly
banquet, yet unto the ungodly, unregenerate and unsanctified, it becomes
unholy and wholly earthly, Hag. 2.14.
as the prophet Haggai teaches, Chapter 2. If a polluted person touch an holy
thing it shall be unclean. The person must be holy that will have sound
profit by the holy things of God: the man that is unholy, defiles every
thing he touches, the polluted person polluteth all things. For as to Tit. 1,
15.
the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving
is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are corrupted: so the
profane person defiles all things, and turns wholesome meat into noisome
poison. We must therefore use sanctified things with sadctifyed hearts: and for
spiritual meat we must have spiritual vessels.

Furthermore, mark the great danger and punishment that is procured and
purchased by the want of preparation. For the unworthy receiver is guilty 1 Cor
11, 27
of the body and blood of Christ, as the Apostle specifieth 1 Cor. 11.
Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again, He that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own judgment, because he
discerns not the Lords body: for this cause many are sick and weak among
you, and many sleep. Where he teaches that such as come unworthily,
irreverently, and otherwise then such mysteries should be handled, do despise
and tread under their feet Jesus Christ himself, provoke the Lords wrath, and
bring on themselves swift damnation. Not that be is carnally and bodily
present, but because the reproach which is used to the signs, touches the
body and blood of Christ signified by them. Even as if a man should rent,
disgrace, deface, spit upon, tread and trample under his feet, and
villanouslie abuse the image, seal, and letters patents of a Prince, he should
be adjudged Ren. Iaesae Maiestatis.
guilty of a grievous crime against the person of the Prince himself, not
which he receives but despiteth: so, such as come unthankfully and
unworthily to this supper, are guilty of his body, not which they have eaten,
but which they have refused and rejected being offered unto them, and therefore
are guilty of their own death, inasmuch as God with the signs offers his
own Son.

Wherefore seeing the presence of God moves, seeing our own profit
persuades, seeing our own practice furthereth, seeing the defiling of the
Sacrament, and the danger of unworthy receiving teaches, and lastly seeing
our own judgment in humane affairs (when the danger is not so great, nor
the loss so certain) cries out for this necessary preparation, it stands
us upon, before we enter into this holy work (whereunto of our selves we are
more unfit and unto ward, and which in it own nature is most profitable) to
set our selves before the Lord, who shall examine and judge the quick and the
dead: to search into our own ways, and to keep a sessions in our own
souls: to look into our secret and hidden corruptions, how we have gone
forward or backward in godliness: to try whither we have a knowledge,
feeling, and disliking of our sins, and whether we have any fear of Gods
judgments, or faith in his promises, or hope in his mercy: to judge our
selves, that we may not be judged of the Lord: to labor to find our special
sins, striving against them by earnest prayer to God, and condemning them for
ever in our selves. If we would thus judge our selves, we should not be
condemned with the world^. Let us be grieved for our natural blindness. Let
us acknoledge confusion of faces to be due unto us, Let us deeply imprint in
our own hearts the horror of our sins past and present. The more we perceive
and discern our own unworthiness, the greater shall be our fitnes to come to
this Sacrament: and the less we espy our own imperfections, the more we
incur the danger of Gods judgments. So then to touch us with true humility,
and to break our stony hearts in pieces with remembrance of our daily
offenses, let us often meditate on the death and passion of Christ, who was
forsaken, scorned, buffetted, and crucified for us: he was led as a lamb to
the slaughter and shunned not the shame of the Cross: then the powers of
heaven and earth were moved, Mat, 27, 45
Judea was darkened, the earth quaked, the stones claue in sunder the graves
opened, the Sun was in the ful-moone eclipsed, the veil of the Temple was
rent, the dead were raised, the thief repented, the Centurion glorified God,
and the whole order of nature was changed. All these things do set before us
the heinousness of our sins, and the greatness of Gods wrath, which could not
be appeased, but by crucifying of the body and by shedding of the blood of
Christ, which is represented to us as in a glass in this Supper. Thus we have
showed by testimonies and effectual reasons, that as in the Passover they
were commanded to choose them a lamb Exodus 12, 3.
on the tenth day, but to kill him on the fourteenth, so that they had four
days liberty between the separating and the killing of him, for preparation
and sanctification of themselves: in like manner in the Supper, which is the
same to us, that the Passover was to the Jews, the Spirit of God charge
this duty upon us, that we prepare our hearts reverently thereunto.

practiced. Especially there is required of us the knowledge in the doctrine of
the law, not only to be able to rehearse the words, but to know the end and
meaning of them, the special branches of them, what are the duties
commanded, what are the sins condemned: for by Rom, 3, 20.
the Law comes the knowledge of sin, and the Apostle had not known sin,
Romans 7, 7.
but by the Law: for he had not known lust, except the law had said, thou
shall not lust. As then, he that will try Gold from Copper, must have his
touchstone: so he that will rightly examine his obedience, must familiarly be
acquainted with the Canon of the Scriptures. This our Savior teaches, John,
5, 3^.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me.

If then we search them, they will give us light to search our selves. And the
Apostle requires the Colossians, Col. 3, 16.
to have the word of God dwell plentifully in them in all wisdom. Wherefore
he that said, examine your selves, meant we should also know the Scriptures, and
especially the law of God, which must be the glass of our Iam. 1, 23,
lives to behold our offenses: and the very groundwork of this examination.

Again, are we charged to try out our ways, and examine Exodus 12, 2^
and did desire to be instructed of their parents, and such as had learned to
make the law a frontlet before their eyes, and a sign upon their hands, that
so the doctrine of God might not depart out of their mouths. Besides, if we
consider the outward works in both the Sacraments aright, This overthrows
the opin^on of Innocentius Augustine, Musculus, and others, who teach it to be
fit and needful that children be admitted to the Supper. Innocent. 1. Epist.
ad patr. Council. Mile. Aug epist. 107 ad Vitalem. Muscul. loc. Co^mu^titul de
Euch^r.
we shall plainly see the truth of this diversity. For in Baptism the action
of the Minister is to wash the body with water, which requires not discretion
in him that is to be baptized, forasmuch as we can cleanse and wash the things
that are without reason, without understanding, without sense, and without
life. But in the Sacra. of the Supper, a reverent giving, an attentive hearing,
a certain understanding of that which is spoken, a wise receiving and eating,
and a careful considering of whom to take, and what to take is required in the
outward work: how much greater judgment is required, to know that God the
father gives the body and blood of his Son to be received by faith? Thus the^,
this examination makes a distinction between both the Sacraments of the new
testament, and shows, that it is not necessary to the salvation of infants,
that they come to the Lords table.

Thirdly, seeing no man must presume to come thither without a serious
examination of himself: Six sorts of persons barred from the Lord, supper
it debarreth doctrine of the Sacraments, and other fundamental points of
religion, they are not to be admitted but refused. Fifthly, if they have al
these things, and want neither baptism, nor ripeness of age, nor years of
discretion, nor use of reason, nor knowledge of the doctrine which is according
to godliness: yet if they remain profane, ungodly, unrepentant, stubborn,
malicious, revenging, open contemners of God, of godliness, and of his word,
Idolaters, adulterers, blasphemers, drunkards, and such in whom appears no
amendment of life, these and such like are not interessed in this Sacrament.
Lastly, it excludes and shuts out all such as are without God in the world,
al Atheists, Infidels, Turks, Jews, and Heretics, all such as have not
yielded themselves to the Church of God, and have not made profession of their
faith, and such as are worthily excommunicated from the Church by the power of
the keys, which are no better the^ heathen and Publicans. Where by we see,
that all not yet baptized, infants and children that want years, al furious and
foolish persons that want the use of reason, al blind and ignorant persons,
that want the knowledge of God and of themselves, all unrepentant persons that
bring not with them faith and repentance, all Infidels and unbelievers with
others that are out of the bosom of the Church, are to be kept back from this
Supper, being such as either cannot or will not submit themselves to this holy
and necessary duty of examination, thereby having no right or title to come to
his table. For such as have not the Church to be their mother, cannot be
nourished with this meat of the Church, to wit, the Supper of the Lord. Among
all these that are thus excluded, we do not name the hypocrite, because his
wickedness is in his heart and kept secret to himself and therefore the Church
can take no notice of him, but leaves him to God, who searches the heart and
tries the raines.

Fourthly, if all persons are to prepare themselves to this banquet provided for
them. God is dishonored both these ways, as well by receiving irreverently, as
by abstaining carelessly from this Sacrament. For he lies under an heavy Ier
48, 10.
curse deservedly, that does any of the Lords works negligently. Even as the
patient, which being sick makes no account of the diet which the Physician
has prescribed, is no less blame worthy, then he that abuses it
disorderly, inasmuch as both sorts do it oftentimes to their danger and
destruction: so is he no less faulty, that makes no reckoning of the receite
which the chief Physician of our Souls the Lord Jesus has appointed, then
he that misuseth and misapplieth the same, because both do it with great
peril and hazard to themselves. We know that such, as being bidden Mat. 22.7.
by the King to the wedding of his Son, made light of it and refused to come,
were destroyed as well as he that came without his wedding garment. We know
when the word of God is preached, which is Romans 1, 16.
the power of God to salvation to all that believe, such as absent themselves
from the hearing of it, perish justly, as well as they that come without faith
and repentance. We know when the passover was celebrated, such persons as were
negligent to observe and keep the same according to all that the Lord had
commanded Moses were to be cut off from his people, Number. 9, 13.
Because they brought not the offering of the Lord in h^s due season, they
shall bear their sin. In like manner such as neglect to come to this
communion, and abstain from it, for fear of communicating unworthily, deprive
themselves of great comfort. And this is the very cutthroat of al godliness and
religion. For why do they not, by like proportion of reason, refrain from
invocation and calling upon the name of God, for fear of praying amiss? And
why may they not absent themselves from hearing the word of God, fearing to
hear amiss? So that if this pretense were a lawful warrant to abstain from
the Lords Supper for fear of unworthy receiving, we might bid all godliness
farewell, in as much as it opens a gap for men to abstain from perfourming
all duties of piety and godliness. Wherefore, let not such persons flatter
themselves with vain excuses and lying words that cannot profit, neither
daube with untempered mortar, saying, we are unworthy, we cannot come: rather
let them labor to shake off their unworthiness, and to cast away Heb. 12, 1,
every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, that so
they may be worthy receivers. Let them not contemn the commandment of Christ
which says, Take ye, eat ye, do this in remembrance of me. Christ has
commanded, we must obey: he says, come: shall we be so unthankful to say, we
will not come? He calls, shall we not answer? He bids his guests, shall we
make excuses? He sends his messengers and prepares his feast, shall we not
provide and prepare to eat thereof? He offers himself unto us, shall we
contemn the blessed remembrance of his death and passion, even the price of
our redemption, and shut our selves from the Communion which the faithful
have with him and one with another? So that we are to persuade our own
hearts, that God is provoked to anger, as well by negligence in abstaining, as
by unworthiness in receiving the Supper.

Lastly, this serves to reprove two sorts. First, seeing Psalm 5^.
and when we are afflicted in conscience and can find no comfort, we are to
resort to the Minister that has the tongue of the learned, being able and
willing to minister a word in season, or to some faithful brother in time of
need, as the patient does to a skillful Physitio^: howbeit there is great abuse
thereof in the church of Rome. Against au^icular confession.
We do not deny or go about to take away al confession of sins before men and
unto men, forasmuch as the Apostle wills, that we confess our faults one to
another, James 5, 16. Iam. 5, 16.
All the question is concerning the manner and order of making confession. But
he allows it to be made to any man, and of one private person mutually to
another; whereas popish s^rift is limited only unto the Priest, and a
straight law enjoined to the people to acknowledge all their mortal sins to
him, with all the circumstances of them so far as possibly they can remember
at the least once every year, if not oftener. Again, the form of confession
of sin required and practiced, is uttered in a strange tongue and an unknown
language, which is foolish and ridiculous: for so they know not what they
speak to God. They would seem to ask him forgiveness, and yet they know not
what they ask. Lastly* they make confession of sins not only to God, but to
the dead, to the Saints departed, which is impious and blasphemous. For they
make prayer to them and crave their intercession for the better obtaining of
the pardon of their sins, which gives a part of the divine worship to them,
and makes them equal with God, as if they could search and see the heart as
well as he does. The Jesuits in their Annotations upon 1 Cor. 11. where the
Apostle wills a man to prove and examine himself, give this note, A man must
examine his l^fe dil gently, Rhem. annot. upon 1 Cor. 11.28.
whether he be in any mortal sin, and must confess himself of every
offense which he knows or fears to be deadly, before he presume to come to
the holy Sacrament. For so the Apostles doctrine here, with the continual
custom of the Cathol ke Church, and the Fathers example bind to do. Thus they
abuse the Apostle which makes not for them; and pretend antiquity, which they
are not able to avouch: and allege the Fathers which serve not their turn.
The Apostle in this place speaks of examination, not of confession: of
proving our selves, not of putting our selves to the proof of others. The
commandment of the Holy Ghost, to confess one to another, binds the Priest
to confess to the people, as well as the people to confess to the Priest. And
whereas the Evangelist declares Math. 3. Mat. 3, 6. Act. 19, 18.
that many were baptized of John confessing their sins: and likewise Luke in
the Acts shows that many believed, and confessed and showed their works: we
must understand it of a confession that is voluntary, not constrained: open,
not secret: general, not particular: before others, not in the ear. True it
is, the Fathers speak much and often of confession, but they mean it either
of such confession as is made to God, or of such persons as had openly fallen
in time of persecution, or of them that of their own accord uncompelled,
accused their own weakness and purpose of shrinking back, albeit they had
not as yet fallen indeed. Now that it may be known that these things do not
concern us, nor yet help our adversaries, Diverse sorts of confession
I will set down what confession we hold, and how it is to be made, and in
what respect. First, we allow the public confession of the whole Church,
confessing themselves to be sinful before God, Neh. 9, 4.5, etc. Secondly, we
hold the private confession of every one, pouring out his own heart before God
in his private and secret prayers, Lu. 18.13. Thirdly, we maintain the
confession made to the Church, when any person has openly offended the
Congregation by any notorious crime and is for the same excommunicated. This
does testify the conversion and repentance of such as have fallen. Lastly, we
teach that confession ought to be made to our neighbor for the offenses which
we commit one against another, when we have upon any occasion wronged and
offended him: and therefore our Savior says, Math 5. Mat. 5, 23, 24.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee: leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy
way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
These kinds of confession we confess and believe: but what makes all this
for the whispering confession used in popery? and judged to be necessary to
salvation? A tirrannous law, binding us to reckon up every one of our sins in
the ear of a Priest, as if forgiveness of our sins stood in this? Whereas
we say and are not afraid to avouch, that this confession pressed upon men to
be made of all sins to a popish Priest upon pain of damnation is no better
the^ another Inquisition. Would we then know what this shrift is? and how to
esteem of it? and what effects it works? It is the mocking of God, What
popish shrift is.
the invention of the devil, the pride of the Clergy, the pick-pursse of the
people, the rack of the Conscience, the shame and reproach of the offender,
the bewrayer and discouerer of the secrets of Princes and states, the pillar of
popery, the ape of repentance, the nurserie of despair, the cherisher of
uncleanness, and to be short, the bawd of all sins. It gets a pardon for
all that is past, it gives free passage for such as are present, and
purchases a privilege for them that are to come. Thus sin is made no sin,
it is a light matter, that no man need to trouble himself for it, for as much
as the Priest may pardon him with a word speaking. Wherefore, albeit this
institution be full of humane wisdom and policy for the upholding and
strengthening of the kingdom of Antichrist, yet there is no title in the word
of God to prove it or confirm it. I confess indeed it was a custom
sometimes in the Church of Constantinople, Sozomen. Eccl. ^^^^ter. lib. 7 cap.
17.
but when it happened that a noble matron was dishonored and dishonested by a
certain Deacon of unclean life: Nectarius the Bishop of that place by the
consent of others, did abolish it out of the Church. What would he have done
if he had lived in the times and places of popery, where such examples are not
strange but common.

If one fast were of sufficient force to thrust it out of that Church,
doubtless many hundred presidents that might be produced not inferior unto
it, ought to serve as a whip to whippe and scourge it out of other Churches,
and as a strong bar to keep it out for ever, that it never get footing and
en^rance into it again. Hence it is that the Church remained in the liberty of
Confession twelve hundred years, and had no snare to entangle the conscience
laid upon it until the Council of Lateran, in which the law of auricular
Confession was first of all inacted: whereby it is come to pass that they have
secret intelligence of all secrets, for by this occasion they know the hearts,
affections, and dispositions of all persons: and by this means they find an
easy way to enrich that covetous and ambitious See, with the riches and
revenues of the world: and by them both arises a twofold benefit, because
both they know how to shift for themselves, and to prevent a mischief before
it come upon them. But to leave these, we exhort men to make Confession of
their sins to GOD, the only beholder of our thoughts and hearts, who has
promised to forgive them: and will never vp-braide us with them.

And herein we do no otherwise then the holy and ancient fathers of the
Church did before us, who send the people from men to God, from the earth to
heaven, from the fellow servants to the common master of all. It was well
said of Augustine, What have I to do with men, Confess lib. ^0. cap 3.
Curiosum genus ad cognoscendum vitam. alicita^.
that I should make confession to them, as if they could heal all my sores? It
is a curious kind of people, to search into other men's lives, but most
slothful to reform and amend their own The like we might say of Chrysostom
who is plentiful in this argument. I do not compel thee to confess thy
sins to others. And again, If thou be ashamed to confess them to any man
because thou have sinned, say them daily in thine own soul. Homil. 2. in
Psalm. 50 ser. de poenit. Hom. 4. de Laza,
I do not bid the confess them to thy fellow servant who may cast them in thy
teeth, but confess them unto God who is able to heal them. In another place
he says: Why should we be ashamed to confess our sins, that he may pardon
them? Does God therefore command them to be confessed, that after the manner
of men he might punnish us? He does it not to punn^sh us, but that he might
pardon us. I will allege one testimony more and then conclude. Homil. de
incomprehens. natura dei.
I do not lead thee as it were into an open stage of thy fellow servants, I
do not compel thee to uncover thy sins to men, unfold thy conscience
before God, show thou thy wounds to the Lord the best Physician, and crave of
him to heal them. Thus ought we to do, let us fly to God when we want help,
who is the God of all mercy and the father of all consolation. And when we
mind to come to the holy Communion of the body and blood of Christ; let us not
think to fit our selves unto it by a foolish numbering up of our sins to men,
but not to God: of custom, but not of conscience: by observing the traditions
of the Church, but not by seeking to obtain pardon of our offenses. The order
which we ought to observe in the examination of our selves is laid down unto
us in the Chapters following. Thus much touching the first reproof.

The second reproof 2. Reproof,
serves to condemn all such as are very precise and curious in searching into
the lives and conuersations of others, that say, stand aparte and come not
near me, for I am holier then thou. These abstain from the Communion, because
of the presence of evil men, and cannot be persuaded to take the Supper with
them. Such as are of the separation reproved for not joining with us in the
worship of God.


In the former part of this Book we have answered sundry obections which
sundry persons allege for themselves why they refuse to join with the people
of God among us that come with love and zeal to his Table. I have not to do
with them in this place: they were for the most part careless men, secure in
the matters of God, and senseless in all good things: but those that now we are
to encounter withal pretend greater care and conscience in the worship of God
then our selves.

These are they of the separation, who have left our Church as no Church, and
abhor our Sacraments as no Sacraments, and revile our Ministers as no
Ministers. And yet if they would confess the truth and give God the glory,
they must for the most part of them acknowledge that they received to believe
in our Church, and were begotten a new by our ministry, and have reaped
strength of faith by our Sacraments, if they may be called ours which are
delivered by us, but instituted by God. Nevertheless, I wish and desire from
the bottom of my heart, that our Church were once so happy as to separate
notorious offenders, and to cut off all occasion of this question. But because
we cannot yet obtain this mercy through our sins, and that through the
iniquity of the times evil men prevail: we must not consider so much what
ought to be among us, as how far we ought to submit our selves: neither
should we fix our eyes so much upon that which is wanting and missing in our
Church, as what great gifts and good things GOD has vouchsafed unto us and
bestowed upon us: we confess we are not in all points that which we should
be, howbeit by the grace of our GOD we are far from that which they charge
us withal: But let us see what they object.

1 Cor. 5.11.
First, they allege that we are forbidden to eat and drink at our common Tables
with them, 1, Cor, 5, From hence they reason from an unequal comparison of the
less to the greater, that if we may not do that which is less then we may
not eat and drink with them at the LORDS Table, which is the greater.

I answer,

Again, they allege the sentence of the Prophet, Come Esaias 52.11. 2, Cor. 6,
17.18. Esaias 52, 11. 2 Cor. ^, 17. Answer.


I answer three things: First the place must be understood not so much of the
separation by place, as by affection: not so much of the company, as of the
coruptions of others.

Secondly Paul speaks of the communion of Idolatry, which is nothing at all
to the holy Communion, which is commanded unto all Christians without any such
limitation as these would bring in. For they can never prove any such
exception: to wit, that we may abstain if we see any offer themselves to
receive which do seem to us unworthy.

Lastly, here is mention of such as were strangers from the faith, and did not
so much as profess the Christian Religion: and therefore it serves not their
purpose who refuse to communicate at the Table of the Lord with such as embrace
Christianity, and make profession of the Gospel, albeit pe^aduenture their
life be not answerable thereunto: so that they abuse this place who will by no
means be brought to come to the Supper of the Lord* when they perceive those
to have access unto it whom they account wicked and profane. Joseph and Mary
frequented the sacrifices in the public assemblies at Jerusalem at the solemn
feasts, Luke 2. So did Christ himself, as appears in many places of the
Gospel. The Church was then full of scandals, as a body full of sores, but
because he had no calling nor commission to remedy those evils, he chose rather
to join himself with the company of the wicked, the^ to separate himself
from the Sacraments and other holy things. Thus it was with Simeon, Hannah,
Zachary, Elizabeth, and other of the faithful. There are two certain rules,
with which I will conclude: First, that our being in company with the wicked,
unwillingly, not willingly: by compulsion, not by free election, shall not hurt
us. It is our delight in them, and desire of them, and striving to be with
them, that brings danger unto us: but if it be against our will, there is no
fear of being infected by them. The second rule is this, that we are greatly
hurt in our salvation, and wounded in our souls by separation from the
exercises of our religion, and therefore there is no just cause why we should
leave the fruit of the one for the presence of the other. It is a part of Gods
spiritual worship to hear his word, and indeed one of the principal
services we can perform unto him, yet may a Christian lawfully hear it where
there are Infidels and unbelievers, yea not only communicate with them, but be
glad that they will vouchsafe to communicate with us. And touching joining in
prayer, and participation of the Sacraments, if it were in our choice and
liberty to avoid them, we might not join with them, nor make one among them:
but because we have no power nor authority to make any separation, we ought
not to refuse or renounce the service of God which is enjoined and commanded
unto us: and let us take heed, least while we go about to separate our selves
from the wicked, we separate our selves from God himself. For there is no man
that forsakes his worship, but after a sort forsakes God, seeing that to
cleave unto him and not to his worship is impossible, and to divide between
these which are always joined together, is to turn him into an Idol. And
thus much touching Examination in general.

CHAP. XVI. Of the knowledge of God: the first part of Examination.
AS we have waighed the necessity of preparing and examining our selves: so let
us consider the manner how it is to be performed. Such as will in an holy
manner prepare themselves Four points required in Examination of our selves.
to celebrate the Lords Supper to the glory of God, the discharge of their
duties, and comfort of their own souls, must diligently acquaint themselves
with these four points, with knowledge, faith, repentance, and reconciliatio^
to those whom they have offended. First, it is required of all persons that
come to this Sacrament, to know the grounds of religion, and understand the
doctrine of the Sacraments. Secondly, to believe in Christ, and to look for
sal^ation in him alone, inasmuch as there is no other name under heaven by
which we must be saved. So then we must come with faith, which is the hand to
apprehend Christ. Thirdly, to abhor and detest our sins, to hate them with an
unfeigned hatred as our deadly and most dangerous enemies, and to have godly
sorrow for them which may cause repentance not to be repented of. Lastly, to
love our brethren truly and sincerely, yea even our enemies. If we find not
these things in our selves, we must carefully use all holy means appointed for
this purpose, to begin them in us: otherwise our estate will prove to be
fearful and dangerous. We must with all sincerity, conscience, and zeal, use
prayer, the word read and preached, conferrence, meditation, and such like
helps as may further them in us. If we do find them in us, though feeble and
in great want and weakness, we are not to abstain from the Sacrament, but to
come thereunto to seek strength of faith and increase of obedience. Wherefore,
Mat. 11, 28*
our Savior calls such unto him, Come to me all ye that are weary and sore
laden, and I will ease you: take my yoke on you, and ye shall find rest upon
your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my burden it light. And chap. 12. A
bruised Mat. 12, 26
reeds shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench till he bring
forth judgment unto victory.

Touching the first, we are to observe, The 1. part of examination is knowledge
of Gods word.
that such as will come aright to the lords supper, must have the knowledge of
Gods word, which is the foundation and groundwork of faith. We must know
what to believe, and must learn the doctrine of salvation out of the
Scripture. Our Savior Christ, in that heavenly prayer which he made a little
before his passion, uses these words to his Father, John, 17, 3.
This is eternal life to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ. We must know how miserable all men are of themselves,
that we are separated from god, the children of wrath by nature as well as
others, and the very firebrarnds of hell. They that want this knoledge, cannot
judge aright of the parts and uses of this Sacrament, nor desire this heavenly
meat which nourishes to eternal life. So then, knowledge must necessarily go
before faith: for it is the nature of faith to believe that which it knows,
and therefore where there is small knowledge, there can be but little faith:
and where there is no knowledge, there can be no faith: acording Romans 10, 17.
to the doctrine of the Apostle, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. The knowledge required of us when we approach to this Sacrament,
stands in these two What particular points ^re necess^tie to be known o^ all that com to the Communion.
points: first, in the knowledge of God, secondly in the knowledge of our
selves. In these two branches stands the first part of examination. And these
two points are so nearly joined and knit together, that no man can thoroughly
know God, unless he know himself: and no man can have the perfect knowledge
of himself, except he know God in whom Acts 17, 28
he lives, moves, and has his being. Under these two heads, many particular
points are containd, necessary to be known of those that offer themselves to
be partakers of this Sacrament. First, that there is only one God, that has
made himself known in three persons, John 5, 7.
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Secondly, that God made man and all
other creatures good, and governs all things well. Thirdly, man did fall
through the enticement of the Devil, and his own wilful disobedience in
breaking the commandments of God. Fourthly, there are ten commandments
divided into two tables: whereof the four first commandments concern our
duties to God, the six last our duties toward our neighbor. Fifthly, we cannot
keep these commandments, nor any one of them, but we break them daily, in
motion, in thought, in word, and in deed: the breach whereof deserves Deuteronomy, 27,
25
the curse of God, that is, all miseries in this life, death in the end of this
life, and hell fire after this life. Sixthly; there is no means or remedy in
our selves or in any creature but only in Jesus Christ the eternal Son of
God, Luke 1, 35
who is God and Man: God that he might ouercom death, and Man that he might die
for our sins. He has pacified Gods wrath, fulfilled the righteousness of
the Law, sanctified our nature, adopted us to be the children of God, and
makes our duties (though weak) acceptable unto his Father. Seuen^hly, all
have not deliverance by him, but only such as believe in Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 30.
whose obedience and righteousness is made ours by a lively faith, whereby we
are persuaded that through him our sins are forgiven, and we made the
children of God. Eighthly, faith is a gift of God, applying Christ and all his
merits particularly to our selves, and teaching that he is a Savior unto us.
Ninthly, being saved by Christ through faith, Luke, 1, 74*
we may not live as we lift: this unspeakable mercy teaches us to deny all
ungodliness, and all worldly and sinful lusts, to live soberly,
righteouslie, and godly in this present evil world, and to walk in newness
of life, Ephesia, 6, 5
because no unrighteous person shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Tenthly, this Faith which brings forth a reformed life, is wrought within
our hearts by the Holie-ghost Rom, 10, 14.
through the preaching of the word, being truly expounded, and profitably
applied with doctrine, consutation, exhortation, correction, reformation, and
consolation: and it is increased besides, by reading, praying, and receiving of
the Sacraments. Eleuenthly touching prayer, we have a perfect platform left
us by Mat 6, 9.
Christ in the Gospel, which contains 6. petitions, the three first
concerning the glory of God, and the three last concerning the necessities of
our own bodies and souls. Twelfely, the Sacraments are another help to
strengthen and increase faith, which are outward signs and seals ordained of
God, to assure us that Christ and all his saving graces are given unto us.
These are two in number. Baptism, the Sacrament of our regeneration and new
birth, assures us by the washing of water, that our sins are forgiven by the
blood of Christ, and we borne anew to God. The Lords Supper assures us, that
by bread and wine given and received according to Gods ordinance, Christ is
given us to be our spiritual nourishment to everlasting life.

These grounds of religion must be known and understood, that we may learn
how wretched and miserable we are by nature, and what remedy God has ordained
for our deliverance. We shall never feel the sweetness of Gods mercy, until
we find the greatness of our own misery. We cannot perceive how greatly we
stand in need of Christ, until we know our own woeful and wretched estate by
reason of sin. Such then as are ignorant in these necessary points of Christian
religion, and especially in the doctrine of both the Sacraments, can never come
aright unto them, can never show forth the Lords death, can never discern his
body, but blindly run on to the danger of their own souls. Wherefore it
stands all men upon, to desire the sincere milk of the word Pet. 2, 10
that they may grow thereby, to seek after knowledge, as for silver, and after
understanding as precious stones. A loathing stomach never well digesteth the
meat that is put into it: and he that is full, despises the Hony-combe. What
is the reason that they remain blind in the matters of God and their own
salvation, and as brute beasts in understanding? Surely, because they desire
not the ways of God, they regard not his fear, they contemn knowledge, as
Esau did the blessing, and the Israelites did their Manna. For no man truly
desired the knowledge of God and of godliness unfeignedly, but he had the
means offered unto him at one time or other. Cornelius desiring to be
thoroughly instructed in the way of salvation, was directed by the Angel to
send for Peter, Act 11, 13.
Who should speak words unto him, whereby he and his household should be saved.
Thus David going the way of al flesh, instructs his son Solomon, 1 Chr. 28, 9.
Thou Solomon know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect
heart and with a willing mind: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but
if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. This is it also which the
Prophet proclaimed, 2 Chro. 15. O Asa and all Judah and Benjamin, hear ye me:
the Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if ye seek him, he will be
found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Likewise the
Evangelist teaches, that when Zaccheus sought to see Jesus, he showed himself
unto him, he entered into his house, and that which is more into his heart, Luke
19, 3. etc,
and that day salvation was begun in him and in his family, being made the
child of Abraham. Hereby is fulfilled that which the Prophet speaks, Psalm.
145. The Lord is near Psalm. 145.18 etc.
unto all that call upon him, even to all that call upon him in truth: he will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he will also hear their cry, and
will save them. Where he teaches, that if we truly desite knowledge, we shall
effectually obtain it. God will not be wanting to us, if we be not wanting to
ourselves. When the Eunuch came to Jerusalem, and exercised himself in the
Scriptures, in reading the Prophet for increase of knowledge, as he sat in his
chatiot: did not the Lord direct Philip to go to him, Act. 8, ^8 ^9
and ioyn himself to his chariot, by whom he was farther instructed and
baptized? So shall it be with all that hunger and thirst after the doctrine of
godliness, they shall not be left destitute, but be filled with the knoledge
thereof to their endless comfort. The hand of God is not shortened, he is as ready
to help us as ever he was, Mat 5 6.
according to the promise of Christ, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Hereunto tends the general
promise, delivered in the general words of him that is the author of grace,
Mat. 7, 7, 8
A^k and ye shall rece^ue, sick and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened
unto you: for whosoever asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to
him that knocks, it shall be opened.

Here we have an excellent comfort and encouragement, to consider that our holy
endeavors shall not be in vain in the Lord.

CHAP. XVII. Of faith in Christ, the second part of Examination.
HItherto we have spoken of knowledge which is the first part of this
examination. Now a man may have knowledge, and yet want faith. Wherefore the
The second part of examination, is to prove whether we have faith or not.
next point which we are to try and prove, is our faith in Christ. For every
man receives so much as he believes he receives, according as our Savior
speaks to the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15, O woman, great is thy faith, be it
unto thee Mat. 15, 23. and 9, 29.
as thou desire. And the Apostle says to the same effect, Heb. 4, 2.
Unto us was the Gospel preached, as also unto them, but the word that they
heard, profitted the^ not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it. All those are worthy receivers, that ground themselves on the free
favor of God in Christ Jesus, believe themselves to be delivered by him from
eternal damnation, and desire daily to go forward in godliness. Hereunto
comes the exhortation of Paul, 2 Cor. 13. Prove your selves, 2 Cor. 13, 5.
whether ye be in the faith: examine your selves: know ye not your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be refused? This true faith is the
mouth of the soul, whereby we receive Christ crucified to our salvation.
Wherefore, it is required of us, not only to have knowledge and understanding
in the mystery of our redemption: but likewise a justifying faith, What a true
faith is.
which is a wonderful gift of God, whereby the elect do apply Christ and the
saving promises of the Gospel to themselves particularly. We must know Gal. 1,
4.
the purpose and ordinance of God, appointing and setting apart Jesus Christ to
be the person in The hand^ of faith what they are.
whom and by whom he has decreed and determined the salvation of all the elect.
Again, we must have a persuasion of Gods true meaning toward us, in offering
salvation through Christ, and that all sufficiency and ability is in him to
save us, whereupon we shall feel a sweet and comfortable resting upon him in
whom God means to save us. These are the hands whereby we apply Christ to
our selves, both by knowing that he gave himself for our sins according to
the will of GOD even our Father, and by relying on his all sufficiency to
perform that high work of redemption whereunto he was sealed and ordained,

This faith is not borne and bred with us, but is wrought in us by the
Holy Ghost, 2 These. 3, 2.
who is therefore called The Spirit of Faith. Except he give it, no man can
have it: it is natural to us to presume on the one side, and to despair on the
other side: but to believe (which is seated in the midst) is supernatural.
To have a dead faith comes of our selves, but to have a lively faith
proceeds from God, to whom we ascribe all glory and praise. Now the proper
office and function of this justifying faith stands in apprehending,
receiving, and laying hold upon Christ and all his benefits. Even as the hand
stretched forth lays hold upon a thing, and pulls the same unto it, so
does faith apply the saving promises of the Gospel to the soul, as the
Apostle teaches Gal. 3. That the blessing of Abraham might come unto the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Gal 3, 14
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith.

Where he teaches that we embrace and receive the precious promises of
salvation and forgiveness of our sins by faith, believing the same to belong
unto our selves. The Scripture calls Christ a redeemer indefinitely; Job
calls him his redeemer particularly, Job, 19, 25. I know that my Redeemer
lives. The Scripture sets out the Lord as the God of his Church. Thomas
upon a special feeling of Christ's savor toward him, Ioh 22.28.
acknowledges him to be his Lord and God. John 20. Thou art my Lord and my
God. The Scripture propounds Christ as the Savior of his people, the blessed
virgin takes this as spoken unto her self, Luke 1, ^^.
and accounts him her Savior, My spirit rejoices in God my Savior. The
Scripture makes Christ the Lord and Protector of his church: Elizabeth makes
a special Luke 11, 43.
application thereof, calling him her Lord. Luke 1 Whence comes this to me,
that the mother of my Lord should come unto me. It is an Article of our holy
and Christian faith to believe the forgiveness of sins: this must every one
believe, this must every one hold, this must every one apply, Math. 5, 2.
as Christ did to the sick man of the Palsy, Matthew. 9. Son be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.

It is the hardest thing in the world thus to believe, whether we respect
Christ or our selves. An hardthing to believe.
It is an easy matter for a man, when he neither knows nor feels the
burden of sin, to say he has faith, and believes in Gods mercy: but when
Satan shall sist him, when his own heart shall accuse him, when sin shall
lie heavy upon his soul, when the unsupportable and insufferable anger of God
shall press his conscience to the nethermost hell, and the flame thereof
consume his bones, and turn his moisture Psalm 32, 4.
into the drought of Summer: if then he can stand upright, and build himself
Math, 7, 24.
upon the rock, when the floods come, when the winds blow and beat upon his
house, and when the ground shakes under his seete, this man with boldness and
confidence may truly say, and seal it up for an everlasting truth, My
sins are forgiven me. For if then he can comfort himself in his God, and
apply his gracious mercies to his own faint heart, and cry out: Job. 13, 15.
Though the Lord would kill me, yet still will I trust in him: this is the
property of a sound faith, against which the strongest gates of hell shall not
prevail.

This appears evidently unto us in the example of Abraham, To. 4, 17, etc
who believed that of his old, weak, withered, and as it were dead body,
should spring children Genes* 1^, 5
like to the sand on the Sea shore, and like the Stars of Heaven for
multitude, and that he should have a seed in whom himself and all the
nations of the world should be blessed. If he had consulted with flesh and
blood, what Discourses might a natural man allege to hinder the crediting
of this promise? yet he doubted not, he disputes not the matter, but believed
that the weak should be made strong, that the barren should be made
fruitful, and a joyful mother of children, that the dead should be made a
live to dwell with a family, springing out of his own body, which was to
reason as unlikely and impossible, as for a dry and dead tree pulled up by the
roots, to bud, bear, and bring forth plentiful fruit. So what can be more
difficult and hard then for us to believe and be persuaded, that by the death
of Christ, we shall have everlasting life? By his shame and dishonor we shall
have glory and praise? That by his wounds and reproaches we shall have the curing
and healing of our sores? That by his agonies and bloody sweat, we shall have
peace and rest? By his condemnation we shall have salvation? Is not this after
a sort, in hell to see heaven? In cursing, to see blessing? In humiliation, to
see exaltation? In death, to see life? In condemnation, to lay hold of
salvation? In feeling of sin, to believe the pardon of sins? Lastly, in our
unrighteousness and misery, to be both righteous and accepted to eternal
life: and in the breach of the law, to believe the fulfilling of the law?

This is indeed to have the saving faith Tit. 1, 1.
of Gods elect. And to say that this is an easy matter, or a small thing is
plainly to betray and discover, that we never knew what true faith means.

For this faith, let every one of us labor that we may Gal. 2, 20.
specially and particularly apprehend the promises, as the Apostle declares,
Galathians 2. I am crucified w th Christ, but I live; yet not I any more, but
Chrict lives in me: and in that that I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith in the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. And
again, 2 Timothy, 4, ^.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
hence forth is la^d up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge, shall give unto me at that day.

Where we see a special application to himself of the benefits of CHRIST, and
therefore it is not sufficient to believe that Christ came into the world, that
he was crucified, died, was buried, rose again from the dead, and ascended
into heaven: for this is a general faith, this is the faith of the reprobates,
yea the Devils know it, and have as great a part and portion therein as we,
yet they tremble at the remembrance of their judgment to come, as James
shows, James 2, 19
Thou beleeuest there it one God, thou do well: the devils also believe and
tremble. There is more required of us, then to believe the histories and
doctrine of the Scriptures to be true, and to make an outward profession of
it, to understand and assent unto the covenant of grace made by Christ, that it
is certain and shall be verified in the members of the church: we must besides
this general and confused faith, apply and appropriate unto our selves the
promises of salvation. We must not only see them a far off, but feel them
in our hearts. We must believe not only that Christ is a Savior, but that he
is our Savior and Redeemer.

Thus we must every one of us for his own part make prop^r to himself all
the riches and graces that are in Christ Jesus, because in giving himself to
us, he gives all his benefi^s: in that he is God, he makes us after a sort 2
Peter 1, 4^
partakers of the divine nature, being heir of all things in heaven and earth,
1 Cor 3, 22.
and Lord of the world, he makes all things ours, whether life or death,
whether things present or things to com, recovering in him the possession of
those things which we lost ^n Adam, being the beloved son of the father, he
makes us acceptable and well-pleasing unto him: leading captivity captive, and
giving gifts Ephesians. 4, 8.
to men, having Dominion over the devil, sin, hell, the world, the flesh,
and all our enemies, he protecteth us that they cannot overthrow us, and has
Reuelat. 1, 6
made us Kings and Priests to God even his father: in that he is happy and
immortal, he makes us partakers of his blessedness and immortality.

When we shall severally and particularly apply all the actions and benefits of
Christ our Lord unto our selves, we may boldly come to the Lords Table, where
we shall find Christ, and enjoy him to our endless comfort, knowing that we
live always by faith, but not always by feeling.

Neither are we to abstain and hang back from coming to the Supper, nor to
despair of our selves, nor to be too much cast down, when we feel sundry
defectes and wants in our faith, For There are 2. degrees of true faith.
there is a weak and feeble says, which is yet a true faith as well as the
strong faith. There are two degrees of faith profitable to be known, and
comfortable to be considered.

The weak faith, what a weak Faith is.
is an earnest and vnsaigned desire to be reconciled unto God in Christ, which
willing desire in us God accepts as the deed it self, he accounts the
desire of faith as faith it self: the desire of reconciliation and
forgiveness of sins by the death of Christ, shall be available to work out
our atonement and redemption. The strong faith is a full persuasion and
assurance What a strong faith is
of the mercies of God when the faithful can truly say with the Apostle, Romans
8, 38, Roma. 8, 38.
39. I am persuaded that neither life nor death, nor things present nor things
to come, neither Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, neither het^hth nor
depth, nor any other creature shall separate us from the love of God which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. To this assurance we labor to come, and in this
assurance we endeavor to grow and to go on from says to faith, and from
strength to strength, until we learn to stand fast as it were upon the
battlements of heaven, and to set the world at defiance, and to tread the
earth under our feet, saying with the Apostle, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? Or who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

This is the greatest measure and highest degree of faith* this is the top,
strength, and full ripeness of faith: here unto we are to strive and
endeavor, and never to give rest unto our souls, until we be resolved and
settled in our consciences, that all our sins are assurredly pardoned, and we
accepted to everlasting life. This greatness of faith was in Abraham, Romans 4,
20
who was not weak but strengthened in faith, being fully persuaded, He that
had promised was able also to do it. All that live in the bosom of the Church
do not attain to this full measure of a perfect faith: but even as it is in
the estate of the body, we are Babes before we come to be men of ripe years,
first we be weak before we be strong, 1 cor* 3, 1* ^.
first we are fed with milk before we can digest strong meat. We see Mar.
4 2^.
Corn first in the grass, then in the blade, before it come to the stalk,
and have ripe corn in the ear. There must be in all things a beginning
before there can be a proceeding to perfection. The tree sends forth his
tender branches, and puts forth his leaves before his fruit comes. So is
it with every Christian man and woman, first they are babes in Christ, and have
certain seeds and beginnings of faith springing in them to eternal life:
afterward they grow from strength to strength, from grace to grace, from degree
to degree, Roma 1, 17.
and from faith to faith until they come to a full persuasion and assurance
without wavering, Psalm 23, 6
which arises after many experiences of Gods manifold mercies and favors in
the course of our lives, as we see Psalm. 23. Doubtless kindness and mercy
shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall remain a long season in
the house of the Lord. Wherefore let us not be dismayed and discouraged when
our faith is feeble, for a feeble faith will apply Christ as well as a strong
faith: it will draw Christ home to dwell in our hearts, Ephesians. 3, 17.
through whom we shall not perish but have everlasting life. He that had but a
weak eye and a dim sight to behold the brazen Serpent in the wilderness, Numb,
^ 1, ^.
was healed from the deadly stinging of the fiery serpents, as well as he that
saw clearly and perfectly afar off. He that has but a leprous and sickly
hand is able to hold that which is offered unto it, as well as a sound and
strong hand. So he that has a little faith in the son of God, shall never have
his salvation denied, nor forgiveness of his sins kept from him, if with an
humble heart he pray to God to have them pardoned.

The Apostles believed, that Christ was the Savior of the world: Luke 24, ^5
yet they were ignorant of his death and resurrection, which are the chief
means of salvation, and they are said to be men of little faith. So our
Savior, when the Luke 17, 5, 6
Disciples had asked increase of their faith, declares that if our faith be in
quantity but as a grain of Mustard Seed, it should be powerful and
effectual, seeing he will not Mark 2, 23
quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised Reed, but cherish the lost
spark and measure of grace given unto us from above. This likewise was the
faith of that Father, whose child was possessed with a dumb and deaf spirit,
when Christ said to him, Math. 7, 7, 8
If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes: straight
way he cried with tears saying, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief. Christ
does not reject him for his weakness of knoledge and faith, to teach that we
should not despair, or be dismaide, when we find wavering, wantes, distrust,
and imperfection in our selves, but rather confessing our frailty with that
Father in this place, pray to be strengthened, and to have our Faith increased.
For, whosoever unfeignedly desires any grace of God tending to salvation, shall
receive it: if he continue Reu 21, 6.
knocking at the gate of his Mercy, it shall be opened, and his prayer shall
be granted, as Christ has promised, Phil 1, 6.
I will give to him that is a thirst of the Well of the water of life. Thus, if
we long after the graces wanting unto us, as the earth after a great drowth
for the comfortable showers of refreshing rain, using the means appointed of
God to attain them, as earnest prayer, reverent attending on the continual
hearing of his word, diligent receiving of the Sacraments, being careful to
give honor and glory to him for his gifts we have already of his only mercy
obtained and enjoyed, we shall be satisfied and replenished: for then He that
has begun his good work in us, will perfect the same in our hearts until the
day of Jesus Christ. Thus much of faith the second part of true examination,
which is the instrument whereby we lay hold upon Christ, and are made lively
members of him: without which whosoever come to the Lords Supper, depart away
without fruit and comfort: because of an action without faith, comes an end
without fruit.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Repentance, the third part of examination.
THe next thing in this trial to be considered is Repentance from dead works
required of all that come to the Lords table.
repentance, which is, a renewing of the mind, a change of the heart* a
turning of the soul, and a reformation of our life and affections. As
knowledge is the beginning, and as it were the very forerunner of faith, like
a Messenger going before his Master to prepare for his coming: so repentance
is an especial fruit of faith* without which, whosoever draws near to the
Lords Table, prophaneth the Sacrament, and departs without comfort.

For, it is an altering of our lives and conuersations unto God, joined with a
godly sorrow and detestation of all sin, together with an unfeigned love and
desire of righteousness. This appears in the change of the whole man, of
our thoughts, affections, meditations and delights: in all these the old man
with his deceitful lusts must be put off, and the new man must be put on, Ephe
^^, 24
which after God is created unto righteousness and true holiness. This duty
is taught in diverse places of the Scripture. Heereunto come the words of the
Prophet Esaiah, When ^say 1, 12.
ye come to appear before me, who required this at your hands, to tread in
my Courts? Bring no mo Oblations in vain: Incense is an abhom nation unto me,
I cannot suffer your New Moons, nor Sab^othes, nor solemn days, (it is
iniquity) nor assemblies. And when ye shall stretch out your hands I will hide
mine eyes from you: and though ye make many prayers I will not hear, for
your hands are full of blood. Wash you make you clean, take away the evil of
your works from before mine eyes: cease to do evil learn to do well, etc.
And Chap. 66. He that kills a Bullock, ^say 66, 3.
is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, is as if he cut off a
Dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he offered Swines flesh: he
that burns incense, as if he blessed an Idol: yea they have chosen their
own ways, and their Soul delights in their abominations. Whereby the
prophet means, that God accepts no sacrifices without faith and repentance.

This also was figured and shadowed out, by washing the Garments, and changing
the attire of such as came with Gen, 35, ^. 3
their Oblations unto God, and prepared themselves unto his service. Th^^ Jacob
commanded, when he reformed his household, and went up with them to Bethell the
house of GOD. Thus Moses prepared the people, before the Law was delivered in
Mount Sinai. And heereunto the Prophet David allude^h, Psalm. 26. I will wash
mine hands in innocence, O Lord, and ^^a^p^sseth (...). As if he should say, I
will endeavor to live most uprightly toward thee and toward men, and so come and
offer sacrifices at thine Altar.

Wherefore, such as feel not themselves to have penitent hearts, to be humbled
and grieved for their sins, to sigh and groan under the burden of them, to
tremble at God, judgments, cannot come aright to this holy Supper, but eat and
drink certain judgment to themselves. The broken and contrite heart is the
pathway to heaven, 1 Cor 7, 10.11.
and an inseperable companion of repentance. This the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor.
7. Godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented off, but
worldly sorrow causes death: but behold this thing, that ye have been godly
sorry, what great ^^^e it has wrought in you: yea, what clearing of your
selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what fear: yea, what desire: yea, what
zeal: yea, what punishment.

Here be the Signs whereby to examine our repentance.
notes and tokens whereby we may try our repentance, whether it be sincere or
not. It has these signs to discern it, a care to leave that sin into which
we are fallen, otherwise we have not repented, as Act. 2. They which had
crucified the Lord of life, and delivered him into the hands of sinners, were
pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter and to the other Act, 1. 37.38
Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? And Peter said unto them, Amend
your lives, and save your selves from this froward generation. The other signs
of repentance are a confession of our sins to God, and a condemning our selves
for them: an holy and inward anger against our selves for our carelessness in
looking to our own ways: a fear nor so much of Gods judgments, as least we
fall into the same sins again, and so offend our merciful Father: a desire
ever after to please God with all our hearts: and last of all a renewing and
punishing of our own souls for our offenses committed against him. Now to the
end we may repent aright, and sit in judgment of our selves, according to the
form of God; justice: it shall be needful for us In examining our selves, we
must (...) the order of the Comandements. Command. 1.
to examine our selves by the ten words of the law, and out of the same to
frame ten several encitements against our selves, whereby we shall find a
great defect of righteousness, a great spoil of obedience, a great access of
disobedience, and a great heap of all kind of corruptions. This then may
serve and suffice for the true examination of our selves. We must consider and
confess that we have not loved and feared God, we have not believed and
depended upon him in all estates as we ought, but have oftentimes feared and
loved the creatures above him, we have preferred a filthy pleasure before him,
we have doubted of his promises through unbelief, and relied upon an arm of
flesh and blood. We have been careless day with feasting, playing, sporting,
drinking, idleness, and other vanities. We have not yielded reverence to
superiors for conscience sake, nor been affrayed to offend them as God has
commanded: we have not always spoken

Touching the sixth Commandment, we have not loved with such uprightness,
soundness, justice, sincerity, and truth as God requires: we have been given
to oppression, covetousness, and hard dealing one toward another, and not
considered that godliness is great gain, if a man be contented with that he
has, that if we have food and raiment, we must be content, and can carry
nothing with us out of this world, we have not at all times been given to
mercy and compassion toward the poor, for the maintenance of them and their
families, especially in times of famine, derth, pestilence, sickness, and
other mortalities and necessities.



Exodus 10, 17
Thou shall not lust, requiring a pure heart toward our neighbors, holy
cogitations of the spirit, and a continual conflict against evil affections
and lusts of the flesh.

Thus must every one of us araigne and endite our selves. Thus we must accuse
our selves, and condemn our own works. Thus we must search our own ways,
confessing that if John 3, 20
our own hearts accuse us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things. Then let us appeal to the throne of grace, let us desire salvation in
Christ for his mercies sake, let us cast all our comfort upon him, covering our
faces through shame of our sins that are past, humbling our selves through
grief of them that are present, and working out our salvation with a fear of
that which may come hereafter.

If thus we judge our selves, God will acquit us: if thus we condemn our
selves, God will justify us: if we accuse our selves, he will discharge us: if
we be displeased with our selves for our sins, God will be well pleased with
us, and cloth us with the righteousness of Christ. But if we stand upon our
own righteousness and worthiness, if we say we have need of nothing, if we
flatter and deceive our selves, comparing our selves with our selves or with
others, and not with the rule of Gods word, God will examine us, and sit in
judgment upon us. If he enter into Psalm. 130, ^,
judgment with us no flesh shall be justified in his sight: for if thou, O
Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? He will be
revenged of our sins, and bring many plagues upon us: he will send sundry
diseases upon our bodies, and a troubled spirit upon our souls, he will add
one punishment to another until we repent, as he teaches by many examples in
the scriptures.

The Apostle says, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
1 Cor. 11, 29 30, 32.
judgment to himself. For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and
many sleep: for if we would judge our selves we should not be judged. But
when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world. So the Israelites being myraculously fed by the
Lords own hand, lusted and became unthankful, and therefore while the meat
was yet in their mouths, Psa. 78, 30 32
The wrath of God fell down upon them, and slew the strongest of the^, and
smote down the chosen men of Israel.

Judas chosen to be one of the twelve, John 13, 27.
coming unworthily to the Passover, Satan entered further into him, wroght in
him his own confusion, and brought upon him fwift dam nation. The ghest in the
Gospel, Mat. 22, 22, 13.
that pressed unto the supper without his wedding garment, was taken
speechelesse, bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Let no man therefore put off, and defer his
repentance from day to day, least he draw upon himself final destruction of
soul and body, and find his heart exceedingly hardened through continuance in
sin: but while 2 Cor. 6, 2.
the acceptable time is, let us both purpose and endeavor to forsake our evil
ways, our wicked works, and all known sins revealed unto us by the sacred
Oracle of the word of God.

And because we have daily wants, and do commit daily and new sins through
infirmity of the flesh, Renewed faith, and renewed repentance required of us.
we must have renewed faith and renewed repentance, Luke 22, 32
because every new sin requires a new act of repentance, and appealing to
Christ by faith. Then we are aright disposed to the Lords table, when we are
lively touched with a sense and feeling of our corrupt dispositions and daily
fallings in our says and obedience. For the repentance of every faithful man
must be double: first general, repenting of original and actual sins
generally, receiving power of God to change our minds, wills, and affections,
Mat. 3, 1.
whereof John Baptist faith, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
This is given and granted unto us at that time, when first we receive to
believe, it makes an alteration in us, slays the old man, quickens the
life of the new man; begins in weakness, continues in greater strength, and
grows more and more unto perfection. Secondly special, for special sins
and continual failings into which we fall, which we must practice to the end
of our days.

Now as we said in the former chapter, that no man for the feeblenes of his
faith, is to absent himself from this Supper, so must we remember touching
our repentance, though it be in great weakness and frailety: yet if it be a
sound and sincere hatred of all sin, not a forsaking of some sins only, as
Saul, Herod and Judas did, keeping other in themselves to their own confusion:
our imperfections shall be covered, our wants shall be supplied, our weakness
shall be remitted by the death of Christ, who was anointed and sent to preach
Luke 4, 18.
the Gospel to the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to publish deliverance
to the Captives, recovering of sight to the blind, and to set at liberty them
that are bruised. And he pronounces such Mat. 5.3.
blessed as are poor in spirit. For theirs was the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore if thou feel in thy self great defects of faith, of repentance, of
sanctification, pray to God earnestly that he will vouchsafe to increase his
gifts, let us confess with David, 2 Samuel 12.13
we have sinned; let us weep with Peter, Luke 22, 62 and 7, 38.
and the sinful woman: let us acknowledge our unworthiness, and say with the
Centurio^, Lord, Mat. 8, 8.
We are not worthy that thou should come under our roof. Let us cry out with
the Publican, Luke 8, 13
O God be merciful to me a sinner. Let us not be ashamed to speak it with
Daniel, that to us belongs open shame and confusion of faces. This is the way
to make us worthy: this is the means to fit us to the Lords Table: this is to
be practiced of such as will be his guests.

CHAP. XIX. Of reconciliation to our brethren: the last part of Examination.
HItherto, in examination of our selves, we have showed what we are to do in
respect of God, the root whereof is knowledge, the body is faith, the fruit is
repentance. Now to conclude, we are to handle the last part, which is Love
toward their brethren is required of all that come to the Lords Table.
love toward men, and reconciliation of our selves unto our neighbors, for
injuries, wrongs, and offenses done unto them, which are as poison to this
banquet. For in vain we shall pretend knowledge, boast of faith, glory of
repentance, if we fail in duties toward our brethren. First we must look to
be at peace with God, and to be reconciled to him. For we shall never be at
peace with our brethren, except we be reconciled to God. The greatest war is
between God and our own souls, so that nothing can bring peace to us, until
we be at one with him: but when once we are at one with him, we shall quickly
be at one with all others. For here is the touchstone and trial of all the
rest, even our obedience to the second Table, which concerns the duties of
love toward our brethren. Heereunto comes Mat. 5, 23.
the doctrine of Christ set down in the Evangelist, Mat. 5. If thou bring thy
gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go first be reconciled to thy
brother, then come and offer thy gift. Where he teaches, that he so approves
this duty, that he will have his own immediate seru ce cease, and give place
for a time, till i^ be performed. So in the Sermon which he made to his
Apostles, before he was betrayed to death, he did diligently beat upon this
point, saying, Ioh 13, 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you: greater
love then this has no man* that a man bestow his life for his friends: ye are
my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. This likewise the Col 3, 12.
Apostle teaches, that we may know him to be the scholar of the same master,
Col. 3. As the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, k ndnesse,
humbleres of mind, meeknes, long-suffering, forbearing one another* and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel unto another, even as Christ
forgave you, eue^ so do ye: and above all these things put on love, which is
the bond of perfectness. As every one has a comfortable experience in his
own heart of Gods mercy toward him in the pardon of his sins which are many
and great; so let him show mercy again, as he has received mercy, and deal
unto others kindly, as God has dealt graciously toward him. Our Savior Christ
avouches this, Math. 18. in the parable of the lender that had many debtors:
he called them to Mat. 18, 23
take an account of them, and forgiueth the debt, having compassion on him that
was not able to pay: but when he was departed, and had found one of his
fellow-seruants which ought him an hundred pence, he laid hand on him, thratled
him, and cast him in prison till he should pay the debt. The^ the Lord called
him and said, O evil servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou
prayedst me: Ought thou not also to have pity on thy fellow-seruant, even
as I had pity on thee? So his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the
tormenters, till he should pay all that was due to him. Then follows the
application of the whole, So likewise shall mine heavenly Father do unto you,
except ye forgive from your hearts each one his brother their trespasses.

Now the Lords Supper was ordained of God for this end, that it might be a band
of love, and a chain to unite and join us together among our selves, that if
it were possible we should not break from him: as Paul teaches, 1. Cor. 10.
We that are many, 1 Cor. 10, 17
are one bread, and one body, because we all are partakers of one bread.
Wherefore this Supper may fitly be called, a Sacrament of unity, and a seal of
our agreement one with another. Behold here a chain consisting of many linkes
to knit us together, that we break not from God and our brethren. Do we not
all come to one table? Do we not all eat of the same bread? Do we not all
drink of the same cup? Is not the same loaf compact of many corns? Is not
the same wine pressed out of many clusters? Do we not all join together in the
same receiving? Were we not baptized into the same baptism? What a shameful
thing is this, full of infamy and reproach, to see the branches of the same
vine, the sheep of the same shepherd, the children of the same Father, the
servants of the same Master, the fellows of the same household, the heirs of
the same kingdom, the guests of the same banquet, the obtainers of the same
promise, the partakers of the same hope, the members of the same body, and the
professors of the same faith, to contend and strive one against another, to
delight in brawling, fighting, quarrelling, and to nourish hatred, malice,
revenge, rancor, spite, envy, biting, and backbiting one of another. If Ephraim
be set against E^^y 9, ^1
Manasses, and Manasses against Ephra^m, if brother be divided against
brother, if we bite one at another, let us take heed least we be consumed one
of another. The Sons of God are renewed into the Image of God, to resemble
their heavenly Father in true holiness, and do all wear the same cogni^ance and
livery. For the Sacraments are the marks of Christ's sheep, whereby they are
known and discerned: so that al our dissentions, divisions, raylings, ^eu
lings, disgracings, and defacings one of another, tend to the reproach and
dishonor of our common ^ather, and do give an heavy testimony against our
souls with God and his elect Angels. For how do we approach unto God? how do
we come into his presence? With what hearts do we pray before him and unto him?
Are we not taught Math. 6, 12.
to ask forgiveness of our sins, as we forgive the trespasses done unto us?
If then we be malicious and envious, and carry the fresh remembrance of wrongs
in our hearts to pursue them with revenge: do we not pray against our selves?
Do we not beseech God to pour vengeance upon us? Do we not open our mouths to
our own destruction? For when we use our tongues to say, Luke 11, 4.
Lord forgive us, for even we forgive, is it not as much as if we should pray,
forgive us not Lord, for we do not, we will not forgive others? Therefore, after
the form of prayer given to the Disciples, Christ adds, If ye do forgive
Men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye do
not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your Father forgive you your
trespasses. And as he exhorts that when they stand and appear before the
Altar, Mark. 11, 25
they must forgive: so when we appear at the Lords Table, we must forgive, if
we have any thing against any man, that our father also which is in heaven may
forgive us our trespasses Now if we would be direct^d to know whether this love
be in us or not, we may try our own hearts by these 1 Cor. 13, 4.
holy properties and blessed effects described by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. Love
(says he) suffers long, it is bountiful, love enuieth not, love does not
boast it self, it is not puffed up: it disdaineth not, it seeks not her own
things, it is not provoked to anger, it thinks not evil: it rejoices not
in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: it suffers all things, it believes
all things, it hops all things, it endures all things.

Here we may see what manner of love ought to be in us. Every one of us must
endeavor that all the parts of this description may rightly agree to every one
of us, and truly be found in us toward all men, even our enemies, as we see
Jesus Christ has left us an example of his love, Luke 23, 35
when he prayed for his enemies, that crucified and cruelly entreated him
father forgive them for they know not what they do, and this did Stephen to
those that stoned him, lord lay not this sin to their charge. This is the
truth, let us acknowledge it. This is the way, let us walk in it: this was
their practice, let us follow it.

Thus we have showed the necessity of examination of our selves before we come
to the Lords Supper, and declared the parts wherein it stands, and the manner
how it is to be performed. If we come furnished with these things, with saving
knowledge, with justifying faith, with unfeigned repentance, with a loving and
longing reconciliation toward our brethren among whom we live, having as much
Romans 12, 15.
as is possible, Peace with all men, yea even our enemies: let us not abstain
from the Lords table, by reason of some fraileties and infirmities in us: for
God covers them, o and will not bring them into remembrance, as we see 2 Chro.
30. A multitude of people had not cleansed themselves, yet did eat the
Passover, but not as it was written: wherefore Hezekiah prayed for them,
saying, The good God be merciful toward him that prepares his whole heart to
seek the Lord God, the God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed
according to the purification of the Sanctuary: and the Lord heard Hezekiah,
and healed the people. Where we see, that because their heart was upright and
sincere, their wants and imperfections were not imputed unto them. For God
respects the truth of the inward parts, and pardons their sins that thus
prepare their hearts to seek him. So then The sacrament is not honored by
abstayning from it.
they were greatly deceived, that thought they honored the Sacrament by
abstaining from it: it is not honored, but dishonored: not hallowed, but
profaned: not regarded reverently, but reproched grievously by our wilful
abstinence, 1 cor, 11, 28
as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 11. Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. He does not say, let him prove
himself and so let him abstain. For the Sacrament is abused, as well by
forbearing, having examined our selves, as by not examining our selves, and
receiving unworthily. And thus much of Examination, and the manner to be
observed therein.

CHAP. 20. The conclusion, containing an abridgement of the whole Treatise,
together with a confirmation of some parts and passages of it.
THe effect of that which has been delivered hitherto in these Books, may
thus be gathered into a short sum and abridgement. We have The sum of the first
Book
declared that God in all times and ages of the Church, from the first being of
our first parents, has to his word and promises annexed Sacraments, as
conduites of grace, and seals of assurance Genesis 2, 9, etc
for the confirmation of them, thereby magnifying his own mercy toward his
people, showing our weakness and unworthiness, and condemning such as
oftentimes desire to come to the Lords Table, but esteem little of the
preaching of the word, and such as are diligent in hearing of the word, but
careless in coming to the Sacraments, and manifesting Gods goodness to us,
in giving us such helps, as if a man should put a staff in his hand that is
weak and ready to fall: whereas the word and Sacraments have one and the same
Author, they are instruments of the same grace, their whole force and effect
depends on God, they require faith Hebru. 4, 2.
to be mingled with them, and they profit not always at the very moment of
hearing and receiving. Notwithstanding, some differences we find between
them, as namely in the greater necessity of the word then of the Sacraments.
Infidels were never barred from hearing the word when they would become 1 Cor.
14, 24
hearers thereof; and whereas the word affects one only of the senses, to
wit, the hearing, the Sacraments are offered to the eyes as well as to the
ears, and fo in some sort become more effectual then the word.

Touching the word Sacrament, it is drawn from martial Discipline, and
properly signifies the Soldiers Oathe, whereby he binds himself to his
Captain; which word being used by the old Latin Interpreter, is now beecome
ordinary and common in the Church, which is not mentioned in so many Sillables
in the Scriptures. And howsoever the word be often taken in a large and
general signification, yet as we take it in these Books, What a Sacrament is.
a Sacrament is a visible sign and seal ordained of God, whereby Christ and
al his saving graces by certain outward rites are signified, exhibited and
sealed up unto us.

This description being received teaches us these points, first that the force
of the Sacraments depends not on the worthiness or unworthiness of the
Minister, but upon the ordinance of God, Mat. 23, 2, 3.
so that an evil Minister may deliver the good things of God. And this was the
cause that John 4, 2.
Christ Jesus baptized none, but his Disciples baptized, that we might learn
not to esteem of the effect of the Sacraments, by the fitness or unfitness
of the Ministers.

Besides, we are admonished hereby of the weakness of our Faith which
needs to be strengthened: and this is the reason why so long as we live in
this world we must use the Sacraments, because our Faith is always weak and
imperfect, and needs helps to further it, means to increase it, and proppes
to stay it. And therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11, 36. As often as ye eat
this bread and drink this up, ye do show the Lords death till he come.
Furthermore, we learn that there is no use of the Sacraments in the kingdom of
heaven, where all things are come to perfection: Now when that which is perfect
is come, 1 Cor, 13, 10.
then that which is in part shall be done away.

Again, Deutro 4, 2
none must add unto them, none must take ought from them, none must any way
abuse them, contrary to the institution and ordinance of God. Lastly, we learn
from hence, that the Sacraments are not bare and naked signs of Christ absent
1 Cor. 10, 16
but sure and certain seals of Gods promises, and of the righteousness of
Christ who is offered unto all, but received only of the faithful: so that
the presence of ungodly men meeting us at the same Table, cannot any way hurt
us in our worthy receiving. In a In a Sacrament consider his Parts, and his
Uses.
Sacrament we are to consider two things, his Parts and his Uses.

The parts of a Sacrament are The parts are outward and inward.
partly outward and partly inward. The outward parts are The outward parts of a
Sacrament are four, the Minister, the Word, the Sign, the Receyuer.
these four. First, the Minister lawfully called, is necessarily required. If
then the Minister will not administer them, or if private persons will
administer them, Math. 28, 19
they sin against God, the one for not performing the duties of his calling,
the other because he runs beyond the bounds of his calling. The second
outward part Esaias 6, 6, 7
is the word of institution, consisting of a Commandment and a promise: so
that it is required of us to understand the words of institution, to join the
word with the Sacraments, and to discharge those from the number of
Sacraments, which want the warrant of the word.

The third outward part of a Sacrament is Mark 1, 5.
the sign: for wheresoever there is a Sacrament, there must of necessity be an
outward element, so that neither must we make an Idol of the Sign by
advancing it too high, nor clean abolish it as the Church of Rome does by
their doctrine of Transubstantiation. The last outward part is the Gene. 17, 12
Receiver: so that the Sacraments without their lawful use, are no Sacraments
at all, so long as the signs are reserved and not applied.

The inward parts also are 1 Cor. 3.7.
four. First, God the Father, offering and applying Christ Jesus, as surely as
the Minister does the outward sign, which is a great comfort to such as come
to the Sacraments.

The second inward part of a Sacrament is Titus 3.56.
the holy Spirit working by the word: so that we can never hear the word or
receive the Sacraments aright without the special direction and inspiration of
the spirit of God, neither must we hang upon extraordinary revelations, which
opens a wide door unto all disorders, inasmuch as the Spirit is not
separated from the word.

The third inward part is Jesus 1 Cor. 10, 3
Christ, who is the truth and the life of all Sacraments: now if God the
Father have given him unto us, Rom, 8, 32.
how shall he not with him give us al things else? Let us therefore lay hold
upon him, especially in all difcomfits and troubles, when our faith is
assaulted by the enemies of our salvation.

The last inward part is the faithful Receiver: for except we To 14, 23
send out faith to bring Christ home to dwell with us in our hearts, we shall
in vain look to receive profit by the Sacraments: so that the Reprobate who
are vessels of wrath, and the children of perdition, cannot receive Christ,
albeit they partake the signs of Christ. As for the elect, who are the Lords
fealed up to the day of redemption, before their conversion and gathering into
the sheepefold of Christ, they also only receive the outward sign without
Christ, inasmuch as they are without faith: but after they are called with an
holy calling effectually, and have received to believe unfeignedly, they are
partakers both of the sign and of the thing signified.

These are the outward and inward parts. Now there Acts 8, 36
is a fit proportion and agreement between these parts, each very aptly
answering the other. For even as the minister by the word of Institution,
offers and applies visibly the outward element to the body of the Receiver:
so the father by the spirit, offers and applies Jesus Christ inuisibly to
the faithful receiver.

We showed before, that in a Sacrament we are to observe two points, his
parts and his uses. Hitherto we have spoken of all the parts, both such as are
outward, and such as are inward. Now it remains to handle his uses. The uses
of a Sacrament 3. chief uses of a Sacrament.
are chiefelie three: first, Romans 4, 11.
to strengthen secondly, Ge. 17, 1, 11.
to seal up the covenant between God and us: thirdly, Ephesians. 2, 11
to be a Badge of our profession, and as a banner displayed to witness our
warefare under our chief Captain Christ Jesus.

If these be the true uses and ends of the Sacraments, then we learn to take
notice of Mark 9 23
our own failinges and infirmities of Faith; that GOD refuses none for
weakness and wavering of Faith, Romans 4, 11
that there is an assurance of Faith to be attained unto, in this life; that as
God evermore keeps his promise with his people, Number 23, 15.
who is not as man that he should lie, 1 John 3, 13
nor as the son of man that he should deceive, so must we be careful to
keep the Articles of agreement between God and us, namely to believe his
word, to love our brethren, to obey his will: that the Sacraments belong not
to the unfaithful, and can do them no good at all, forasmuch as they be
effectual unto us by faith. Lastly, as our privileges are great, to bear the
badges of Christ our Lord, so it teaches that we are not our own, 1 Cor. 6,
19 20.
but are bought at a great price, not with 1 Pet. 1, 18.19.
coruptible things as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ as
of a lamb unspotted and undefiled.

Hitherto of the nature of the Sacraments: now of the number of them, as we
understand the word for such as are seals of our communion with Christ. The
Sacraments The Sacraments of the new testament are only two
of the new testament are two, baptism and the Lords Supper, neither are there
any more left unto the Church. For Christ taught no more 1 Cor. 10, 1.2. Act. 20,
27.
Sacraments to the Apostles, the Apostles delivered no more to the Churches, who
yet were faithful witnesses, and revealed the whole counsel of God, without
concealing and keeping back of any doctrine which themselves had received.
Besides, these two Sacraments are altogether perfect and sufficient, both to
enter a Christian into the Church, and to retain him continually in the same.
From this number of two Sacraments we learn, first to acknowledge the great
love of God toward us, who has eased us of the Act. 15, 10.
heavy burden of infinite ceremonies prescribed in the law, and delivered us
A^g de d^^^. C^^^. ^. 3. c. 9
a few Sacraments in stead of many. Secondly, we see hereby the difference
between the old Testament and the new, and between the Sacraments of the old
Testament and the new: they had sundry significant signs and ceremonies, whose
interpretation was not easily known unto them. Thirdly, seeing God has given
unto us two signs, and added two seals to his word and writings, we ought to
have the stronger faith in his merciful promises. For wherefore has he
doubled the signs, but that we should increase in faith and as it were double
our assurance of his graces? Lastly, this number of two, overthrows the
number of seaue^ Sacraments, maintained in the Church of Rome, which just
number was (...).
first broched by Peter Lumbard, afterward ratified in the Counsel of
Florence, and lastly established in the Counsel of Trent, and is now become
the common doctrine of that counterfeit Church.

For besides baptism and the Lords Supper, which we receive, they The number
of seven Sacraments is fa^se and forged
have installed into the number of Sacraments, Confirmation, Penance,
Matrimony, Orders, and extreme Unction, contrary to the doctrine of the
Scriptures, contrary to the nature of Sacraments, and contrary to the evidence
of sundry reasons. And first of all, Confirmation no Sacrament.
Confirmation be lifted up into the seat of the Sacraments, or sit down in
this Chair of honor, because it wants the institution of Christ, it wants
an outward sign, it has no word to warrant it, or promise of blessing: for
howsoever Act, 8, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17.
the Apostles by imposition of hands gave the Holy Ghost, those miraculous
gifts are now with-drawne from the Church of God. Lastly, they have advanced it
above baptism, they administer it in a strange tongue, and hallow the greazy
oil to purify soul and body.

True it is, they allege the example of the Apostles, who used imposition of
hands, over those of Samaria, Act. 8, 14. But can they bestow the like
miraculous gifts as the Apostles did upon the Samaritans by laying on of their
hands? Indeed when Philip, had catechized the Samaritans, and taught them the
fundamental points of Christian religion, the Apostles came and prayed for
them, and laid their hands upon them: So likewise after that children have in
their own persons made public and particular profession of their faith (which
others did profess for them in their name at baptism.) We acknowledge that
prayer may be made for them that strength of faith and increase of grace may
be given them by the Holy Ghost to live and dye in that faith whereof they have
made profession. To which prayers we deny not but the ceremony of imposition of
hands may be added, betokening the restraint of our desires to the parties
whom we present to God, and declaring thereby that we pray for them that are
before us. But what is this to the cozenage and imposture of the Church of Rome
that mock God and his people? For the Apostles did not consecrate Oil mixed
with Balm, nor anoint the Samaritans with such Oil. They did not cross
their foreheads, nor kiss their mouths, nor clap their ears, nor bind their
faces with fillets, nor forbid them to wash their heads, neither used any such
may game as is now practiced by the popish Bishops in their apish confirmation,
who have it in greater estimation then the Sacrament of baptism, because they
permit the administration of it to every Priest, yea to private persons, yea to
women, yea even to the Jews and Infidels that are out of the Church: whereas
they reserve to the Bishops only the power of Confirmation, as if it had
greater power to strengthen the soul against the Devil.

Secondly, Penance is no sacrament
their penance instituted by bodily chastisements to make satisfaction for sin
to God, is no Sacrament of the new Testament, nor any sacred thing being thus
understood. For we acknowledge no other satisfaction 1 Ioh, 1, 7.
for sin, wherein God delights, and the conscience of man rests, but only
the death and obedience of Christ. Besides, true repentance has been preached
and practiced from the beginning of the world, after that sin entered into the
world. Furthermore, their penance has no visible sign, as baptism and the
Supper of the Lord have. Thirdly, Matrimony is no Sacrament.
matrimony, albeit it be a divine ordinance, honorable Heb, 13, 4.
among all estates, yet can be no Sacrament of the Church of Christ, because it
was instituted before Gen, 2, 18,
the law, it is ratified among the Infidels which are no members of the Church,
it has no promise of grace and salvation joined to it, and albeit it be
honorable in all, 1. Cor, 6, 7.7, 37.
yet it is not necessary in all.

Lastly, the Roman Church esteems it as an unclean thing a profanation of
holy orders, a living in the flesh: so that as with one hand they advance it to
a great dignity, with the other hand they cast it down, with great disgrace
and contempt, as unworthy of the high and holy priesthood.

Fourthly, orders come in the next Orders no sacrament.
place, which are the officers and ministry of the Church, but no Sacrament, or
Sacraments of the Church. For then, according to the number of orders, we
should multiply the number of Sacraments. Neither have they any outward Element
and visible sign.

Lastly, we are come to extreme unction, which we suffer not to mask under the
name of Sacraments, but pull off the vizard thereof, because the church had the
use of anointing so long as it retained the miraculous gift of healing.
Besides, it has no word of institution to warrant the continual practice of
it, until the second coming of Christ.

Indeed the Apostles and Disciples were commanded to anoint the sick, and
so to heal them of their sickness; and if any man in our days have this
miraculous guifte of healing bestowed upon him, we like well that he should
anoint the sick, and in the name of God use the gift bestowed upon him. But
the Church of Rome anoint those whose case and condi^ion is without hope of
amendment and recovery. Thus a Medicine is turned into a Sacrament: and a
miracle is turned into a coniuring of Devils: and the Vnct on which was wont
to heal the body is turned into a foolish ceremony unprofitable both to the
body and to the soul, and yet it will require a large half hours work to
can o^e o^^ extreme unction. A great deal of time very all ^^stowed.

Wherefore, s^^ing the word of God teaches the number of two Sacraments only
and the Church of Rome enstructeth her children in^o the number of seven
Sacraments neither more nor less: they must pardon us, if we hearken rather to
the Scriptures then to their Traditions, rather to God then to man, rather to
the author of truth then to the spirit of error. Nevertheless, though we
thus speak, we like well the things themselves being rightly understood, at the
repentance of the penitent, confirmation of the faithful that are weak and
new called, the order of the Ministry of the Church, the visitation and
comfort of the sick, the lawful estate of honorable Matrimony, as godly and
profitable, and that not only in the new Testament, but also in the old: so
that we would have no man slander us or mistake us herein, as though we refused
those things which be of themselves godly and good; but we like not and allow
not the devising of new Sacraments in them, for which we have no warrant in
the word of God.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Sacraments in general, The sum of the 2. Book.
of their parts, of their uses, and of the number: now we come to speak of
them in particular, first of Baptism, which is as it were the door or gate of
the Church, then of the Lords Supper, which is the food and nourishment of
the Church.

And howsoever Baptism has sundry significations, yet as it signifies that
washing with Water which serves to seal and assure the Covenant of the New
Testament, What Bapt is.
it is the first Sacrament wherein by the outward washing of the body with
water once in the name of the Father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost, the
inward cleansing of the soul by the blood of Christ ir represented.

Exodus 12, 48
This description teaches, that such as are not yet baptized are not to be
admitted to the Lords Table, and that albeit dipping be not necessary to the
being of Baptism, Ephesians. 5, 26.
yet washing with water is of the essence of this Sacrament. For the Church is
at liberty to baptize either by dipping or sprinkling, D^e. des^d^gm (...) 4.
l. 4. ^^i. 7
as we may see in Austine, that this liberty was kept and retained in the
Church: and Cyprian vphouldeth the sprinkling in Baptism, yet so as that he
affirms it to be at men's liberty.

We learn also that such as are once baptized are not to be rebaptized, albeit
they have been baptized by Heretics: and that whosoever is baptized has
made a solemn Covenant to profess the Christian religion, and to lead an
unblameable and unreprovable conversation, considering that he is no longer
his own to live as he list, but as he is bought with a price, so is he bound
to serve him that has bought him, and to approve himself to him in all holy
obedience.

Now we are to consider in baptism (as we did before generally in a Sacrament)
these two things, The parts of Baptism.
his parts and his uses. The parts of baptism are both outward and inward.
For as there was a circumcision of the body and of the heart, so there is a
baptizing of the body, and a baptizing of the soul. John the Baptist, in his
baptizing directed al to Christ, to believe in him as Acts 19. and he preached
the kingdom of heaven, Math, 3. so that there is but one baptism of the New
Testament, Ephesians: 4. For as we do baptize with water unto Christ, and admit men
to have interest in the kingdom of God; as we incorporate them into the Church
of Christ, and offer the promise of forgiveness of sins to them which repent
and believe the Gospel: so did John in his baptism, Acts 8, and 10 and 1^.
who baptized as the Apostles did, forasmuch as both of them are said to
baptize in the name of Christ. Herein lies the difference rather in the order
of time, then substance of the Sacrament, the one was first given to the Jews
only, and this latter was communicated unto the Gentiles also. We cannot
therefore assent and agree to them that make two sundry baptismes thereof. For
this makes two baptismes no more then it makes two Gospels, because Christ
and his Apostles did first preach it and publish it to the Israelites, and
afterward unto the Gentiles.

Again, we are put in mind, that when the Sacrament of baptism is to be
administered, we should not make all possible have out of the Church as the
manner of many is among us, as though it did nothing at all belong unto us, but
it is our duty to contain our selves, and continue our presence together with
the rest of our brethren, that by our tarrying we may to our comfort consider
with our selves our own receiving heretofore into the visible body of
Christ's Church and congregation, as also that it belongs unto us to offers
prayers unto God for the infant that is present to be baptized, like as others
did in former time for us, and so as it were pay the debt we owe to the church
and perform to others that Christian duty which others have already performed
unto us.

Let us come to the parts of baptism. The outward parts are these four, the
Minister of God, the word of institution, the element of water, the body to
be washed, The first outward part is the Minister, as the Messenger of God.
For baptism is a part of the Ministry and God has joined the ministry of the
word and the administration of the Sacraments together. Wherefore the Minister
must be careful and not careless in the execution of his office, who is to
sanctify the water, and to wash the party.

Moreover, the people are directed unto whom to resort when they have children
to be baptized. Thirdly, the Church of Rome profane baptism, when they
appoint Midwiues and private persons to baptize children, nay, do allow Pagans,
even such as are not yet baptized themselus, and hold it available. Lastly, it
is not fit that the Church should set apart some ordinarily to baptize, who are
not able to preach the word, no more then it is lawful to set apart an
ordinary Officer for to minister the Lords Supper, which is not able to
teach. Besides, this were to institute a new kind of Ministry, of such who
are not called of GOD as Aaron was; Heb. 5, 4.
neither can any sufficient reason be given, why the Church should take
upon it this Liberty.

The second outward part The second outward part.
is the word, of institution, which is as the form of this Sacrament. Now by
the word in this place we understand the promises of the Gospel, and the
form of administration thereof instituted by Christ which must be in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. This part and point
being thus rightly understood both teaches and reprooueth. It serves to teach
that we make not three Gods, as though the Father were a God severally, the
son a God severally, and the holy Ghost a God severally, albeit these be
named and reckoned up severally: for we be not baptized into the names, but
in the name: not of many Gods, but of one in nature and essence, and triple in
persons and properties. And we must beware of this also, that we make not an
inequality of the persons, and suppose that the Son is less then the Father,
and the holy Ghost less then the Son, and the Father above them both,
although the Father be set in the first place, the Son in the second place,
and the holye-Ghost in the third place, because they are coequall, and none
before or above the other.

Besides, it reprooueth one of the slanders published against us by many
friends and favorites of the Church of Rome, to wit, that we hold and
maintain that we ought never to baptize but when there is a Sermon. But to
put them out of doubt, we do no more teach that we may not baptize but when
there is preaching, then that we may not preach, but when there is baptizing.
For none of us do believe or defend any such doctrine of the absolute
necessity of the preaching of the word at the baptizing of children, or the
receiving of the Supper, as if the essence of the Sacraments depended upon the
preaching or the absence of preaching did destroy the nature of the Sacraments.
True it is, we affirm two things. First we say, that a Sermon is very fit and
convenient, and always to be wished if it may be had, because it sets
forth more lively a declaration and demonstration of Christ's death. John 7, 22
And therefore we see this practiced by John, and the disciples of Christ.
Howbeit it is not so needful and behooueful, as that without preaching it
should be no baptism, or that for want of this it should be reiterated, and
the former made void. And therefore the Priests that circumcised children in
the Temple, did not always preach the law to the people, for then they must
preach not only upon the Sabbath, but every day in the week, and peradventure
oftentimes in the day, forasmuch as children were brought at all times to be
circumcised, being precisely tied unto the eight day, and therefore as children
were borne every day of the week, so doubtless they were brought to be
circumcised every day of the week. And what Sermon could there be at the
circumcision of John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, Luke 1, 62.
his Father for his unbelief being stricken dumb, and so not able to speak,
Luke 1, 62? Again, we confess that seals without writings, are like wax set
to a blanke, and therefore baptism without the word is altogether unavailable
and unprofitable. Notwithstanding, by the word we do not understand the solemn
interpretation of the scriptures with doctrine and application, but a
declaration of the institution of Christ, and a commemoration of the promises
of the Gospel. Thus we make the word necessary, and otherwise then thus we do
not make it to be necessary.

The third outward part is the element of water, The 3. outward part of
Baptism.
which is the matter whereof baptism consists. Whosoever therefore baptizeth
with any other liquor then with water, as with blood, with sand, with snow,
with milk, or such like matter, does frustrate baptism, and makes it an idle
Ceremony. Again, all popish corruptions, superfluously added and annexed to
this Sacrament, contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel, as Cream, Crosses,
Censers, Tapers, Spittle, Salt, and such like unsavory trumpery, are utterly
condemned, having also a superstitious opinion of holiness and worship joined
with them. Lastly, seeing water is an outward part, the want of washing with
water cannot hinder the salvation of such as die without baptism. All perished
not under the Law that died without Circumcision; God is not more rigorous
under the Gospel: neither did Christ come to condemn those whom the law
saved. This therefore is a bloody and discomfortable doctrine to be abandoned
and abiured of all parents, of all children, of all christians. God said at
the first to Abraham, when he instituted circumcision, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed, Genesis 17, 7. And the Apostle Paul speaking of children
born of faithful Fathers and Mothers says, That they be holy. 1. Cor. 7, 14.
By the strength and virtue of this covenant so graciously made and faithfully
kept, it comes to pass, that the children of believers so soon as they be
borne, do belong to God and to his kingdom.

The absolute necessity of Baptism, How baptism is absolutely necessary.
we acknowledge in two points: first, it is necessary to have it celebrated in
the church to the end of the world. Christ has commanded it, and the Church
ought to keep this commandment without spot and without rebuke, until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. For as the Apostle teaches that we must
show the Lords death until he come: so we are to baptize the members of the
Church, until he come again to judge the quick and the dead.

Secondly, it is necessary in this respect, because who soever does
voluntarily deprive himself of baptism, the Sacrament of regeneration, and
the seal of the righteousness by Faith, and does wilfully contemn it, as
the Pharisees did against themselves, cannot be saved. For, it is the refusing,
not the wanting; the contempt, not the deprivation of baptism that brings
with it condemnation; according to that which the Lord speaks touching
circumcision, Gen, 17. The uncircumcised male, whose flesh of his foreskinne is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people: he has broken my
Covenant. But to say, Genesis 17, 14.
that God cannot or will not save children without baptism, or to believe,
that being carried toward baptism, and dying in the way, they are excluded
from eternal salvation, Children dying without baptism are not damned.
is a rash and cruel sentence of corrupt and partial judges. First, it is a
false accusing of our merciful God of extreme rigor and severity, as if he did
badlie provide for the salvation of children borne under the old testament,
who were restreined circumcision before the eight day.

Secondly, it commits the salvation or damnation of children into the power
of a man or a Midwife: for if they list to baptize them, they shall go into
Paradise, if they please not to do it, then they shall never come unto Heaven.

Thirdly, our adversaries themselves, that urge so much the necessity of
Baptism, do teach in their writings that many are saved without the Baptism
of Water, as sundrte Martirs that were never baptized, but that the shedding of
their blood has the force of true baptism. And yet (as it is well observed)
this baptism of blood is contrary to their own Cannons, which conclude and
determine that it can be no Sacrament, if he that baptizeth has not an intent
to baptize: but they dare not avouch, that the persecuters and executioners
conferred baptism, or ever had any intent to baptize. And how is the intent
requisite in him that does baptize, more then in him that is baptized? To omit
this, that many have ended their days by martyrdom, that never had their
blood shed and powered out of their bodies.

Fourthly, it is agreed upon on both sides, that baptism is once only to be
administered to one and the same person, and not to be iterated or repeated;
what reason then can be rendered by them why Martyrdom of a person already
baptized should be no Sacrament, and that the Martyrdom of a person not yet
baptized, should be a Sacrament? For he that has been once baptized may be
baptized no more by any other baptism. And thus Martyrdom shall be a greater
honor and dignity in him that is not baptized, then in him that has lived and
continued in the Church, and been baptized.

Fifthly, circumcision in the old Testament, and baptism in the new, are all
one, and of like necessity: yet infinite people were saved under the old
Testament without circumcision, as all the faithful women, and such as truly
repented amongst the Ninevites, at the preaching of Jonas.

Lastly, our adversaries are constrained to join with us in that they confess,
that the power of God is not tied to the Sacraments, Lumb. l 4. did 4
insomuch that many partake the truth of the Sacrament, which do not receive
the outward sign of the Sacrament; and that there is a baptism of the spirit
which supplieth the deprivation and default of the baptism of water. And this
is as much as we desire: so that they teach that which we teach, and believe
that which we believe.

The fourth outward part of baptism The 4. outward part of Bapt.
is the body that is washed. Now such as are to be baptized must be within the
Covenant. Not to all and every of them that have life, nor all that have sense,
nor all that have reason have right to it, and a privilege in it: but the
people of God by Covenant. These are either men and women of riper years, or
else the infants of such who have interrest in baptism as well as the parents
of whom they are borne. This condemns the Romish practice of Baptizing
Belles, as a most horrible profanation of this Sacrament, and serves to set
forth the great love of God unto all believers, who vouchsafes to be their
God and the God of their seed. Hence likewise it appears, Infants have
interest in baptism as well as their parents.
that infants are to be baptized. For baptism succeeds in place of
Circumcision, the Apostles baptized Colos. 2, 11.
whole houses, Christ calls infants and sucklings Act. 16, 15, 33
unto himself, and says that unto such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven: they
are Christ's sheep and members of his body: Hence we learn, that the baptism
of Infants is no unwritten tradition, but a written and divine institution
taught in the Scriptures. Consider also hereby, the difference between
baptism and the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 14, 16 Mar. 10, 13, 14 15.
and that all are conceived in original sin. Acknowledge also a difference
between them and the children of Infidels, and let parents be encouraged Psalm.
51, 5.
to bring up their children in the instruction and reformation of the Lord.

Hitherto of the outward parts: now follow Ephesians. 6, 4.
the inward parts, which also are four in number. First, The inward parts of
baptism are four.
God the Father represented by the Minister, whereby our faith is greatly
strengthened. For whenever the eye sees the Minister pouring water on the
body, faith beholds God the Father clensing the soul with the precious blood
of his Son Christ. The second part is the Spirit Mat. 28, 19
of God, having relation to the word and promise of God: and therefore
whenever we come to hear the word or to receive the Sacraments, we must
crave the assistance of the Spirit to open our hearts, 1 cor. 12, 12
as he opened the heart of Lydia. If this inward teacher be wanting, the ear
hears, and the hand handles, but the heart is hardened. The third inward part
of baptism Act. 16, 14
is Christ represented by the water. This serves greatly to confirm our
faith, to consider with our selves, when we behold with our bodily eyes the
water poured upon the body baptized, Act. 2, 38.
the blotting out of all our sins by the blood of Christ Jesus. The 4. inward
part is the soul cleansed, 1 Pet. 3, 21.
most lively and effectually represented by the body washed. For the washing of
the body represents the clensing of the soul. This teaches, that by nature
we are corrupt and abominable, Ep. 5, 26, 27
so that God must work in us both the will and the deed. These are the four
inward parts of baptism. The agreement between these outward and inward parts
The proportion betwixt the outward and inward parts of baptism.
is very evident. Fot as the Minister by the word of institution, applies
water to the washing of the body: so the Father through the working of the
Spirit, applies the blood of Christ to the clensing of the soul.

This distinction and proportion of the parts, to wit, the outward with the
inward, serves to determine many Controversies, untimely raised, hotly
pursued, and uncharitably continued among us. For if we did aright discern the
outward baptism from the inward, and that which the Minister does deliver from
that which God does give and bestow, it might be a good means to dissolve
sundry doubts, touching the sufficiency and efficacy of this Sacrament,
whether it be impeached or abolished by the evil of the Minister, which is of
three sorts of heresy impiety and ignorance.

The first question is touching heresy, Touching the baptis. of the Heretics.
whether baptism ministered by an Heretic be true baptism or not? I
answer, If Heretics keep not the substance of baptism, but err in the
foundation of religion, and the doctrine of the Trinity, their baptism can be
no baptism. Hence it is that Nicephorus Niceph. hist. lib. 3. cap 33
makes mention of a Minister, that in the want of water baptized with sand*
but the party was again baptized, and that most justly. But if they keep the
Doctrine of the Sacrament sound in substance, and fail not in the essential
parts of it, such baptism is good baptism, and ought not to be repeated. For
as the truth taught by Heretics is Gods truth, and available to edification,
so long as they preach out of Gods word: so baptism administered by them is
true baptism, so long as they observe the institution of God entire and
vncorrupt.

The second Question is touching the scandalous life and profane heart of the
Minister, whether it hinder the effect of the Sacrament or not? Touching the
baptism of evil Ministers.
I answer it does not: for as good prayers conceived by evil men have also
audience with God, so it is with the Sacraments, albeit they be administered
by evil men, yet have they acceptance with God. And albeit the sons of Eli
did occasion the people to abhor the offerings of the Lord, yet it is their
sin to abstain. Judas being sent out to preach ministered Baptism also,
which was no doubt effectual and sufficient to the Receyuers, albeit he were a
damnable hypocrite and the child of perdition.

True it is, he received no benefit by the word or the Sacraments, yet he might
be a means of doing good to others. The light of the Sun passes by myrie
and unclean places, and yet it is not defiled; so the dignity of the Sament is
not hindered by the lewdness of the Minister. The Sacraments brought unto us by
loose Ministers (which are no better then stumbling-blockes laid before the
weak, Aug. in Johan. tract. 5.
are like water that passes thorough a Channel into a Garden, it self
receives no benefit by it, howbeit the garden is watered and made fruitful
thereby. Many of the Priests and Levites among the Israelites were ungodly and
unsanctified, yet they both offered sacrifices, and celebrated Sacraments,
which to the right partakers were feales of the Covenants, and means to
increase faith.

Again, there is no difference in respect of God between him that is profane
in heart, and him that is profane in life; between him that is profane
outwardlye, and him that is profane inwardly, forasmuch as they are both alike
known unto him. But no man knows what is in the heart, and therefore if
profaneness did hinder the fruitfulness of the Sacrament, no man could be
assured that at any time he received a Sacrament, but must always hang in
suspense and doubt of the matter. Let no man therefore refuse or abhor the
Lords ordinances for the evil demeanor of the Ministers, as no man will reject
the guifte of a Prince, albeit a wicked person should draw the conueyance.

The third and last question remains, which is, whether the ignorance or
inability of the Minister to preach, Touching the bapt of ignorant ministers
do disanull the sufficiency and efficacy of the Sacrament to the receiver that
believes? It were to be wished that every Congregation had his learned
Pastor, that so the occasion of this Question might be cut off: but because we
cannot have so flourishing a Church, we must consider the matter as the case
stands with us, and know that his actions are not nullities. For the Apostle
requires, that the Minister should be unreprovable in life, 1 Timothy 3.2.
as well as apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. If then his evil life do not disanull his
work, why should his ignorance be a greater bar? If then any reason thus:
Every Ministry of the New Testament is a preaching Ministry,

Therefore Sacraments are void, that are delivered by no preachers:

Why may we not reason in like manner and as strongly, Every Ministry of the
New Testament is an unblameable ministry,

Therefore Sacraments are void that are delivered by them that are not
unreprovable.

Indeed every good ministry is a preaching ministry, but not every
ministry in general: and therefore it will not follow that the action of him
that is no preacher is a nullity^. But of these Questions we have spoken more
at large elsewhere.

Thus far of the parts ^ Baptism, both the outward and the inward parts: now
w^ come to the uses thereof, Three uses of Baptism.
which are principally three. First, to show the placing and planting into the
body of Christ, to r^maine in him for ever. This conjunction with Christ is not
bodily or natural, but mystical and marvelous in our eyes: for we are made
one with Christ, 1 Cor. 6, 17.
by the same Spirit dwelling in Christ and in all the members of Christ. So
then, the Saints triumphing in heaven, and all the believers fighting upon
earth, as soldiers in warefare, have one and the same spirit of Christ
dwelling in them, and therefore are one with him. Secondly, to assure us of the
remission of our sins, that we may be able to stand in the presence of God,
Gal. 3, 17.
having put on the garments of Christ, as Jacob receiud the blessing clad in
the garments of his elder brother. This overthrows the doctrine or rather
doting of the Church of Rome, which teaches that baptism abolisheth all
sins going before it, and leaves nothing that has the name or nature of
sin. If this were a truth of God not a dream of men, it is not only
decent, but greatly to be desired, to have baptism deferred until old age,
nay unto the hour of death, that fo we may depart hence in peace with greater
assurance of Gods favor in the pardon of our sins. Thirdly, Mark, 1, 1.
to slay the old man, and to kill our natural corruption by the power of the
death and burial of Christ; besides, to raise us up again to holiness and
newness of life by his resurrection. Hence it is, that the Evangelists call it
the Sacrament of Repentance, admonishing every one of us to express the
strength and power of baptism, as the Prophets oftentimes exhort the Jews to
Deuteronomy: 10, 15.
circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, and to harden their necks no more. So
we ought not to content our selves to be baptized in body, but must labor to
be baptized in soul by a daily proceeding in regeneration, by bringing forth
the fruits of sanctification, and applying Christ Jesus to our full
justification.

Thus much of baptism, the honorable badge of our profession and dedication
to Christ that dyed upon the Cross, what it is, what are the parts and uses
thereof. Now we come to The sum of the 3. Book.
the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, which is called by diverse and
sundry names in the New Testament. Sometimes it is called the 1 Cor. 10, 16
Communion, teaching that we are one body coupled togethet in Christ, showing
that it is to be received of many together, and admonishing us of unity and
concord among our selves.

Sometimes, it is 1 Cor. 11, 20
called the Lords Supper, hence we see who is the author of it, no Man, no
Angel, but the Lord Jesus, leaving it for a farewell token of his Love
toward us. We must also come with an earnest desire hungring after Christ,
that we may be satisfied with his righteousness. Sometimes, it is called the
Acts 2, 42.
breaking of bread: this shows, that the substance of bread remains after
the words of consecration, that figurative speeches are used in the Sacrament,
and that this external rite of breaking the bread, used by Christ, practiced
by the Apostles, observed by the pastors of the Church, ought not to be
omitted and ouer-passed. Sometimes, it is called the 1 Cor, 10, 21
Table of the Lord: this teaches, that Christ and his Apostles, at the
celebration of it, used a table not an Altar, that it is a Sacrament, not a
Sacrifice, and that we ought to draw nere unto it with all regard and
reverence. Lastly, it is called the New testament or Will of Christ. This
title teaches, that there is a double Covenant between GOD and man, the one
old, the other new: the one of the law, the other of the Gospel: the first of
works, the second of grace.

Again, it serves to condemn the cursed sacrilege of the Church of Rome,
which adds and detracteth, alters, and mingleth it with the leaven of her
own inventions. This is a great comfort to all Gods children, to consider that
all faithful Christians are the heirs of Christ, to who^ he has promised
salvation of their souls, and forgiveness of their sins.

As we have seen the several names of this Sacrament, which show the nature
thereof unto us: so now we will set down What the Lords Supper is.
what the Lords Supper is. The Supper of the Lord is the second Sacrament,
wherein by visible receiving of bread and wine, is represented our spiritual
communion with the body and blood of Christ. Here God is present, and sits
as president at this Table, he offers unto us his own Son for our
justification, and therefore this Supper must be reverently regarded, and
diligently frequented of us.

In this Sacrament In the lords Supper consider hi^ parts and his uses.
we are in like manner to consider the parts and the uses thereof. The parts
are partly outward, and partly inward. For it fares no otherwise with the
Sacrament, then it does with man considered in his parts. A man is a compound
creature, made of flesh and of a reasonable soul, as Athanasius speaks in
his Creed. If the question were asked whether man were a mortal creature or
immortal, earthly or heavenly, visible or invisible? No man could rightly
answer without a distinction; to wit, that he is earthly touching his body,
and heavenly touching his spirit. In like sort we must consider touching the
lords supper, which is made of an earthly and an heavenly thing: and therefore
if the question be demanded, whether it be an earthly or an heavenly thing?
We must resolve that in part it is earthly, and in part heavenly, earthly in
the figure, and heavenly in the matter that is signified. We must acknowledge
from hence, the diverse natures and parts of it, distinguishing the one from
the other.

Then had never risen so great conte^tion and confusion in the Church of Christ
touching this Supper, if this distinction had heene wisely observed, and if
what is proper unto the outward parts, and what proper to the inward had been
duly marked. The ignorance of this point has bred much debate, and kindled a
fire that will very hardly be quenched.

The outward parts are The outward parts are four.
four. First the Minister, who is to take the bread and wine into his hands 1
Cor. 11, 23
after the example of Christ, to separate the Bread and Wine, so taken from
their common use to an holy, to break the bread, to pour out the Wine, and
deliver them both into the hands of all the people present: for it is not for
every man to minister in the Church of God, and to bestow and dispose the
Mysteries of Christ. The Apostles were present at the Supper, not as
dispensers, but as communicants; not as Ministers, but as guess: Christ was as
the master and maker of the Feast instituting with his own hands the
Sacrament of his grace.

So then they are not consecrated* to be Priests of the New testament, but
preachers of the Gospel and ministers of the Sacraments: and therefore private
persons may not take this Supper to themselves or deliver it to others. The
second part is the word of Institution, Luke 22, 19
This is my body, that is, this bread is Tertul. lib. 4. cont. Marcio august.
conr. adimant. cap. 12.
a sign of my body, which shortly shall be crucified for you: this cup is a
true sign of my Blood, presently to be shed, to confirm the new Covenant of
GOD, touching forgiveness of sins and eternal life. These words are not
properly but figuratively to be understood, being Sacramental speeches.

Thus the Scripture speaks of Genesis 17, 10
Circumcision and of the Paschall Lamb. The third outward part are bread and
wine, fit signs to signify our spiritual nourishment by eating the body, and
drinking the blood of Christ. In baptism we have one only sign, but in
this supper Mark 14, 12
we have two, to note out our full and perfect nourishment by Christ. Neither
did Christ deliver the deceivable shows of bread and wine or cast a mist
before the eyes of his Disciples, to make them think it Bread which was no
bread, or wine which was no wine: but he gave them true bread, and the true
fruit of the vine, 1 cor. 10, 16
as the Apostle calls them, after the blessing, breaking, consecration.
Hereby falls to the ground the mystery of transubstantiation, the most
misshapen monster that ever lived or was devised. It brings in a false Christ,
and turns him into an Idol: it makes Sacraments without signs: it makes
Christ to have an infinite body, who is like to us in all things Heb. 4, 15
sin only excepted: Lastly, it confounds heaven and earth together. Aug.
epist. 57. ad Dardan.
as Austine has well determined. Again, if Christ delivered both signs, the
people ought to receive under both kinds, so that they may be justly called
Church-robbers, who have takan from the people the use of the cup, and Gal. 3,
15.
wretched deprauers of Christ's testament, depriving the right heirs of their
inheritance, and engrossing into their hands the goods of others. They make it
of the essence of the Sacrament, to use unleavened bread, and to mingle water
with wine, which Christ never ordained or commanded: but that which is
necessary, they esteem as needles and superfluous, thus transgressing the
commandment of God by their own traditions. The fourth outward part are the
Communicants, whose duty it is, Mat. 26, 26.
to take the bread and wine into their hands, to eat the bread and to drink
the wine to the nourishment of their bodies. He did not bid them to reserve the
outward signs, to hold them up and adore them, or call the Sacrament their Lord
and their God, he did not command them to offer them up to God the Father as a
propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead, as is used in their unbloody or
rather most bloody Mass, which has caused so much innocent blood of the
blessed martyrs to be shed, Reu. 6, 7.10
who being killed for the word of God, and the testimony which they maintained,
their souls under the Altar cry day and night with a loud voice unto the Lord
holy and true, to judge and avenge their blood on them that dwell on the earth.
Lastly, hereby are overthrown the private Masses of the Church of Rome, which
now grow to be too common, 1 Cor. 11, 10
and cannot stand with the Communion of Christ, who delivered the signs of
bread and wine to all the Disciples that were present, they did not stand by,
and gaze one upon another, but received the Supper of the Lord together.

The outward parts have bin hitherto handled, which being rightly performed,
What Consecration is.
there follows consecration, which is a separation of the outward signs from
their ordinary use to an holy and spiritual use, that whereas before they
served for the body, now they are made instruments of grace, and seals of the
righteousness by faith. The inward parts follow, The inward parts of this Supper
are four.
which are four: First, God the Father who appointed his Son to perform the
gracious work of our redemption, and in the fullness of time sent him into the
world, Romans 4, 2 5
who dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification. Secondly, the
Holy Ghost, who assures us of the truth of Gods promises. This shows, that
he is true Revel. 1, 4.
God equal with the Father and the Son, proceeding from the Father and the
Son. This confuteth such as suppose no partaking of the body and blood of
Christ, except he be given us in a carnal and fleshy manner: whereas the Spirit
works faith in our hearts, Heb. 11.1
which is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of things
which are not seen. The third inward part of the Lords Supper, Luke 22, 19
is the body and blood of Christ, delivered for us unto death. This conuinceth
such of a spirit of error, who make unbelievers and reprobates partakers of
Christ's body and blood: thus his body should be profaned, Ioh 6, 5
and his saving graces separated from his person. But even as where Satan
dwells and possesses the heart, there always reign the works of darkness,
and damnation: so the gifts of Christ accompanying salvation, are inseparably
joined with the person of Christ. This also condemns the real presence and
carnal eating of Christ, which forgeth many Christ's, and reuiueth the heresy
of Eutiches: it crosses sundry Articles of the Christian faith, and makes
faithful men like the unfaithful Barbarians, that devoured man's flesh and
drunk his blood. True it is, Christ is truly present in the Sacrament,
howbeit not carnally, and corporally, but spiritually and mystically. He has
given himself to be the food of our souls, let us hunger and thirst after him
and lay hold on him to our salvation: for ^ Ioh. 5, 12.
he that has the Son, has life: he that has not the Son of God, has not
life. The last inward part is the faithful receiver, who stretches forth the
hand of faith, and so lays hold on Christ and al his saving graces. For no
man can communicate with his body, but the same is made partaker of his
benefits. Let us all prepare the true and lively faith Tit. 1.1.
of Gods elect, and assure our selves that hypocrites and unbelievers cannot
possibly be partakers of the body and blood of Christ. These are the four
inward parts also of the Lords Supper. The similitude and relation The
proportion betwixt the outward and inward parts of the Supper.
of the outward and inward parts one to another stands in this manner, even
as the Minister by the words of institution, offers and gives bread and wine
to the Communicants, to feed thereupon bodily: so the Father by the Spirit,
offers and exhibiteth the body and blood of Christ Jesus, to the souls of
the faithful to feed upon them spiritually. Thus much of all the parts of the
Lords Suppeer: now follow the uses to be unfolded. The The uses of the l^d
supper are three
uses and profit which we reap by the Lords Supper are specially three. First
to show forth with praise and thanksgiving, the death and the sufferings of
Christ, who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, by whose
stripes 1 Pet. 2, 24
we are healed: so that we have the chief cause in our selves, which did
crucify Christ. Secondly, to teach our communion with Christ, being made flesh
E^h 5, 30.
of his flesh, and bone of his bones. Hence we learn, that all the godly and
believers are made partakers of Chrst and his graces. This is matter of great
comfort in our manifold trials and tentations, that we are joined to Christ as
members to the head, Romans 8.^3.
and therefore neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of GOD, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. But on the other side, the ungodly and unbelievers have
no part or portion in Christ and his graces, they are as branches Ioh. 15, 6.
cut off which wither, and men gather them to cast them into the fire and to
burn them. Thirdly, to declare and testify our Communion, fellowship, and 1
Cor. 10, 17
agreement with our brethren, meeting together at the same Table, and partaking
together of the same Supper. Wherefore, seeing we have not only an union with
Christ, but a Communion among our selves, we are the servants of the Church, to
serve one another in all duties of love, to instruct them that are ignorant, to
raise them that are fallen, and to bind up the broken hearted, to reconcile
our selves one toward another, and to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace. Hitherto we have handled the doctrine of the Lords Supper, declaring
what it is, what are the parts and uses thereof; the preparation to this work
follows, 1 Cor. 11.28
consisting in the examination of our selves, and trying our own hearts by the
touchstone of the law of God. This duty is very necessary to be performed of
us, Ier. 17, 9.
for the heart of man is deceitful above al things, and the secret corners of
it past finding out. We have to deal with God in this business. Great is the
profit which we reap and receive, if we come rightly and reverently prepared.
Great is the punishment procured, by want of this trial and examination. And
the Hag. 2 14
Sacrament it self is defiled, by unworthy receiving. This preparation
principally stands in these four points: in the Ioh. 17, 3.
knowledge of God and of our seluess especially of the whole doctrine of the
Sacraments: in a 2 Cor. 13, 5
lively faith in Christ, seeing every one receives so much as he believes he
receives: in repentance Psalm. 26, 6.
from dead works: and lastly in Mat. 5, 23.
reconciliation toward our brethren, having peace Romans 12.18.
with all men, and love toward our enemies.

Thus I have opened plainly, yet truly, the doctrine of the Sacraments,
delivered in the Scriptures, and taught in the reformed Churches. I have
disclosed some part of the mystery of Iniquity, and discovered and laid open
the skirts of that great Idol of the Mass, the reproach of Christians, the
scorn of the Gentiles, the offense of the weak, and the occasion of ruin to
many that stumble thereat to their own confusion. The Lord God, high possessor
of heaven and earth, and preserver of his people that call upon him, put it
into the heart of al Christian Princes and Rulers of the earth, to pull down
this abominable Idol, that has advanced it self against the kingdom of
Christ, and to deface this filthy monster that has deceived many, who trusted
in it. The same Lord vouchsafe to reveal his truth to the ignorant, to
establish them that are weak, and to confound all obstinate enemies to his
truth, to their Prince, and to their Country, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.
Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal Contents of this Book.
ABsence from the Communion. Page 296. 304. 515. 306. Absolution of the
Papists, what. p. 128. Abstinence from the Supper. See Abse^ce. Accidents
without subjects. p. 348. Adoration of the Sacraments. p 386. 387. Adversaries
confess two Sacraments. pa. 115. Agreement between the word and Sacraments.
p. 2 between Sacraments of the old Testament and New. p. 117. Between
Circumcision and Baptism p. 226. Altars not used in the Supper. p. 288.
Anabaptists revelations. p. 74. they deny Childrens Baptism p. 232. Aquarij
old Heretics. p 385. Articles of faith ouerturned by Transubstantiation. p.
362. Assemblies must continue till Baptism be administered. p. 163. reasons of
it. Ibid. Assurance of salvation. p. 95. 118. 146. Attention required to the
signs p 447. Auricular confession reproved. p. 127, 517. diverse sorts of
confession. pa. 519. what the Popish shrift is. Ibid.
B
Baptism taken many ways p. 150 what it is pa 151. the parts of it pa. 158.
174. who have interest in it. p. 210. Baptism of heretics how far good. page
155. administered by eu ll ministers it is good p. 566. and by ignorant
ministers. pa. 567 Baptism ought not to be delayed. page 160. not tied to a
certain day. p. 161. ^27. in what sort necessary. page 108. it must be handled
by the ministers only. p. 175. the reasons of it. p. 176. Baptism of Christ
and John all one. page 166. 167. Baptism used by the Church of Rome lawful
pa. 186. whether we may bring our children to be baptized of Popish Priests.
p. 187. Baptism no humane tradition. pa 229. 230. 239. it is the Ch^istian
badge. pa 259. not to be handled in sport. pa. 261. 263. it belongs to all
present. pa. 262. it engrafteth us into Christ. page 266. it can make none
Christians. p. 269. it cannot confer grace. pa. 270. it seals up
forgiveness of all dnne. p. 270. 272. what uses it has. page 266. it is
auailable without a sermon. page 561. Baptized in heart. pa. 275. it is the
truth of baptism. p. 277. Baptising in the name of the Trinity how to be
understood. pa. 194 corruptions of it in the Church of Rome p. 199. belles
baptized, p. 213, it belongs not to Angels, nor to the dead, p. 215. we may
not Baptize one for another, Ib nor infidels, p. 217 Bastards may be baptized,
p. 220, and saved Ibid. Blind custom, p. 318. Body of Christ truly received,
p. 296. Bread may not be changed in the supper, page 350, why it was chosen
before other things p. 437. Bread and wine remain in their proper nature, p.
354. Breaking of bread what use it has, p. 287 448, it is not to be omitted.
Ib. it expresses Christ's passion, p. 288, how it is necessary, p. 331.
C
Calling every one must have, page 179. Carnal presence, See Real. Change of
the bread wherein, p. 53. Chastisements of the body, p. 124. Children dying
before baptism, See Infants. Children are within the covenant p. 211. of such
as come of unbelieving parents p 212 Children of Turks and Pagans how they may
be baptized, p. 218, of impenitent persons, p. 119, of such as are born in
adultery, p 220, of Papists, p. 121, and of excommunicate persons, Ibid.
Children not to be admitted to the supper, p. 514. Circumcision the same with
baptism, p. 226, it is double. 275, used now of the turks and Moors, p, 228.
Christ is offered to all. p. 2^. he is received by faith, p. 76. he is the
substance of all Sacraments, p. 75 of baptism, p. 253, of the supper, p. 454.
he was a Lamb slain from the beginning, p. 79, he is our food, pa. 84. he
received a true body, pa. 458, he suffers with us, p. 502. Christ how
present, p 456. Comfort for the lowest in the Church, p. 162, for parents, pa.
241, for children touching their baptism, page 264 and for the whole Church,
Ibid. Communion between Christ and the faithful, p. 267, 281, 499. it is
wonderful near, p 500 expressed by marriage, p. 455. Communion with our
brethren, page 503. we must employ our gifts to their good, pa. 50^. love one
another, p 505. Communion under one kind, p. 369. Co^municants a part of the
Supper, p 385 Comparison between bodily and spiritual eating, p 460.
Confession no part of repentance, page 125, the kinds of it, p. 126.
Confirmation no Sacrament. pa. 119, the reasons, p. 120. the ceremonies used in
it, p. 121, it is preferred before baptism, p. 122. Concomitantia, p. 380.
Consecration what, p. 51, 435, wherein it consists, p 52, not a charm page
53, 436, the means thereof, page 436. we have it in our Churches, p. ^^8.
Conjunction, See Communion. Contempt of the Sacraments damnable, p. 5, 100,
160. Contrition no part of repentance, p. 125. Contradictions touching
transubstantiation, p. 366. Contradictions not in God, p. 471, Corruptions in
baptism. p. 200. Covenant between God and man, what, p. 96. who are within the
covenant, pa. 102, who are without it, pa. 103, it has 2. seals, p. 110.
D
Death not to be feared, p. 146. Declaring the Lords death, what, p. 496.
Departing out of the Church before baptism unlawful, p. 163. Despair
remedied, See Remedies. Difference between word and Sacraments, p. 4, between
Sacrifice and Sacrament, p. 63. between the Sacraments of the old Testament and
the New, page 116, between John's baptism and Christ's, pa. 167, between
circumcision and baptism, p. 226, between baptism and the Lords Supper, p
239, 347, 513 Difference between the childeren of the saithful and infidels, p.
240, between the Papists and us touching christ's presence. p. 456. Dipping not
necessary in baptism, p. 152 Division of hell, p 81. Dry communions forbidden,
p. 375. Duties of them that are baptized, p. 195.
E.
Eating of Bread how understood, p 378. spiritual, what, p. 460. Elevation of
the Sacrament, p. 386. Ends of a Sacrament, p. 89, of Baptism, p. 266, of the
Lords Supper, page 493, false ends devised by Papists, Ibid. Evil ministers may
deliver sacraments p. 17 Eucharist, see Supper. Examination necessary, p. 507,
reasons urging it, p. 509, wherein it consists, p. ^25. the want of it
brings judgment, p. 543. Examination of others how reproved p. 522
Excellency of the faithful, p. 105. Excommunicate persons, p. 319.
F.
Faith what it is, p. 530, what are the hands of it, p. Ib. it stands in
applying, p 531, it is the hardest thing to believe, page 532, though weak,
yet available, pa. 535, two degrees of it, Ibid. Faith like the mouth of a
vessel p 480, it must be brought with us to the Supper, p. 486, 530, it goes
not always with feeling, p. 305, it is assaulted with doubting pa. 93, none
rejected for the weakness of it, p 94. Fa^se Sacram. of the Roman Church, p. 42
False ends of the Supper, see Ends. Falling from grace, p 1^6. Fasting not
necessary before the Supper, p. 402. Fathers dying, went to heaven, p. 80.
Fellowship with Christ, p. 268, the means that work it, p. 269. Forgiveness
of sins, p. 395, Form of baptism p. 157, 193, the means thereof, p. 194.
G.
God the Author of Sacram^n^s, p. ^6, he always gave them to his Chu ch, p.
1. his love to the ^aithfull, p. 242. Godly are made partakers of christ, p.
501 they cannot be separated f om him, Ibid. God fathers and God mothers
ancient, p. 244, a commendable custom, page 245. whence it came, Ibid. Grace
not tied to the Sacraments, p. 65, none rejected that has my grace, p. 310.
H.
Hands of the soul, what, p. 452. Heretics baptism, p 155, 186. Hildebrand
cast the Sacrament into the fire, p. 468. Hope well of the seed of the
faithful, pa. 212, 224. Hunger after Christ, p. 473. Hypocrites ascribe too
much to the Sacraments, p. 488, they are not partakers of Christ, p. 489.
I.
Jews bos^ed of circumcision, p. 275, their sacraments were not figures of
ours, p. 112. Ignorant persons partake not the Sacraments aright, p. 40, 44.
Infants dying before Baptism not damned, p. 202. reasons thereof, page 203.
they have not actual faith p. 224, they ought to be baptized, p. 22^. proou^d
by reasons, p. 225, 226. they ought not to be admitted to the Supper, pp. 233,
234, they are guilty of orig^nal sin, p 237. 230. Infidelity, p. 147. Infidels
not to be Baptized, p. 217. John's Baptism and Christ's alone, p. 559. Intention
of the minister not necessary, p. 54, 62, Popish shifts to justify it, p. 58.
Inward parts of a Sacrament, p. 61, of Baptism, p. 248, of the Supper, p. 444.
Judas received not the Supper. page 486. Judging our selves wherein it
consists, p. 89.
K.
Kneeling at the Communion lawful, pa. 40^, it is not Idol^try, p. 405, reasons
to justify it, p 419, 424, no learned man against it, p. 410, what is objected
against it, Praefac. it is not used to the bread. Kneeling fittest at Prayer,
p. 407. Knowledge ought to be ^n all, p. 10^, 512 in what particulars it
consists, p. ^16. God offers the means thereof at one time or other, p.
^29.
L
Leaning at the Supper, ^ 414. Little faith is true faith* p. ^6. Love feasts
not called the Lords Supper, p. 28^. Love required of such as come to the
supper, p. 5^5, it is the trial o^ other duties, p. Ib. it is one end of the
Supper, p 557, without it we pray against our selves, page 548* the properties
of it, Ibid.
M.
Malicio is cannot receive aright, p. 282 Marcionites, p 216. Marriage between
Christ and the faithful, p. 2^7. Mass whence, p. 391, the n^me not evil in
it self, Ibid, an ^dol of the Papists, p. 392, reas^ns against it, Ibid it
cannot stand with the Communion, p. 282, 291, it is no propitiatory sacrifice,
p. 294 M trimony no Sacrament, p. 42, 131. the reasons thereof p. 132.
Messalians, p. 271. Midwiues not to baptize, p. 1^1. Min^sters only may
deliver Sacraments, p. 13, the reasons of it, p 34, their work in the
Sacram^nts p. ^6, they can but deliver the signs, p. 37 what to do when they
cannot be had p 184. Ministers must be ready to baptize children, p. ^89 what
actions he must perform in baptism Ibid. and in delivering the Supper, p 325,
they are not sacrificing Priests, p. 32^. Ministers intent. See Intention,
Miracles ceased p. 472.
N
By nature all sinful, pa. ^58. Necessary how far the Sacraments are, p. 32.
Neglect of baptism, pa. 160, 161 of patents sin in this, p. 208. Neglect of
coming to the Communion, p 321. Number of Sacraments two, p. 109. the reasons
thereof, pa. 110. taught by the Fathers, page 114, 115.
O.
Obi^ctions o^ Papists, that the Sacraments confer grace, p. 60, 67.
Objections used in d^fence of women's baptism^, p. 81. Obiecti^ns used to prove
children without baptism damned. p. 205. Objections of Anabaptists against
childrens baptism, p. 232, 233. Objections of careless Communicants, p. 299,
of such as make the breaking of the bread essential, p 329. of such as make it
indifferent, p 332. Objections pretending that private persons may deliver the
Communion, p. 327. Objections for taking the cup from the people, p 375, for
private Communions, p. 399. Objections of the necessity of sitting at the
Supper, p. 410, against kneeling, p. 417. Objections touching the real
presence, p. 466. Objections of those of the separation, why they cannot
Communicate with us, p. 522. Often receiving required, p. 316, 297, 284, 302,
442. reasons to persuade it, Ibid. the contrary came from the Devil, p. 297.
Offering for sin, p. 392. Omnipotency proves not the real presence, p 470.
Two rules touching it, Ibid. Once Christ was offered, p. 393. Orders no
Sacrament, p. 42, 136. the reasons thereof, p. 137. Orders of Angels, p. 81.
Original sin in Infants. See Infants. Original sin p. 273 it is forgiven
by Christ, p 255. Outward parts of a Sacrament, p. 32, of baptism, p. 174, of
the Supper, p 323. Outward washing not the chief part of baptism, p. 250. it
assures the inward clensing, p. 258.
P
Paraphrase upon the words of institution, p. 340. Parents must teach children,
p. 30, 243. not neglect their baptism, p. 208. Penance no Sacrament, p 123.
the reaons thereof, p 129, the parts of it, p. 124, what the Papists mean by
it, p. 130. People must resort to Ministers for baptism p. 189. Popish
ceremonies in baptism, p. 201 202. Popish shifts to justify the Priests
intention, p, 8 See intention. Popish orders of Angels, See orders, Popish
division of hell, See Divisions, Poor comforted, p, 162, 199, Prayer not in a
strange tongue, p. 346 a means of Consecration, p. 437, it must be used for
Gods bles^ing, p. 441. Presence co^sidred many ways, p. 451. 465. Presence of
ungodly men at the Supper, cannot defile us* p. 23. Princes allowed to receive
in both kinds, p. 373, the reasons thereof, Ibid. Private Communions unlawful,
p. 396. they overthrow the nature of a Sacrament, p. 401. Private Mass: See
Mass. Private persons must not meddle with Church Censures, p. 24, nor with
the Sacraments, p. 36, nor with the Supper, p. 327. Profession of the faith, p.
10^, against such as scoff at it, p. 107.
Q
Questions, whether the children of Jews and Turks may be baptized, page, 218,
whether the childeren of impenitent persons may, p^. 219. whether children
borne in adultery may, pa. 220. whether children of professed Papists may be
baptized, pa. 221. whether the childeren of excommunicate persons may, Ib
whether we may bring our children to be baptized of Popish Priests, pa. 187.
Question between Papists and us about Christ's presence, p. 296. Question
whether the Apostles only received at Christ's hand, p, 375, 376.
R
Real presence* pa, 455. confuted by reasons, p, 457, it brings many
contradictions p. 458. Reasons why we ought oftentimes to communicate. pa. 3
4. why the breaking of bread ^ nec^ssary. p. 331. why Christ made choice of
bread, page 346. why he made choice of wine, p 347. Reasons against
Transubstantiation, p. 354. Receiver a part of the Sacrament. p 48. without
receiving, no Sacrament, page 49. what duties are required of receivers, p. 50
they must not rest in outward receiving, p. 51. Rebaptziation unlawful, p 154.
whence it arose p 155. Reconciliation, pa. 283. 284. See Love. Remedies against
despair. p. 147. Remnants left after the Supper, pa. 440, Repentance required
of all communicants p, 108, 109, what it is, p, 123, 538 not to be delayed. p.
313. Reprobates receive the signs alone, p, 87 Reservation of the Supper, p,
386. Reuolters from babtisme. p, 2^0. Rites, Look Sacramental.
S
Sacraments profit not always by and by, p, 3, they cannot beget faith, p, 5,
a list and in need of them, pa. 10, how more effectua^l men the word, p, 11,
the parts of them, page 26, 32. Sacrament what it signifies, p, 14, not to be
adored, p, 388, Sacraments instituted of God, p, 16, their force depends not on
the minister, page, 17, they cannot confer grace, page, 25, they depend not on
the intent of the minister, page, 55, 56, 57, they seal the covenant between
God and us, page, ^6, they are badges of our profession, p, 104. Sacraments why
called mysteries, pa, 138. they profit not without the spirit, p 253.
Sacramental rites strengthen faith, p, 454. Sacramental eating what, p, 483,
Sacrifice how the Supper is, p, 397, Satisfaction no part of repentance, p,
127, reasons against it, p, 128, Seal and sign how they differ, p, 15. Sermon
not necessary before baptism p 560. Sick how to be comforted, pa, 142, how
they may put away the pains of sickness. p, 146, how they should behave
themselue^ toward their families, page 148: how they should comfort themselves
wanting the Supper, p. 328. Sins committed by such as come not to the Supper
p. 10. Sitting at the Supper not necessary, p. 407, 408. Sitting of Christ not
the same with ours, p. 413, how the institution may be broken sitting, p 417.
Soul cleansed an inward part of baptism, p 257. Spirit makes the Sacramen^s
profitable, p. 64, 72, 251, 449 he is true God, pa. 252, we must crave his
assistance coming to the word and Sacraments, Ibid, he joins us to Christ,
page 451. Spiritual eating what, page 481. Spiritual sluggards, page 312,
313. Supper called by many names, page 280, why called a Supper, pa. 285, it is
no sacrifice, page 289, what it is, p. 293. Supper how abused profanely, pa.
295, it must be often received, p. 297, it is rightly a costly banquet, p. 303,
it was instituted for the weak, p. 310, how it is physic, p. 311, six sorts
baried from it, p. 514. Sufferings of Christ, p 479, causes thereof in our
selves, p. 496, who profit aright by them, p. 497.
T.
Testament of Christ, p. 250. Tongue unknown, see prayer. Transubstantiation
over thrown, p. 45, 354, it is full of contradictions, p. 366, it is the life
of popery, p. 369. Types of baptism, p. 274.
V.
Victor poisoned in the Chalice, p. 358. Understanding of the instituion
necessary, p. 140. Unction no Sacrament, p. 139, the reasons thereof pa. 140
Ungodly not partakers of Christ, pa. 502, they have no benefit by the
Sacraments, p. 552. Union between Christ and the faithful, p. 267. Unleavened
bread not necessary, p. 382. Unlawful to stand by and not receive, page 298,
299. Uses of the Sacraments, p. 90, of baptism p 266, of the Supper, p. 493.
Use of spiritual things breeds not contempt, p. 307.
W.
Water an outward part of baptism, page 158, it cannot clen^e away si, p 253,
254. Weak faith applies Christ, p. 76, 72, 94 Weak have interest in the
Supper, page 310. Weakness no cause to abstain from the Supper p. 525. Wicked
receive only the signs, pa. 29, they are to be separated from the
Sacraments, p. 485, they do not receive Christ, p. 400 Will, see Testament.
Wine why chosen to be the sign in the Supper, p. 347, it may not be changed,
page 350, it is not to be mingled with water pa. 384. Word and Sacraments must
go together, page 10, it is required to the essence of a Sacrament, p. 38, no
word, no Sacrament, p. 41 word of institution, p. 337, it is expounded. p. 338,
it is a means of Consecration, pa. 437. Women may not baptize, pa. 177, 178.
no assurance to receive the truth of a Sacrament from them, p. 178. Women
after as^r^ circumcised, p. 226. Worthiness of the Sacrament d^pends not on
man, p. 18.
Y.
Youth must remember God* p. 248.
FINIS.

