royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE By the King.
A Proclamation for the apprehension of Richard Smith, a Popish Priest, styled,
and calling himself, the Bishop of Calcedon.
FOrasmuch as We certainly understand, that Richard Smith, an English man
borne, by profession a Popish Priest, now is, and, for some years past, has
been in this Realm, and here not only peruerteth Our Subierts in their
Religion, but does also both by his writings in Print, and otherwise, and by
his continual practice, persuade those Our Subjects, to whom he has access,
from their Alleagiance to Us, their Liege Lord, and usurps to himself
Episcopal jurisdiction from the Sea of Rome, and exercises the same within
this Kingdom, and holds continual Intelligence with Our enemies, whereby,
according to the just Laws of this Realm, he has committed the offense of
high Treason: And yet nevertheless, diverse of Our Subjects seduced by him, do
receive, harbor, and entertain him, contrary to Our Laws, and have thereby
incurred, and do incur the penalty of those Laws, which are capital to the
offenders. We therefore being justly provoked by the boldness of the said
Smith, do hereby straightly command all Our loving Subjects, of whatsoever
condition, quality, or degree, that none of them directly or indirectly do
permit, or suffer him to be concealed, or harbored, but that forthwith they
arrest and apprehend his body, and bring him before the next Justice of Peace,
to the place where he shall be apprehended, whom We straightly command to
commit him to prison without Bail or Maineprise, and presently thereupon
inform Us, or Our Privy Counsel, of his apprehension.

And We do further declare hereby, that if any person shall hereafter directly
or indirectly harbor or conceal the said Smith, or use, or conniue at any
means, whereby the said Smith may escape from being apprehended or arrested,
that then We shall extend the uttermost severity of Our Laws against every
such offender. And We further charge and command all and singular Our Judges,
Justices of Peace, Majors, Sherifs, Constables, and all other Our Officers,
Ministers, and loving Subjects, that if they shall find any person offending
herein hereafter, that then they and every of them proceed with all diligence
and roundnes, not only against the said Smith, but also against all such as
shall harbor, conceal, or conniue at his concealment, or shall not use their
best endeavors for his discovery and apprehension, according to the uttermost
extent of Our Laws.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the eleventh day of December, in the fourth
year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXVIII.


