A COMMENTARY UPON THE EPISTLE OF SAINT PAVLE TO PHILEMON. Wherein, the
Apostle handling a mean and low subject, entreating for a Fraudulent and
Fugitive Servant, mounteth aloft unto God, and delivers sundry high Mysteries
of true Religion, and the practice of Duties oeconomicall. Political.
Ecclesiastical.


As Of Persecution for Righteousness sake. Of Christian Equity, and
Moderation. Of Gods free Grace forgiving offenses. Of Household Government, and
private possessions. Of the Conversion of Sinners, and Communion of Saints. Of
Faith, and good works. Of Friendship, and Suretiship. Of Prayer, and
Hospitality. Of the Gospel, and Almes-deedes. Of Gods Providence. And of the
force and fruit of the Ministry.


Moving all the Ministers of the Gospel, to a diligent laboring in the
spiritual Harvest, and the people, to a conscionable attending to the word of
Salvation, as to Gods high and holy ordinance for our conversion, with assured
hope of his wonderful blessing; upon the sound Preaching of the one, and the
saving hearing of the other.

Written by WILLIAM ATTERSOLL, Minister of the word of God, at Isfield in
Sussex.

Luke 17. 3. Take heed to your selves: if thy Brother trespass against thee,
rebuke him: and if he repent, forgive him.

Printed at London by William Iaggard. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir THOMAS PELHAM, Baronet, increase of GRACE in this
life, and eternal GLORY in the life to come.
AGesilaus King of Lacedemon, when one praised a certain Orator that he could
stretch out small matters at large and length; and amplify them with many
words, both fitly and fully answered him, But I cannot Plut. Apotheg.
think him a good Shoo-maker, that would put a great and wide Shoo upon a
slender foot. There be many I fear, who considering the shortness of this
present Epistle; and comparing it with the largeness of my Exposition, will
be ready to suppose and surmise, through the fore-stalling of their
preiudicate Opinion, that to a little City I have set up wide Gates; and to a
slender body, have fashioned a wide Garment; both which, are faulty and unfit.
But, if these partial Judges would weigh the cause aright, in just and equal
Balances, without the corrupt affections of Malice, or Envy, I doubt not, but
they will rather think, that to a great Foot I have fitted and applied a
little Shoo.

For this Epistle Written to Philemon, though it be short in words, and
comprehended in a little compass; yet, if we regard and respect (as we ought
to do) either the pithy and profound substance of the matter, or the cunning,
or rather curious Art of Paul the writer, or the great and glorious Majesty of
God the Endighter, which shines and shows it self even in the least things;
we shall be constrained to confess, that this is a right great Epistle, and as
Macrob. comment in Some. Scipion. lib. 2. cap. 5.
one says in another case, Verborum parua, sed rerum foecunda, and the
Interpretation of it very brief, both in regard of the Worthiness of the
Argument, and the Wisdom of the Spirit that appears therein. A Diamond may
be little, yet it is of great price. The eye is small, yet it sees far. The
heart is little, yet is it the life of the body. It pleases God to show forth
the greatness of his power in the least works of his hands. And as Merchants
that cast Accounts, Vellei. Pateri. hyster. lib. 1.
comprize greater sums in shorter room; so does the Apostle handle most
weighty Matters and Mysteries within the slender compass of a few Verses, that
we should rather weigh the work, then number the words. He seems no where to
reason more exquisitely, and to deal more pregnantly then in this place. Every
word almost has the force of a Motive; and seasoning his cause with Wisdom,
and his doings with Art, he so creeps into Philemons bosom, and closes with
him at a sudden, that by no means he can start from him. Sometimes, by
loving Titles; Sometimes by Artificial insinvations; Sometimes, by favorable
preventing of Objections; Sometimes, by Rhetorical persuasions; Sometimes, by
earnest Preparations; Sometimes, by Charitable Mittigations; Sometimes, by
strong Obligations; Sometimes, by deep Protestations; Sometimes, by fit
Reuocations; and sometimes by forcible Arguments, as it were by so many
courteous Congies, and vehement Adiurations, he deals and prevails in such
sort with him: Liuy histor. lib. 45.
as Popilius the Roman Ambassador, against Antiochus King of Syria, who
having delivered his message from the Senate, made a circle about him with his
rod, and charged him to put off all delays, and give him present answer
before he departed out of it. Thus does the Apostle lay his Net, and cast his
Chain about Philemon, that he hampereth him fast, and holds him close,
before he is aware of any such matter.

This Philemon (to whom the Epistle is directed) was a Wealthy man, a Citizen
of Colosse, the Host of the Church, who had a Servant, named Onesimus; he,
having pilfered and purloyned some of his Masters goods, fled away from him
and the Church that was in his house. For, whatsoever the care and diligence of
the Governors be, lewd persons do oftentimes shroud themselves under their
Roof. But coming to Rome, no better then a fugitive, he heard Paul preach
the Word, which is as Ier. 23, 29.
an Hammer to break in pieces the stony hearts of unregenerate men, and Romans
1, 16.
the power of God to salvation, to all that believe; so that he acknowledged
the falt he had committed, and desired to be reconciled to his Master, whom
he had offended. He being thus gained to the Faith, Gualt. hom. 1. in Philemon.
and kindly and courteously entreated by Paul ( Who becomes all things to
all men, 1 Cor. 9, 22
that by all means he might save some) is by him sent back with these Letters
of Commendation, and intercession for him, pleading his cause, as it were at
the bar, effectually, craving pardon for him earnestly: and teaching Gualt.
hom. 2 in Philemon.
thereby, that no man (albeit of the lowest sort and condition) truly
repenting, ought to be despised and contemned. He went away Unprofitable, he
returned Profitable; he went away Gualt. hom. 5 in Philemon.
Perverted, he returned Converted; he went away a Servant, he returned a
Brother. Before he heard Paul preach, he was a Thief; but when he had heard
him, he became as his Natural Son, Phile. ver. 10
as he is not ashamed to call him, and account him in this Epistle.

Question.
Upon this occasion of this Servants flying away, and be-taking himself to his
heels, a question may be demanded, which also of some Paraeus in Genes. cap.
39.
is handled, whether it be lawful for bond-slaues that are bought with money
(such as the state of Servants in those days for the most part was) to run
away from their Masters, forasmuch as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7, 21. If thou
may be free, use it rather. Where he wills them to prefer freedom before
bondage, and to be their own men rather then another; and to be at liberty,
rather then to be Servants to the Honor and Humor of other men. Answer.
I answer, such practice is not to be any ways allowed, unless they be
oppressed with beastly and intolerable Tyranny, and be denied meat and
maintenance, whereby life is to be sustained. For then their Masters that have
paid Terent. in Andr. act 1. scen. 1
a price for them should be defrauded, the Covenant or promise (that
themselves have passed) should be disanulled, and themselves being taken,
should thorough their own misdemeanor, be more cruelly handled, and kept in
harder and straighter durance. We see when Joseph was sold by the Treachery of
his envious Brethren, and thereupon carried far from Genes. 39, 1
his Fathers house, he behaved himself with all Modesty and Meekness, he
endured the cross with all patience, being laid in fetters where Psalm. 105, 18
the Iron entered into his soul; he never attempted to make a wilful escape,
or to break open prison (albeit it had been no hard matter to do it) least
while he thought to avoid the smoke, he should fall into the fire: like unto
Espops Fish, who being in the pan, leaped upon the coals. The Israelites when
they were holden in Exodus chap. 1, and 2.
Egypt in bondage and great slavery, never offered to make resistance, but
waited with all long suffering, until God sent Moses and Aaron to work their
deliverance. The Doctrine of the Popish Schoolmen allows in their deciding
of cases of conscience, such as are unjustly and wrongfully imprisoned, to
escape for their lives if they can: and according to this determination, is the
practice of the Papists. But this is no better then to resist the Magistrate,
Romans 13, 2.
which is the Ordinance of GOD, Romans 13. The Apostles being clapped up in
prison, never sought occasion and opportunity to deliver themselves, until God
and Man delivered them, and brought them forth: and sometimes Acts 5, 19. and
12, 7, 8.
the Lord sent his Angel from Heaven, to open the prison doors, and to smite
off their chains, and to free them from the rage of their enemies. The Apostle
Peter warns Servants to be subject to their Masters with all fear; not
only to the good and courteous, but also to such as are froward: and he gives
this Reason, 1 Pet. 2, 19.
For this is thanke-worthy, if a man for Conscience toward God, endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. We must commit our selves and our causes to God, and
take heed we use not unlawful means to set our selves at liberty.

Now, concerning the counsel and direction of the Apostle, he persuades no
liberty but such as is lawful, even to free themselves from thraldom by all
good and honest means, only that God shall put into their heads and hands.
For, when Servants were bought and sold as Villains, nay as brute Beasts in
the Market, and while their Master had power over them of life and death, he
would have all such as are under the yoke, 1 Timothy 6, 1.
Count their Masters worthy of all Honor, that the name of God and his
Doctrine be not evil spoken of. When Paul and Silas were committed to close
prison, as they sung Psalms to God, Act. 16, 25, 26.
suddenly there was a great Earthquake, and the Foundation of the Prison was
shaken, by and by all the doors opened, and every Man's bands were loosed, so
that they might without knowledge or disturbance of any, have escaped and gone
their ways; but being committed by authority, they remained as lawful
prisoners without evasion.

These things here briefly touched, are largely entreated of in this
Commentary; touching the penning whereof, to leave mine own Labors to the
Judgment of the indifferent Reader, I cannot deny (but do ingenuously
confess) that I have benefited my self, and do desire to benefit others, by
other Authors, both Old and New, whom I have searched and perused, through
whose travails I have bin guided and directed in the way, and by whose eyes I
have seen into many particulers here discussed. Concerning the ancient
Writers, that have the grayest hairs, I cannot pass over Chrysostom and
Theophylact, both Greek Writers: Concerning the Modern and later, Calvin,
Beza, Illyricus, Rolloc, Piscator, Hunnius, which (for Honors sake) I name and
remember. Among whom, some have written shorter Annotations, others have
written fuller expositions, and al of them have yielded some matter and stuff
toward the erecting of this building. Neither is this any shame or reproach to
acknowledge, Prolog. in Adelph.
but rather a fruit of Justice and Equity, to give to every one his own. Let
no man therefore object, that I have thrust my Sickle into another man's Corn,
or put mine hand into another man's Coffer, or ploughed my ground with another
man's Heifer, or set to sale other men's goods, as mine own; much less vpbraide
with contumely and contempt, Horat. lib. 1. epist. 3.
the saying of the Poet: Si forte suas repetitum venerit olim,
Grex anium plumas, moueat cornicula risum,
Furtiuis nudata coloribus.
that is; If every Foul shall fetch her plumes again,
The Naked Crow, shall stripped of all remain.
The Wiseman teaches, Eccle. 1, 9, 10
There is no new thing under the Sun, is there any thing whereof one may say:
Behold this, it is new? It has bin already in the old time that was before us.
The Heathen man saw this, and could say: Nihil est iam dictum quod non sit
dictum prius:
that is; There nothing is, or said, or seen;
Before our times, that has not been.
The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, says, 1 Cor. 3, 22.
All things are yours, whether it be Paul's, or Apollos, or Cephas, etc. all
are helps allowed and appointed unto us to bring us unto Christ. It is no
small comfort to Travelers Bucan. praef. in Institu. Theolog.
to tread and trace the footsteps of such as have walked the right way before
them. In like manner, it is no small profit and pleasure to me, grounded upon
the evidence of the truth, to have followed the examples of learned and
approved Authors, that have labored faithfully in the Vineyard of the Lord,
and lighted a Candle unto others.

This Exposition (such as it is) I presume to offer unto your Worship, not
fearing your Judgment in the allowance, nor doubting of your favor in the
acceptance thereof, and therefore grounding my self upon it, I regard not the
censure of Carpers and Cauillers, who have nothing to grace themselves, but by
seeking the disgrace of others; nor yet any thing to raise themselves a great
name, but by taking away others good name: so that as one says well, Scaliger.
exercit. in fine.
Ex alieni nominis ruina gradum sibi faciunt ad gloriam suam. They will dislike
either the person, or the matter, or the style, or the allegations, or they
know not what, and care not what, so it be somewhat. The proofs used are too
many, the Reasons too large, the Uses too vehement; yea, nothing can please
them, that please themselves in their own conceits. If I should crave pardon
for my slippes in this Exposition, or for my boldness in this Dedication, I
should therein also open the mouths of many, to tax me of vanity, and reprove
me of folly. For, when Albinus, who wrote an History of the Roman Offices in
the Greek tongue, requested the Readers in the Praeface, to bear with him if
they found any imperfections and wants in his work, M. Cato the Censor
answered when he read it, Plut. in the life of Cato.
Doubtless he had deserved pardon indeed, if he had bin forced to write his
Story: but he is a Trifler that had rather ask pardon for his fault, then to
be without fault. For men are wont Macrob. Saturn. lib. 1. in Praefat.
to desire forgiveness either when they err at unawares, or when they commit a
fault by constraint and compulsion from such as have authority over them, whom
they cannot or dare not deny. Such severe and sharp Judges I am like to light
upon, who will demand the question of me, what I mean to plead for pardon?
For, who compelled me to make the fault for which I crave favor? And why I
did not rather keep my self from offending, then desire the forgiveness of
the offense?

Wherefore, leaving these rash and rigorous Censors of other men's doings, I
come to declare the causes that have induced me to offer the exposition of this
Epistle unto you, and to pass it under your Worships name. For to whom does a
Treatise of Godliness more fitly agree, then to him that professes
Godliness, and has the power of it dwelling in his heart? Or to whom should I
commend the Patronage of the truth, better then to him that is a fauorer and
lover of the truth, and of such as favor and love the truth? Besides, as I
have heretofore tasted of your kindness and bountifulness toward me, which I
ever esteemed as a debt lying upon me, so I have been desirous to leave a
perpetual Testimony to others, of a thankful heart. I am not able to
recompense like for like, but may rather say with the Apostle, Acts 3, 6.
Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have I give unto you: and so much
the more I will always be ready to follow the example of Paul, who when he had
received mercy at the hands of Onesiphorus, he prayed unto God to render back
into his bosom the fruits of his love bestowed upon him, 2 Timothy 1, 16 17, 18.
The Lord show mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my chain: but when he was at Rome, he sought me out
very diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy
with the Lord at that day, etc. So my ernest prayer to God, even the Father of
all mercy, and God of al consolation, is, and ever shall be, to show mercy for
your mercy, and love for your love, and to preserve you unto his heavenly
kingdom. And I beseech you oftentimes to Meditate upon the 71. Psalm, which as
it was composed by the Prophet in his latter time, so he oftentimes craves of
God to be with him, and to keep him safe, now that his head was hoare, and his
hairs gray, Psalm. 71, 5, 9, 17, 18.
Thou art my hope, O Lord God, even my trust from my youth: cast me not off in
the time of age, forsake me not when my strength fails. And afterward, O God,
thou have taught me from my youth, even until now, therefore will I tell of
thy wondrous works, yea even unto mine old age and gray head, O God, forsake
me not, until I have declared thine arm unto this generation, and thy power
to al them that shall come. For, a man may fall away from God, as well through
the doting of age, as through the lusts of youth. Be faithful unto the death,
and you shall receive the crown of life: continue unto the end, so shall you be
safe. The Wiseman teaches, that the days will come, when we shall say, we
have no pleasure in them, Eccle. 12, 3.
when the keepers of the house shall tremble, that is; the hands which safeguard
the body from injuries, shall shake as in a palsy: The strong men shall bow
themselves, that is, the legs, which are as a strong Staff, or as a firm
Pillar, to sustain and bear up the weight of the body, shall begin to fail
and wax feeble: The Grinders shall cease; that is, the teeth appointed to chew
the meat, either wax loose, or else are lost: They wax dark that look out
of the windows; that is, the eyes of the body (which are as the Windows of
the house to give light) Liuy. lib. 5. in the Oration of Licinius Caluus Pliny.
lib. 7. cap. 50.
shall decay and grow weaker and weaker, that they cannot behold the
brightness of the Sun: The doors shall be shut without by the base sound of
the Grinders; that is, the Lips which are as two Doors or Gates, shall
scarce be able to open themselves, being become stiff: He shall rise up at
the voice of the Bird, that is, the least noise shall be able to awake him, he
that while he was young slept soundly, so that the sound of a Trumpet could
hardly move him, is now by the crowing of the Cock, or the chirping of a
Bird, raised and disquieted: All the daughters of singing shall be abased; that
is, the ears and other Instruments of Music shall be so weakened and dulled,
that they shall take no pleasure nor delight therein, 2 Sa. 19, 36.
as Barzillai confesses unto David: also They shall be afraid of the high
thing, that is; when once they grow crooked with age, every plain way will
seem rough; and every stone, a Mountain unto them. And the Almond tree shall
flourish: that is, their head shall be renowned with the comely ornament of
white hairs, as the beautiful Blossoms of an Almond Tree, etc. Thus does the
Wiseman describe the discommodities and difficulties of old age, which
approaches unto us all, and will in the end overtake us, to the end we should
learn to remember our Creator in the days of our youth. The Lord God
Almighty, who is the ancient of days, deliver you from every evil work, and
bless you and yours more and more with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things, that as you bear the Image of his Eternity, so you may be partaker of
eternal Glory, Amen.

Yours to command, WILLIAM ATTERSOLL.

To the Reader.
IT was well said, Plini. secund. Epist. 6. lib. 1.
that the first duty of a Writer is, that he read over his own Title, and cast
back his eyes to consider what he began to write: who, if he dwell upon the
matter, is not to be accounted long: but if he wander and straggle from it,
every sentence is too too long and tedious. The Epistle with which I deal, I
confess, is short: the Commentary which I have written upon it, long: howbeit,
I have bin careful to remember the former rule, and to keep me close to the
present subject, and therefore hope to obtain pardon with patience. One of the
Ancients said of Carthage, that contended so much and so long with Rome, in
emulation for greatness and Empire; It is better to say nothing, then to
speak a little. Much more may this be said of this Noble and Divine Epistle,
wherein the Apostle does so discover his affections, and stir up the
affections of others, that too much cannot be spoken of it.

Touching the Epistles of Paul, some were written unto whole Churches; as that
to the Romans, Corinthians, Galathians, etc. Other were written to particular
persons; as two unto Timothy; one to Titus; and this to Philemon.
Notwithstanding, we must understand, that howsoever they were privately
directed to certain men, yet they were inspired of God, and penned by the
Apostle, for the benefit of the whole Church. For if respect had only been
had to those, unto whom they were purposely and principally intended, many
things Calvin. comment. in 1. Timoth.
might have bin spared, which are every where dispersed and handled in them.
This appears expressly in the Epistle to Titus; the which, albeit it carry his
Name alone, whom Paul left in Candy Titus 1, 5.
To redress the things that remain: yet the scope of Paul was, to profit the
whole Church, as we see in the finishing of the matter, when he shuts up the
whole in this manner; Titus 3, 15.
Grace be with you all. The Inscription is to one, but the conclusion is made
to many, even all the elect. So ought we to apply unto our selves, such
heavenly instructions as are handled in this Epistle, no less, then if it were
particularly sent unto every one of us from God.

The Books of the New Testament, may be ranged and ordered into three sorts;
whereof part are Historical, part Doctrinall, and part Prophetical, to omit
the Athanas. in Synopsi.
distributions of others. The Hystoricall are so called, because they describe
the History of Christ our Savior, as the four Evangelists; or of the Apostles
and the Church gathered by them; as the Acts of the Apostles. The Dogmaticall
are such, as are called the Epistles of the Apostles, not that such Paraeus
comment. upon the Epistle to the Romans
as comprehend the History of Christ, do not also contain the Doctrine of
Christ, and of salvation by Christ, but because these do most especially
handle the same. True it is, the Apostles labored in preaching the Gospel,
and publishing it by lively voice, in what places, and to what persons, and at
what times soever they could; but because they could not always dwell among
the Churches, and guide them with their presence which once they had planted,
neither yet were able to see them all in the face and to speak unto them mouth
to mouth: it pleased God to move them, and direct them to set down in writing
(compiled in form of Epistles) the sum of Christian Doctrine touching piety
toward God, Faith in Christ, and love toward men: but most especially
concerning the miserable estate of man through his fall, and of the remedies of
this misery: concerning the Person and Offices of Christ the mediator;
concerning the benefit of free Justification by Christ and of the lively fruits
thereof, which ought to shine forth in all them that are Justified. The
Prophetical Book, is only the Revelation of John, which under certain
Types, foretells the state of the Church to come, both the combats which it
shall endure, and the victory which it shall receive.

The Heretics that lived in former times, raised up from the pit of hell, by
Satan himself to disturb and destroy the faith of many, have called sundry of
these Cannonicall Books of Holy Scripture into Question, and rejected them
altogether, as Bastards or counterfeits. Faustus the Maniche (as S. Augustine
witnesses) was not ashamed to open his blasphemous Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 33.
cap. 3.
mouth, and affirm, that many things in the New Testament were false. The
Ebionites would receive only the Gospel according to Matthew, the other three
Iren. lib. 1. ca. 26.
they despised and refused. The Marcionites, another detestable and damned
sect, used only Lukes Gospel, and that also they miserably Epiph. haeres. 42.
mangled according to their own devilish fancy. The Acts of the Apostles,
and Paul's Epistles, were set at naught, and flatly refused by the Eusebius hyst.
lib. 4. cap. 29.
Tatians, and other Heretics called Seueriani, as Eusebius makes mention in
his History. Both the Epistles written unto Timothy, that to Titus, Hierom.
praef. in Tit.
and the Hebrews, were cast away by Marcian and Basilides: for whatsoever they
saw to cross Tertul. lib. 5. aduersus Marcian.
and contradict their Heresies, they rased out of the Canon, and would not
receive it as authentical. Among all which, this is to be observed, that such
as did admit (as Divine) any of the Epistles, did never deny the authority of
this Epistle to Philemon. Some indeed have renounced the Epistle to the
Hebrews: some, the latter Epistle of Peter: some, the Epistle of James: some,
the Epistles to Timothy and Titus; and other, the two latter familiar Epistles
of John: but no Heretic was so forsaken of God, or ever grew to be so
desperate, to contemn and set light by this Epistle, if ever he admitted and
accepted the credit of any. Which plainly declares the Majesty that shines in
this little and short Letter, wherein Paul by his Divine eloquence and
pithinesse of argument, does even ravish and astonish all the Readers thereof.

To the end this may the better appear, let us as in a Table set before our
eyes The contents and chief heads of this Epistle.
the chief heads and contents of this Epistle, and view with how cunning a
pen or Pensill, the principal parts thereof are drawn, together with the
profit arising from thence; following the example of them, which when they
bid any guess to Dinner or Supper, are wont first to declare what shall be
their cheer, and how many Dishes they shall have, praying them to take it in
good worth, and to look for neither better nor worse, then has been
mentioned. In like manner, being determined to make a feast, and having
provided a Banquet, which I have set forth, and invited the courteous and
Christian Reader, that will come and taste of it: I dare be bold to promise,
that the Meat is good and wholesome. What food soever is found that cannot
please the taste of a well-affected stomach, I confess the fault is in the
Cook that has prepared and dressed it. I would therefore entreat thee to
accept of these three Dishes, and to consider, the person that was the writer;
the person to whom he writes; and the person for whom he writes. The person
that penned it, was Paul the Apostle: the person to whom it was written, was
Philemon the Master: the person for whom he wrote, was Onesimus the Servant.
Upon these three, as on certain pillars, stand the maine drift and purpose of
this whole Epistle here expounded.

Touching the first, The person of the Writer of the Epistle.
which is Paul the Writer, he does not style himself in this place, as commonly
he uses; An Apostle of Jesus Christ, but The Prisoner of Christ, and declares
that he begat Onesimus to the Faith, in Prison. It is honorable to the Saints
to suffer for the truths sake. The Apostles rejoiced that they were Acts 5,
41. James 1, 2.
Counted worthy to endure afflictions and troubles in a good cause. They
endured imprisonment as Martyrs, not as Malefactors; as Preachers of the
Gospel, 1 Pet. 1, 15
not As Busybodies in other men's matters; as doers of good, not as evil
doers; never ceasing to further the salvation of others, even when their bodies
were restrained of liberty: and yet in this want of enlargement, they were
mighty in deed and word, to work the conversion of such as resorted unto
them, verifying the saying of the Apostle. 2. Tim. 2. 9. 2 Timothy 2, 9.
I suffer trouble unto bonds, but the word of God is not bound. Whiles he
pleaded his cause in Chains, Acts 16, 28
he had Almost caught Agrippa in the Chain of the Gospel, and won him to
the Faith. When he was come to Rome, he would not be idle, Act. 28, 17, 23.
but called the chief of the Jews together, and then expounded unto them the
way of Salvation, testifying the Kingdom of God, and persuading them those
things that concern Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets, from morning to night. Thus does one say most truly of him; When he
was bound, he was stronger then they that bound him: when he was a Captive, he
was freer then they that kept him: and when his Judges examined him, he
examined them, and set them at liberty that were under the thraldom of sin
and Satan. It is truly said of the Wiseman; Prou. 11, 30 Dan. 12, 3.
He that wins Souls is wise, and shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and such as turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars
for ever and ever. This wisdom is no where to be found, no where to be
sought, no where to be learned, but in the Word of GOD, which is the wisdom
of God, and the power of God. So then we see, it is not the punishment that
makes a Martyr, but the cause. Some are punished as Malefactors: some dye as
Martyrs. Joseph was cast into the same Gene. 39, 20 and 40, 3.
Prison, with the Butler and Baker of King Pharaoh: They suffered imprisonment
in the same place, but the cause was not one for which they suffered. Joseph's
Master took him and put him in Prison, in the place where the kings Prisoners
lay bound; and there he was in Prison; but because it was in a good cause, and
for a good conscience, the Lord was with him, and showed him mercy, and got him
favor in the sight of the Master of the Prison. The like we might say of
Paul and Sylas, who were not only beaten with Rods, but clapped up in close
Prison with Malefactors; but they were not without comfort in their sufferings,
Acts 16, 25
For At midnight they prayed and sung Psalms unto God, so that the rest of the
Prisoners heard them. They suffered 2 Timothy 2, 9.
As evil doers, but not for evil doing. And albeit they were Prisoners, yet
they were Christian Prisoners: and when the body was ready to be offered, and
the time of their departure drew near, forgot August ser. de Sanct. Cypr.
not their Apostolical care of the Churches, and watchfulness over the Lords
Flock; yea, we see Paul in this place, forgets not a base Servant, as
shall be showed afterward.

Touching the second point, The person to whom Paul writes.
we are to consider the person to whom Paul writes; which is, to Philemon,
craving at his hands the fruit of Christian Equity and Moderation, to forgive
him that had offended him, according to the doctrine of the common Master of
them both, Jesus Christ. Luke 17. Luke 17. 3, 4
Take heed to your selves, if thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him:
and if he repent, forgive him: and though he sin against thee seven times
in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying; It repents
me, Thou shall forgive him. It is a great virtue in thee, if thou Isidor. lib.
2. soliloqu.
wrong not him, of whom thou art wronged: It is great Fortitude, if when thou
art wronged, thou remit it: It is great Glory, if thou be willing to spare him,
whom thou had power and ability to hurt. As Christ taught forgiveness to
others, so he practiced his own Doctrine, and Luke 23, 34.
prayed for those that were his persecuters. Philemon had bin greatly wronged
by his false and theeuish servant, yet Paul craves pardon for him upon his
repentance toward God, and his submission toward his Master. It is the
Doctrine of the The doctrine of the Nouatia^ Heretics.
Nouatian Heretics, to deny hope of favor and forgiveness to such as are
fallen; against whom Cyprian has written a learned Epistle; Cypri. ad
Nouatian. haeretic.
whereby they go about to kill, whereas they should cure them that are wounded,
and to swallow up them in despair, whom they ought to raise up with comfort.
For they allege, that Christ threatens, Math. 10, 33
Whosoever shall deny him before men, them will he deny before his Father which
is in heaven. But he understands such as persevere in it without repentance,
denying him unto the end, and forsaking him unto the death, such indeed he
will disclaim and deny in the kingdom of his Father; which plainly appears
by the contrary, in the opposite Member going before, Math. 10, 32.
where he promises, that Whosoever shall confess him before men, them will
he also confess before his Father which is in Heaven; whereby he means
such as continue in that confession, and are faithful without starting
backward.

Peter being in the Highpriests house, did deny his Master that chose him,
not only to be an Apostle, but to be an elect vessel, to preach the Gospel
both to Jews and Gentiles; he denied him that bought him, and redeemed him; in
word, with an Oath, with Cursing and Execration; yet he returned and repented:
he went out from that wicked Company, and wept for his grievous fall most
bitterly. Many good Soldiers are sometimes daunted at the sight of their
Enemies, and run out of the Field like Cowards, not without some reproach and
impeachment of their Man-hoode, who afterward gather strength, and are ashamed
of their own folly, both resisting those that fight against them most
courageously, and pleasing the Captain that has made choice of them.

Hence it is, that the Lord proclaims Mercy, and renews his Covenant of
forgiveness to such as turn unto him. The Prophet Joel says, Chapter 2. Joel
2. 12, 13.
Turn you unto me with all your heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning;
Rent your hearts, and not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for
he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. Here is mercy offered, and a general pardon
published, which God will perform to all penitent persons. Likewise, the Lord
for better assurance, if we doubt of his word once uttered, says by his
Prophet Ezekiell, Chap. 33. Ezekiel. 33, 10, 11.
O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, Thus ye speak and say;
If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we are consumed because
of them, How should we then live? Thus do wicked persons, when they hear of
Gods Judgments, c^st off all confidence in his mercies, and murmr at his
threatninges. But what follows? Say unto them, as I live says the Lord, I
desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and
live: Turn you, turn you from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O ye house
of Israel? When the sinful woman came to Christ in the house of Simon the
Pharisee, humbly confessing her sins, and shedding abundance of tears for
them, and by them both, testifying her love to Christ, he turned unto her, and
said, Luke 7, 48.
Thy sins are forgiven thee. On her part, we see repentance, weeping, and
Prayer; On Christ's part, we see Forgiveness offered, and pardon bestowed. It is
well said of Cyprian, Cypr. epist. ad Nouat. haeret.
Legimus and adoramus nec praetermittimus coelestem domini sententiam, qua ait
negaturum se negantem; nunquid and poenitentem? that is, we read, and
reverence, and do not go about to reuerse the heavenly sentence of the Lord,
when he says; I will deny him that denies me: But does he any where, or at
any time say, he will deny him that repents of his sins from the bottom of
his heart? Or does he allow any to Romans 14, 4.
judge another man's servant, which stands or falls to his own Master?
This is it which makes the Church Triumph in the experience and feeling of
Gods Favor and Mercy, Micah. 7, 8, 9. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy,
though I fall, I shall arise. When I shall sit in darkness, the Lord will be
a light unto me. For as the righteousness of the righteous Ezekiel. 18, 21 24.
man, shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression, so the wickedness of
the wicked man shall not hurt him, whenever he turns from his iniquity. Such
is the care of God over the sheep of his pasture, and his love toward the^,
that he denounces a fearful w^ against the shepherds of Israel, that feed
Ezekiel. 34. 4.
themselus, and not the flock: he charge them that they did eat the fat, and
clothed themselves with the wool, but the weak they have not strengthened, the
sick they have not healed, neither have they bound up the broken, nor brought
again that which was driven away, neither have they sought that which was
lost, but with rigor and cruelty have they ruled them. Ezekiel. 34. To conclude
this point, our Savior shows, that when a man, having an hundred Sheep,
has lost one of them, he leaves ninety and nine in the Wilderness, and goes
after that which is gone astray, until he find it, Luke 15, 4, 7, 10.
and then He lays it on his shoulders with joy, and carries it home to the
sheepefold, I say unto you, that joy shall be in heaven, even in the presence
of the Angels of God, for one sinner that conuerteth. Seeing then, the Lord
Jesus (who is the LORD of life) teaches in the Gospel, that there is so great
joy in Heaven for a penitent sinner, Cypri. lib. 2. epist. 12.
how great joy ought there to be on earth, when we see the kingdom of God
enlarged, and a fellow member pulled out of the jaws of Satan, whom he had
holden captive, and taken as a prey to devour and destroy for ever? It is the
end of Christ's coming, Luke 19, 10.
To seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19, 10. And seeing our gracious
God is so ready to remit offenses done against him; who are we, and of what
matter or metal are we made, that are so hard-hearted, and stif-necked, and
implacable against our Brethren? We are taught to ask forgiveness, Math. 6,
11, and 18, 35.
as we Forgive: and in the Parable of the miserable and merciless servant
propounded, Math. 18. Who being forgiven ten thousand Talents, refused to
forgive his fellow an hundred pence, was delivered to the Tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due to his Lord: We are taught, that in like manner
shall our heavenly Father do unto us, except we forgive from our hearts each
one to his Brother, their Trespasses.

This Doctrine does the Apostle publish at large in this Epistle, craving
pardon at the hands of Philemon, for his penitent and prostrate servant, not
doubting but as God had forgiven him, and given him repentance, so he also for
his part would remit the trespass and injury done unto himself. Thus we see
what to judge of these Nouatians, Aug. de haeres. cap. 38.
who are indeed the true Puritans, and contrary to the whole course of the
Scriptures, deny repentance and reconciliation, to such men as after baptism
(through infirmity, and force of persecution, and fear of danger) do yield
so far, as to deny the faith. We have a noble example of Gods notable
compassion toward such as offend of frailty and weakness in Peter, who was
received to mercy: and Christ would never have said, Math. 18, 18
Whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, if such persons as
repent were altogether to be barred out of the bosom of the Church. Can these
proud spirits then be the Disciples of Christ, Danae de haeres. page 97.
that are harder and straiter laced then their master? Thus they frustrate
true repentance, and take away all admonitions both public and private, which
are of great force to reclaim and recover a sinner.

The third and last point remains. For, as we have considered the person that
writes this Epistle, and the person to whom it is written, so we are The
person for whom this Epistle is written.
to mark the person for whom it is written, to wit; for Onesimus a servant, a
fugitive servant, a false servant, a fraudulent servant. A base and mean
subject for the Apostle to handle, howbeit penned in so high and heavenly a
manner, and contrived with such exquisit Art, and excellent Judgment, that it
ouer-reacheth the meannesse of the matter, and leaves no excuse that Philemon
could allege to wind himself from him, and manifests the special care that
Paul had, of this poor penitent person. It is recorded of In the works of
Master Greenham.
M. Fox of blessed Memory, when one told him that a certain man (of none of the
greatest or highest callings) who had received much comfort from him in the
days of his trouble, was desirous to acknowledge his thankfulness toward
him, and asked him whether he remembered such a one? He answered; I remember him
well: I tell you, I forget Lords and Ladies to remember such.

Many there are, that are ashamed of such as are of low degree, whom
notwithstanding God loves, for whom the Savior of the world died, and to whom
the word of salvation is preached. When the Church was in Abraham's house, it
consisted not only of such Genesis 17, 12.
as were borne in his house, but of such also as were bought with his money, of
any stranger that was not of his seed: and when the Lord gave unto him the
seal of his Covenant, he commanded him to circumcise not only himself and his
son; his Steward, and the cheifest parts of his family, but every male, even
the least and lowest that lodged under his roof. As then the Wiseman says in
the Proverbs, Prou. 17. 5.
He that mocketh the poor, reproacheth him that made him; so he that
despises a servant, because he is a servant, dishonoreth God that made him a
servant. Hence it is, that the Titus 3, 9, 10
Apostle charge such to be subject to their Masters, and please them in all
things, not answering again: neither pickers, but that they show al
faithfulness, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all
things. They are therefore, through pride and disdain not a little deceived,
but wander wide out of the way, that think religion comes not down so low
as unto servants, that Gods providence vouchsafes not to respect them, and
that it booteth not to give them any instruction. True it is, God has
established by his own ordinance, a difference between the Master and the
Servant, as our Savior shows, Luke 17. Luke 17, 7, 8
Who is it also of you, that having a servant ploughing or feeding Cattle,
would say unto him by and by when he were come from the field, Go, and sit
down at table? And would not rather say unto him, Dress wherewith I may sup,
and gird thy self and serve me, til I have eaten and drunken, and afterward eat
thou, and drink thou? etc. The Gospel does not abolish the distinction
between man and man; between high and low; between Master and Servant; yea,
when they are al believers, as is plentifully handled in this Commentary:
howbeit the writ of partition is not so great, nor the wall of separation so
far distant between them, we should think the Lord cares for the one,
and contemns the other, who made them both, preserves them both, redeemed
them both, sanctifies them both, and will glorify them both. This did Job
wisely Job 31, 13.
consider, Chap. 31. If I did contemn the judgment of my servant, and of my
Maid, when he did contend with me, what then shall I do when God stands up?
And when he shall visit me, what shall I answer? He that has made me in the
womb, has he not made him? Has not he alone fashioned us in the womb?

The Heathen, that saw nothing but by looking through the windows of nature
(themselves being merely natural men) took upon them their just and lawful
defense, and pleaded for them at the bar of reason (when they were used
oftentimes no otherwise then the Beasts and Cattle) that Master and servant had
Macrob. lib. 1 Saturn. cap. 11.
one and the same beginning, were norished with the same Elements, did draw in
the same air, did tread upon the same ground, and returned in the end into the
same earth. Yea, their plea for them went a great deal farther, Though they
are bondmen, yet they are men: and albeit they are servants, yet they are our
fellow-seruants. He is indeed become a servant, but it is through necessity; A
Servant in body, but a Freeman in mind. And peraduentuee the Master
himself that rules over him, may be more slavish then he. He that is a Drudge
or servant to his own lusts, to Wrath, to Envy, to Covetousness, to Ambition,
Cicer parad. 5.
is a right servant, obeying most foul and filthy Masters, and none a baser
Bondsman then such a one. He is a true Master, and a right Freeman, that has
learned Plut. desuperstitione.
to rule over his own affections, such a man is stronger then he that rules a
City. The other are servants against their wills, but these serve and obey as
most vile vassals, willingly; neither do they desire freedom.

We are not to esteem of men by their estate, or (as we say commonly) by their
fortunes, but by their manners. We may alter our manners, Seen. Trag. in Traad.
our condition we cannot always. He is no great wise man, that purposing to
buy an horse, looks not upon him, but contenteth himself to view only the
Bridle and Saddle: so is he as simple and shallow, which judges of a man by
putting on a gay coat, or by the wearing of a precious garment, or by the
condition of his outward person, and not by the inward Guiftes and Ornaments
of the mind. Abigaile is renowned for a Woman 1 Samuel 25, 3.
of singular wisdom, and that worthily, yet she disdained not the counsel of
her servants. Naaman was Captain of the King of Aram, yet he refused not the advice of his attendants, that waited upon him. These persons judged it to be
no disgrace or disparagement to their high calling, nor any sauciness in their
servants, to presume to teach them, and tell them their duty; nay, without
guiding themselves by them, and following their direction, the one had been
exposed to miserable slaughter, the other had returned in the uncleanness of
his leprosy; whereas by this means the one was preserved, the other was
cleansed. It is therefore an untrue and unsavory Proverb, that A wicked and
witless Proverb.
A man keeps in his house so many enemies, as servants: for we have them not
enemies, but we make them so, when we behave our selves toward them
tyrannously, cruelly, contumeliously, spightfully, and outragiously, Macr.
Satur. lib. 1. cap. 11.
doing against them so much as we dare do, not so much only as we ought to do:
not considering how lawful it is, but how powerful we are, and how weak they
are. All the profane Histories, are full of worthy examples of many Servants,
who are commended for their trust and faithfulness; Wittiness, and Courage;
Might and Magnanimity to all posterity, and have not doubted to give their
lives to death, in their Masters quarrel. It is not therefore much to be
marvelled at, that the Apostle, perceiving how Heb. 4, 12.
Mighty the word had bin in Operation upon Philemons Servant, does account him
as his Son, and seeks to reconcile him to his Master; in which respect, he
was willing and desirous to have Phile. 13, 14
kept him with him, to Minister unto him. He claims some authority over him,
being his spiritual Father: howbeit, because he was not only his Son, but
also another man's Servant, he would not retain him without his Masters
knowledge. Let them not therefore for their low degree be contemned, nor have
the means of instruction denied unto them.

Thus I have set down to thy view (Christian Reader) the scope of this
Epistle: wherein the Apostle (in a narrow compass) does couch together many
Mysteries of our Religion, which I have labored to lay open in this
Commentary. And howsoever the work is grown in bigness, and extended in
length under mine hands more then at the first I purposed and intended, yet I
hope the manner of handling herein observed, shall easily recompense thy
labor bestowed in reading. I cannot in few words comprehend the matters that
are here and there dispersed throughout the Book. Among many other, these
points are principally handled. Touching affliction for the truth, and
persecution for righteousness sake. Touching Christian Equity and Moderation:
Touching Gods free grace, and forgiving offenses: Touching household Government
and Private possessions: Touching the conversion of Sinners, and the Communion
of Saints: Touching Faith, and Good Works: Touching Friendship and
Surety-ship: Touching Prayer and Hospitality: Touching the Gospel and
Almsdeeds: Touching Gods providence, and of the force and fruit of the
Ministry: as is more at large to be seen in the Table of the doctrines. Accept
(I pray thee) the pains I have taken in the discussing of these points, pardon
the escapes (if any be) into which I have fallen, as in traveling so long a
journey, it is easy to fall into a slumber: and wheresoever thou understand
the hand of God to have been with me in publishing the truth, give him the
glory, and ascribe the praise unto his great name, to whose grace and
goodness, I commend thee.

Thine in our common Savior, William Attersoll.

A BRIEF RECAPITVLATION OF ALL THE DOCTRINES HANDLED AT LARGE IN THIS EPISTLE.
Out of the Praeface.
THe course of the Gospel cannot be stopped, but will have his passage in the
world. page 1. The Argument and occasion of the Epistle, together with the uses
thereof. page 7.
Verse 1, and 2.
Doct. 1. Good things must be followed and sought after earnestly and
fervently, not coldly and carelessly. page 9 Doct. 2. It is no disgrace or
reproach to the Servants of God, to be cast into prison for the Gospels sake.
page: 12. Doct. 3. The persecutions of all true Christians, are the persecutions
of Christ Jesus, when they are imprisoned for Christ's sake. page 15. Doct. 4.
All good duties to God or man, are better done by the help of others, then
alone by our selves. pa: 21 Doct. 5. A christian friend will perform any
christian duty to his friend. page 25. Doct. 6. Christian women should be
helpers unto their husbands, as heirs together of the grace of life, page 29
Doct. 7. The calling of a Minister, is a painful and laborious, a needful
and troublesome calling. page 33. Doct. 8. It is the duty of all house-holders,
to teach and instruct their families that belong unto them. page 38
Verse 3.
Doct. 1. The free favor and mercy of God in Christ Jesus is first and above
all other things to be desired and prayed for. page 48 Doct. 2. Such as are in
Gods favor, have his blessings flowing unto them, and following them. page 55
Doct. 3. All blessings temporal and eternal, are to be craved from God alone
in Christ Jesus. page 61
Verse 4, and 5.
Doct: 1. Men ought to take cause of great joy, to see others grow and proceed
in good things. page 68 Doct. 2. It is the nature of faith to apply the mercies
and promises of God to our own selves. page 76 Doct. 3. It is the duty of the
faithful, to pray not only for themselves, but also for others. page 82 Doct.
4. True Religion must not only be inwardly believed, but also outwardly
confessed, and openly professed. page 86 Doct. 5. Faith and Love, are the
cheifest things that commend a man to God and his Church. page 95 Doct. 6.
Faith in Christ, and Love to the Saints, do always go together in all the
servants of God. page 99. Doct. 7. Christ must be the Object of our faith, we
must look unto him, and depend upon him. page 106 Doct. 8. The works of
mercy, are especially, and above, and before others to be showed to the poor
Saints that are godly. 111 Doct. 9. Such as truly believe in Christ, and
belong to him, are Saints. page 117
Verse 6, and 7.
Doct. 1. It is our duty to stir up our selves and others to increase in good
things. page 126 Doct. 2. The gifts which we have received, must not lie hid
in us, but be employed to the good of others. 140 Doct. 3. The goodness of God
bestowed upon our selus or others, must be published abroad, and made known to
others. page 142 Doct. 4. The spiritual graces of God bestowed upon others, do
give occasion of joy to the Saints. pa. 147 Doct. 5. The works of mercy are
to be showed to the poor distressed Saints. page 154
Verse 8, and 9.
Doct. 1. The Office of the Pastor and Minister of God, is an Office of power
and authority under christ. 163 Doct. 2. Gentle means are to be used rather
then severe, to persuade men to holy duties. page 172 Doct. 3. Superiors in
gifts, or age, or both, are to be reverenced and regarded above others. pa.
177.
Verse 10.
Doct. 1. The least and lowest member converted to Christ, must not be
contemned or condemned. page 184 Doct. 2. The same affection that is between
the Father and the Son, ought to be between the Minister and the people
committed unto him. 189 Doct. 3. The preaching of the word is the ordinary
means and instrument of our conversion and regeneration, page 205
Verse 11. and 12.
Doct. 1. Christian religion makes a man profitable and helpful unto others,
that before has been injurious and hurtful. page 227. Doct. 2. In godly,
religious, and reformed families, are many times ungodly, obstinate, and
unreformed persons, both Children and Servant. page 237 Doct. 3. Former
Offenses (albeit great and heinous) upon true repentance, are to be forgiven
and forgotten. page 243 Doct. 4. Our love to all the Saints, especialy such as
have bin converted by us, ought to be dear and fervent, page 254 Doct. 5. The
Gospel does not abolish or diminish civil ordinances, and distinct degrees
among men. page: 262
Verse 13. and 14.
Doct: 1. Every Christian is bound to serve the common good of the church, by
what means soever GOD has enabled him thereunto. page: 272 Doct: 2. All
christian duties done to God or man, must be done willingly, and chearefully
performed, pa: 282
Verse 15, and 16.
Doct: 1. All things (even sin it self) are ordered and turned by the
providence of God, to the good of the elect. page 295 Doct: 2. God oftentimes
takes from his servants outward commodities, to bestow upon them greater,
page 305 Doct: 3. The false and sins of our brethren, whereof they have
repented, are not to be increased and amplified with odious and extreme words,
but rather to be buried and forgotten, page 311 Doct: 4. The more grace
apeareth in any, the more should they be tendered and regarded of us. page 322
Doct: 5. Although christian religion do not take away the degrees of persons,
yet it makes us al equal, and brethren in Christ, page 330 Doct: 6. The more
bands and reasons are given us to care for any, the more we are bound to care
for him, page 337.
Verse 17.
Doct: 1. The consideration of our communion one with another, ought to move us
to regard one another, and to do all good one to another. pa: 348 Doct: 2.
Among Christian friends all things are common. page 350
Verse 18, and 19.
Doct. 1. The communion of Saints does not take away any man's right and
interest in his private possessions, and things of this life. page 365 Doct. 2.
It is lawful for one man to become surety for another, and to engage himself
and his credit. pa: 373 Doct: 3. Covenants in Writing, for debts, bargains,
and sales, are honest and lawful. page 385 Doct: 4. Such as have gained us
unto God, ought above all others to be most dear unto us. page 394
Verse 20, and 21.
Doct: 1. No man ought to be eager and extreme in exacting and requiring their
debts, dues, and demandes, from the poor and needy, page 407 Doct: 2.
Whatsoever we desire, provoke, and persuade others to do, must be in the
Lord. page 415 Doct. 3, Men ought greatly to rejoice at the good and benefit of
their brethren, in temporal and eternal blessings, which they see to befall
them, page 421 Doct: 4. Men ought always to hope well, and to think the best
of their brethren, not to suspect the worst of them. page 426 Doct: 5. The
faithful being moved to christian duties, have yielded more then has bin
required at their hands. page 431
Verse 22.
Doct: 1. Hospitality, that is, the joyful and courteous entertainment of
distressed strangers for the truths sake, is to be used and practiced of all the
servants of God. page 440 Doct: 2. The prayers of the faithful are auayleable
for themselves and others, both to obtain blessings to them, and to remove
judgments from them. page 447 Doct: 3. The gifts of God bestowed upon his
Servants, come from his free grace, not from our free will or deserts. page 457
Verse 23, and 24.
Doct: 1. Courteous speeches, and loving Salutations, are beseeming the
Servants of God. page 471 Doct: 2. We must not utterly cast off the weak, but
show our compassion toward them. page 478 Doct: 3. Many that seem forward in
the profession, do afterward fall back. page 484
Verse 25.
Doct: 1. Spiritual things are to be prayed for, and preferred before
earthly things. page 500
An Exposition of the Epistle, of the Apostle Paul to Philemon.
The time when this Epistle was written.
THIS Epistle is short in Words, low in Argument, and private, in regard of the
Matter: yet the manner of handling is high and heavenly, and the Doctrine
general and common to the whole Church. It was written (as appears) to
Philemon, at what time the Apostle was grown old in years, was drawing near
his end, and was clapped up and kept in Prison at Rome; from whence also he
directed sundry Epistles to diverse Churches and particular persons. From thence
he wrote to the Galathians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the
Colossians; and the latter Epistle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.
which was penned not long before his death and dissolution. For albeit, he
were held in durance and restrained of his liberty, that he could not visit the
Churches where the Gospel was planted, nor lay a new Foundation where as yet
it had not been preached: yet he was not idle or unfruitful, but labored to
do good to the Church by writing, when he could not come to bestow some
spiritual Graces among them by teaching. We see here, that Paul writes out
of Prison, and slacketh not to instruct, both general Churches, and particular
persons. From hence we learn, that Doct. 1. The course of the Gospel cannot
be stopped.
the course of the Gospel cannot be stopped, but keeps on his way and
passage in the World. The truth of the Gospel will have his free liberty, it
can be hindered by no Chains, it can be restrained by no Bands and Boults, it
can be shut up by no bars of Iron, and Gates of Brass, but breaks forth as
the light of the Sun out of a dark Cloud. We see this evidently in the
example of Paul, Act, 26, 22, 28.
albeit he were in bonds and Chains, yet he pleads his cause, with such
gravity of speech, with such power of the Spirit, with such piercing of the
matter, with such efficacy of words, and with such respect of the persons
before whom we spoke, that he had almost gained and persuaded Agrippa to
Christianity. The like we see in another place, Act. 28, 30, 31.
when he was brought Prisoner to Jerusalem, confined to an House, and
delivered to a Soldier to be kept, he received all that came unto him;
Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the
Lord Jesus Christ, with all boldness of speech, without let. This appears
more evidently in none, then in Christ himself, who as at all times he sought
all occasions and opportunity to do good to the souls and bodies of men, Luke
23, 43.
so when he was upon the Cross, he converted the Thief, and was ready to
seek and to save him that was lost. These consents of Scripture, come directly
to the former point; and serve to teach us, that whatsoever the purposes and
pretenses of men be, yet they shall never be able to stop the stream of the
word of God, which flows plentifully to the comforting and refreshing of the
dry and barren hearts of sinful men.

Reason 1.
Let us breefely consider the Reasons. First, the doctrine delivered is of God,
not of Men; from Heaven, not from the Earth. If man were the Author of it, it
might easily be resisted by the power of man; nay, it would in time fall down
of it self. But seeing the whose Scripture is inspired of God, and the
doctrine thereof has him for the Author, the light of it cannot be quenched.
Thus does Gamaliell reason in the Council, Acts 5, 39.
If this be of God ye cannot destroy it, least ye be found even fighters
against God. Who can prosper, that provoke God? Or who can look for good
success, that fights against God, and against his ordinances?

Reason 2.
Again, God will bring their devises to naught, and confound all their
endeavors that go about to hinder the course of his word. Although they band
themselves together, and assemble against the Lord and against his anointed;
yet he that dwells in the Heavens shall laugh, and have them in derision, he
will break their bands and crush them in pieces like a Potters Vessel. This
the Prophet teaches. Psalm. 33. Psalm 33, 10, 11.
The Lord breaks the Counsel of the Heathen, and brings to naught the
devises of the people: The Counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the
thoughts of his heart throughout all Ages. Seeing therefore, that the Doctrine
of the Gospel is of God, and that he will dash them in pieces with a Scepter
of Iron that stop the course of it, we may truly conclude, that the course
thereof cannot be hindered.

Use 1.
The Uses of this point are many, which I purpose breefely to point out, that
we may proceed. First, weigh with me from hence the excellency of the word of
God. Who is ignorant what opposition has been and is made against it? What
resisting and contradiction? Yet it keeps on his course, and has his passage
in the world, and runs through the whole Earth. The Apostle declares, That
the things which came unto him, turned rather to the furthering, then to the
hindering of the Gospel, Phil. 1, 13.
so that his bands in Christ were famous throughout all the Judgment Hall, and
in all other places. So he says afterward in this Epistle which we have in
hand; I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds.
Was it not enough for the Apostle to labor when he was free, and his Feet at
liberty, but he must also spread the Net to catch men in Prison? The light of
Gods truth can never be put out, the heat of it cannot be smothered, the power
of it cannot be broken. Though the Teachers and Preachers of the word, may be
stocked and stoned, hewn asunder, burned with the Fire, slain with the Sword,
clapped up in Prison, and fettered in chains; yet the word it self Heb. 4, 12.
is lively and mighty in operation, it enters deeply, it discerns
sharply, the thoughts and intentes of the heart. True it is therefore, the
Ministers of the Gospel may be bound, but the Gospel it self cannot be
bound. Their hands are bound, and their feet are chained, when the tongue is
at liberty to utter the gracious and glorious promises of the Gospel. Nothing
can bind the tongue, but fear and infidelity. If a man bind an Husbandman,
he hinders his sowing, for he sows with his hands: but the teachers being
bound, the word is not bound, for they sow with the tongue. Let vt therefore
acknowledge, that the preaching of the Gospel has in it a Divine power,
nothing can be matched with it, nothing can be compared unto it. The Devil is
called in the Scriptures by sundry Names, to declare his power: the God of the
World, the Prince of the Air, the strong man that rules the House: and he
cannot be displaced and dispossessed but by a stronger. But the Gospel is
stronger then all the power of Satan, and is able to throw him out, for it
gathers a Church where he has his Throne, and rules in the hearts of the
Children of disobedience; it delivers men from the power of the Devil, and
brings them into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. If a man were in
the shadow of death, and had one foot in Hell, the word of God is able to
bring him back again, This is it which our Savior said to the seauentie
Disciples when they returned from preaching the Gospel, and confirming it by
Miracles that followed it; Luke 10, 18.
I saw Satan like Lightning fall down from Heaven. Where he teaches, that
albeit Satan be strong, yet the Gospel is stronger, so that he cannot stand
before it. He has his overthrow by it, and falls down before it, as Dagon
did before the Arc. So the Apostle shows, Act. 26, 18.
that he was called and sent to Open the eyes of the blind, that they might be
turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. We see
it also in the example of Christ himself upon the Cross, who converted the
Thief, gave him faith and repentance, and assured him of eternal blessedness
in the heavens. The Apostles were forbidden to preach the Gospel: through the
malice and madness of the High-priestes, they were apprehended and
imprisoned, they were scourged and euilly entreated, yet they regarded not the
words, they despised the threatenings of all their enemies, and continued to
sound out the Gospel in all places. Paul and Silas prayed and sung Psalms
unto God in prison, and I gained the Iayler to the Faith, Acts 16, 30.
verifying that which the Apostle speaks in another place; 2 Timothy 2, 9.
I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds, but the word of God is
not bound. Indeed sometimes it falls out, that the holy Servants of God have
their hands tied, their feet fettered, their bodies imprisoned, and their
tongues cut out that they cannot speak to the people; but even then the word
is not bound, for then their constant suffering and patient bearing of the
cross, does as by a lively voice, publish and proclaim the truth of the
Gospel for which they suffer, and serves to win many to the Faith of Christ,
So then, the patient suffering of the faithful (though they speak not with
their tongues) is as a solemn preaching, and has the nature of an effectual
Sermon, to gain many to the Faith.

Use 2.
Secondly, we see it is in vain to set our selves against the Gospel of
Christ, and the Ministers of God that bring it unto us. True it is, the World
endeuoreth nothing more then to hinder the truth, and to drown all memory of
the glad tidings of salvation; but all their labor is lost, and all their
purposes shall be frustrate. The Tyrants of the Earth may bind the professors of
the Gospel, but the Gospel it self they cannot bind, and the course of it
they cannot withstand, Paul was cast into prison, yet he freely preached the
Gospel of the Kingdom to all that came unto him. Let all those that say it is
in vain to serve God and to pray unto him, know for a surety, that it is in
vain for them to resist God, and the power of his might. Let them refrain
from iniuring his Servants, and from going about to stop their mouths: let
them remember what Gamaliell said; Acts 5, 38.
Now I say unto you, refrain your selves from these Men, and let them alone,
for if this counsel, or this work, be of men, it will come to naught. A
notable lesson to be learned of all malicious men, and bloody persecuters of
the Gospel, that would if it lay in them, bury all remembrance of Christ and
his Gospel, they shall find and feel the strength of him against whom they
wrestle, they shall see the folly of their own ways, and the madness of
their own works, and they shall in the end, perceive it to be as impossible,
and themselves as unable to hinder the free passage of the Gospel, as to bind
the wind in their Fistes, or to stop the Rain of Heaven from watering the
earth. Hence it is, that the Prophet speaks to like purpose to the Enemies of
the Church; Esaias 8, 9.
Gather together on heaps o ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, and
hearken all ye of far Countries, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces: gird your selves and ye shall shall be broken in pieces: Take counsel
together, yet it shall be brought to naught, pronounce a decree, yet it shall
not stand, for God is with us.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing the Gospel cannot be stopped, it it is the duty of all of
us, to pray for the free passage of it. We have a promise, that God will spread
abroad his saving health, and magnify his great Name over all the Earth; now
it belongs as a special duty to us, to pray unto him, to glorify himself,
and to make his Name known among the Sons of Men. This charge does the
Apostle give unto the Thessalonians; 2 These. 3, 1, 2
Furthermore Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
passage and be glorified, even as it is with you, and that we may be delivered
from unreasonable and evil Men, for all men have not Faith. It is the duty of
all the godly, to pray for the enlarging of the Gospel, whereby the Kingdom
of God is also enlarged. Let us be mindful daily of this duty, desiring of the
Lord this grace, that the Gospel may be freely preached, and cheerfully
received, Math. 9, 38.
that he would send forth laborers into his Vineyard, and maintain them
against ravening Wolves that seek to devour them, that he would bless their
labors, and remove all stumbling blocks out of their way, that he would give
them courage and constancy in discharging their duty, and utterly remove al
hirelings and false teachers out of his Vineyard. It is God that must thrust
forth Laborers into his Harvest. It is he that fitteth them to the work: It
is he that blesses them in the work. Let us not therefore be wanting to our
selves, but pray to the Lord of the Harvest to send out able worke-men to
gather the Corn into his Garner. The cause why we are not furnished with such
Teachers, and if we be furnished, yet the work does not prosper under their
hands, is, because we do not ask for a blessing from God, from whom every
good gift proceeds.

Use 4.
Lastly, this serves as a great comfort, both to the Pastors and people. For
seeing the Gospel shall have his course, let the Ministers boldly go forward
in the discharge of their duty, and teach the people committed to their
charge. Let us not fear the faces of Men. The word which we preach, is the
word of God, who is able to maintain it, and make it mighty in our mouths, to
cast down hills and holds that lift up themselves against it. He is able to
danut and dash in pieces all those that set themselves against it. The work is
the Lords, the Worke-men are the Lords, the blessing and success is the
Lords, and they that strive against it, fight against the Lord. Let us comfort
our selves in these things against all the disgraces and reproaches of the
World. And concerning the Professors of this Gospel, let this Minister comfort
also unto them, that they build not upon the Sand, or upon a weak
Foundation, but their building stands upon a Rock which shall never be
removed. The Apostles comfort themselves, and encourage one another Acts 4, 29.
in the work of the Ministry, because they were assured that the word which
they delivered, was no vain word, nor deceivable Fable, but the Gospel of
Christ who chose them to the calling, and sent them to the work, and
strengthened them to stand, and gave them wisdom to convince and confound all
their Adversaries. Likewise Paul teaches; Phil. 1, 14.
That many of the Brethren in the Lord were boldned through his bands, to
confess and profess the truth of God. We cannot fall except the word fall
with us; nay, except God fall with us, so long as we stand fast in the Faith.
Wherefore howsoever others shrink back, and make ship-wracke of a good
conscience, let us hold out unto the end, and then we shall be sure of
eternal happiness in the Heavens.

The occasion and argument of this Epistle.
Hitherto we have handled the time when this Epistle was written, and the place
from whence it was written; to wit, when he was in prison. Now let us consider
the Argument thereof, and the occasion whereof it was written. The occasion of
penning and writing this Epistle was double: First, general for the
instruction and direction of the whole Church in some necessary points of faith
and obedience, entreating most waightily and wisely of Justice, mercy, mildnes,
meeknes, moderation, reconciliation, and Christian equity, Calvin upon Philemon.
insomuch that he seems rather to respect the edification of the whole Church,
then to have in hand the business of one poor and private man. The special
occasion was to entreat at Philemons hands, to pardon his servant that had
offended him, and to accept his subjection and submission unto him. This Phile.
(as it seems) was a citizen of Colosse, Hierom. in prolog. Coloss. Erasmus
in hunc locum.
a city situate in Phrygia, not far from Laodicea, whose servant Onesimus
committing either Theft in purloyning away his Masters goods, or some other
great and grievous crime (as the manner of lewd and evil Servants is) ran away
from his M. as far as Rome, being many hundred miles distant from Colosse,
where he supposed he should hear no more of him; or if he did, would not
follow and pursue after him so far. This Fugitive and Runnagate Servant, false
fingered, and false hearted, coming to Rome, Synop. Athana. in hanc. Epist.
was by the gracious providence of God, brought where Paul the Apostle lay
bound in prison, and hearing him (among others) preaching the Gospel of Christ
to Remission of sins, to all that repent, had his heart opened, and was by Gods
blessing converted to the Faith, became a sound and sincere Christian, and
performed sundry duties of love to Paul, ministering continually unto him in the
time of his Captivity, as a dutiful Son to his spiritual Father. But after
the Apostle understood that he was another Man's Servant, and belonged unto
him, as it were a part of his possession, though he found him in his distressed
and afflicted estate, very profitable, comfortable, and necessary unto him, yet
he would not detain him from his Master, to whom, by the Word of God, by the
light of Nature, and by the Law of all Nations he appertained. Hence it is,
that he sent him back again to his Master, with this Epistle; in which the
Apostle does by force of reasons and vehemence of words, urge Philemon to
entertain, and retain with him his fugitive and offensive Servant, but now
greatly altered, and thoroughly changed by the power of Gods word: Psalm. 19. 7.
Which conuerteth the Soul, and gives wisdom unto the simple: as the
Prophet teaches us.

The uses of the former Argument of this Epistle.
Thus we see how Paul entreats and obtains pardon for Onesimus, a Servant,
that was converted by the preaching of the Apostle: which offers unto us
diverse good and profitable uses.

Use 1.
First, we see that Christ Jesus rejects none that come unto him, how base
and simple soever they be. All such as repent and believe the Gospel, whether
Masters, or Servants, high or low, rich or poor, are accepted of him who is
Lord of all, and with whom is no respect of persons. A notable comfort to all
of low place and mean condition, to consider with themselves, that howsoever
the men of this World have many times no respect unto them, yet they are dear
to God, and regarded of him, who opens to them the door of salvation, and
reserueth for them a Crown of righteousness. He appoints his Word and
Sacraments for them, as well as for others, and hence it is, that for the most
part the poor receive the Gospel. Gal. 3, 28.
There is neither Jew nor Grecian: there is neither bond nor free: there is
neither Male nor Female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

Use 2.
Secondly, this instructs us, not to contemn or despise any, how vile soever
they may seem in our eyes, but to be careful for their good, and to further
their conversion, Mat 18, 10.
according to the counsel of Christ our Savior. Math. 18. See that ye despise
not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels
always behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven: For the Son of Man
is come to save that which was lost. Many are basely and badly thought off in
this World, who are in great price and estimation with GOD. Many are wronged
and oppressed of Men, of whom the high God of Heaven takes care and charge. We
are ready to respect the outward face and person of Men, but he regards the
heart. God the Father loves them, woe therefore to them that hate them. Christ
Jesus came to save and redeem them; woe therefore to all them that seek to
hurt and destroy them. It pleases God oftentimes to call the Servant, and to
let the Master alone, suffering him to perrish in his sins. This is the
cause that the blessed Virgin magnifieth the Lord, and that her Spirit
rejoices in God her Savior, Luke. 1. 52, 53.
Because he looked on the poor degree of his Servant, and had done great
things for her: He pulls down the mighty from their Seats, and exalts
them of low degree; He fills the hungry with good things, and sends away
the Rich empty.

Use 3.
Thirdly, we learn, that no man ought under any color of Religion and
pretense of godliness, to keep away other men's Servants from their own
Masters. Paul found the Servant of Onesimus faithful to help him, and
forward to Minister unto him; yea, he might be bold with Philemon his Master;
yet he would not detain him with him, without his allowance and approbation.
The Gospel then does not destroy and disanull the diverse degrees and orders
established in the World, but rather confirms and strengthens them. It
allows not the Servant to resist and rise up against the Master, although
he should be a believer, and his Master an unbeliever; or he be a believer as
well as his Master, and in knowledge of godliness be equal unto him: but
teaches him to obey for conscience sake, 1 Timothy 6, 1, 2.
and to Count his Master worthy of all honor, that the Name of God and his
Doctrine be not evil spoken of: And they which have believing Masters, let
them not despise them, because they are Brethren, but rather do service,
because they are faithful, and beloved, and partakers of the benefit. These
things teach and exhort.

Use 4.
Fourthly, we are to mark, that the Lord requires of us, to be ready to
forgive and forget the wrongs and injuries that are done unto us. Let us put
from us all rancor and malice, and not suffer the Sun to go down upon our
wrath. O how Math. 18, 27
great is the mercy of God toward us? How great is our debt toward him? Let us
put on the bowels of pity and compassion, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another; Col. 3, 13.
If any Man have a quarrel unto another, even as Christ forgave, even so do
ye. If we come to any of the exercises of our Religion; to hear the Word, to
receive the Sacraments, or to call upon the Name of God, if the Leaven of
maliciousness have infected our hearts, the word of life, is made the savor
of death; the Sacraments, are made Instruments of Wrath; and our Prayers are
turned into Sin. We are taught in our Prayers, to ask Chrysostom. hom 1. in
Philem.
forgiveness at the hands of God, as we our selves perform this duty toward
our Brethren. The promise of forgiveness, is made to them that do forgive,
Mark 11, 25
When ye shall stand and pray, forgive, if ye have any thing against any man,
that your Father also which is in Heaven, may forgive you your trespasses: For
if ye will not forgive, your Father which is in Heaven will not pardon you your
trespasses. This accords with the precept of Christ. Math. 5. If thou bring
thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought
against thee, Math. 5, 24.
Leave there thine offering before the Altar and go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift. If we desire As
newborn Babes the sincere Milk of the word, that we may grow thereby; 1 Pet.
2, 1, 2.
We must lay aside all maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation, and
envy, and all evil speaking. If we would be doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving our own souls, we must Iam. 1, 21.
Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with
meekness the word that is grafted in us, which is able to save our Souls.
Now we have in this Epistle, Illyr. arg. in hanc Epistol.
a most worthy example of receiving them that are fallen, of forgiving the
penitent, of the pardoning of injuries, of joy for the conversion of a Sinner.
Yea, we learn not only to be lovers of peace, but to be makers of peace; as
Paul does between the Master and the Servant. Our Savior pronounces them
blessed Math. 5, 9.
That are Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God. We are
charged, not only to seek peace our selves, but to make peace with others,
whereby we bear the lively Image of God, who is called the God of peace: we
are made like unto Christ, who is our peace, and has reconciled us unto his
Father.

Use 5.
Fifthly, we are taught to take heed we do not rashly sit in judgment upon
any. This evil Servant had picked and purloyned from his Master, and when he
had done ran his ways, yet GOD found him out and gave him repentance, when
he sought not after God. It is a common Proverb; He runs far that never
returns. Christ Jesus calls some at the leaves hour, as he did the
Thief that hung with him upon the Cross. The Apostle charge, that 1 Cor. 4,
5.
We judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are hidden in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest, and
then shall every man have praise of God. And in another place, Romans 14, 4.
Who art thou that condemnest another man's servant? He stands or falls to
his own Master. All men are in the hand of God, and all times and seasons are
disposed by him. The Husbandman Tilleth the ground, and sows his Corn, but
it does not by and by gtow up. The Disciples of Christ heard many things of his
mouth, which seemed buried and forgotten, but the precious fruit thereof,
appeared plentifully afterward. Let us not limit unto God his times and
seasons, nor go about to teach him knowledge. Paul was a Persecuter of the
truth, a Blasphemer of God, an oppressor of the Church, yet in the end he was
called by the voice of Christ. Let us therefore condemn no man, nor judge any
rashly, least we be judged.

Use 6.
Lastly, we see evidently (as in a Glass) in this Epistle, that all that are
elected of God to eternal life, shall in Gods good time be called effectually
to the knowledge of the truth. God has made all things in number, weight, and
measure. As no more shall be saved then he has appointed, so not one of them
shall be lost that he has prepared to be heirs of glory. God has many ways
to pull them out of the fire whom he will have saved. So many as belong to him,
he will at one time or other, send them and offer them the means of their
salvation: yea, when we least of all seek our own good, and intend our own
conversion, it pleases God to call us, and to gather us into the bosom of the
Church. The Parable Math. 20, 1.
of the Householder hiring laborers into his Vineyard; teaches, that he
calls at all times and hours of the day. We see it in the example of Paul,
when Christ Jesus called unto him from the Heavens, he thought nothing of his
own conversion, but of the Churches subversion. We see it in the Penitent
Thief, in Manasseth, in Mary Magdalen, and many others. We see it in Onesimus
in this place: Who would have imagined, that this man playing the vile
Runna-gate, and the false Thief, and departing out of the religious House of
godly Philemon, which is honored with the Name of a Church, would ever have
turned a new leaf, and come to the acknowledgement of the truth? who would
have thought that the prodigal Son, Luke 15, 24.
going from his Father, forsaking his Brother, wasting his patrimony, and
spending his strength and wealth upon Harlots, would ever have seen his own
folly, and that it should be said of him; My Son was dead, and is alive again;
he was lost, but he is found? This is that which is set down in the Acts of
the Apostles; Acts 13, 48.
When the Gentiles heard it they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord,
and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. God is able to make a
way for the execution of his purposes, and knows how to accomplish his
decrees. Thus much of the circumstances of time and place, as also of the
Argument of this Epistle: Now let us come to the words.

1 Paul, a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Brother Timotheus unto Philemon, our
dear friend and fellow helper:

2 And to our beloved Apphia, and to Archippus our Fellow-Souldier, and to the
Church that is in thine House.


The order of the words, and interpretation of them.
In this Epistle we are to consider two things: First, the Praeface, in the
three first verses. Secondly, the substance and matter of the Epistle, in the
rest. The Praeface or entrance, contains the inscription or Title, in these
two verses, and sundry prayers in the four verses following. The inscription,
remembers both the parties writing; to wit, Paul and Timothy: and likewise,
the persons to whom the Epistle is written; Philemon, Apphia, Archippus, and
the Church that was in Philemons house. These persons, as well writing, as
written unto, are not barely and nakedly set down, but are described by their
several notes and titles given unto them, wherein are contained several
Arguments of persuasion, to move Philemon to that whereunto he exhorts and
entreats him. And first for himself, a Captive and Prisoner, he moves him
to respect his suit, in regard it was the suit of one under persecution, bound
in chains, and kept in thraldom, whom he ought to pity, especially seeing he
was a Prisoner of Jesus Christ; that is, not for any bad cause, but for the
professing and Preaching of the glorious Gospel of Christ. Secondly, he
joins in this suit with him, Timothy a Brother, nay more then a Brother, a
famous Evangelist, whose commendation was thoroughout all the Churches, who
with him entreated for his Servant. Moreover, concerning those to whom this
Epistle is written; first Philemon himself is mentioned, with whom he
presumes to prevail, both because there is mutual love between them, loving
one another in the truth and Christian Faith, and because he is a
fellow-helper, seeking to promote and further, by all good means, the course
of the Gospel, in both which respects, there should be a near familiarity and
special interest one with another.

Secondly, to him he joins Apphia, which seems to be his Wife, both because
she has the second place after Philemon, and because she is set before
Archippus, who was the Pastor and Minister of that Church, as we shall see
afterward. He calls her a beloved Sister, most dear unto him for the common
faith, moving her also to plead this cause, and to further this request with
her husband, whom he would not nor could not deny, in so reasonable a suit.

Thirdly, he names Archippus, and calls him a Fellow-Souldier, because they
of the Ministry (if they be faithful) are in continual warfare, not only
against the continual engines and assaults of Satan, who withstandeth their
Ministry, but against false teachers, and against many unreasonable men, as
also against the sins and corruptions that reign or arise in their several
charges. We see how men destitute of faith, make continual war against them,
one way or other.

This man thus described by his Office, was Pastor and Preacher of the word in
the Church of Colosse, Colos. 4, 17.
as appears by the words of the Apostle, writing to the Colossians. Chap. 4.
Say to Archippus, take heed to the ministry that thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it. He names him with the rest, because the Pastors
and Ministers of the Church, ought to prevail much with all the professors and
people that are under their charge, being to them in place of Fathers, that
may or should command in the Lord.

Lastly, he remembers the Family of Philemon, which he does entitle with an
honorable Name, calling it a Church: which serves to the singular commendation
of this Servant of God, as one that did so guide, instruct, and govern his
private Houshhold (as all faithful Governors of Families ought to do) as that
it might truly be reputed a company and Congregation of Men, Women, and
Children, that are dedicated unto God, to his worship and obedience, according
to the saying of Christ; Math. 18.
Where two or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Every Christian Family, is a particular and little Church, where God is
sincerely honored and worshipped, which is another special reason to win
Philemon to his purpose, thinking so reverently and religiously of him and his
private charge.

Observations out of these verses pointed out.
It remains after the order and interpretation of the words, to see what
Observations arise out of the same. If we should stand upon every particular
point that might be raised out of the Text, it would be both endless and
fruitelesse. Again, the Scripture is as a lively Fountain, that can never be
dried up: it is as a rich Treasury, that never can be emptyed. Wherefore,
before that we come to handle the principal and especial Doctrines, it shall
not be amiss to point out diverse instructions that the Apostle intimates.

And first, mark, that among all that are here named, none is mentioned
without his Title of honor, to teach, that every one ought to have somewhat
to commend him, and whosoever lead an upright and holy life, their name ought
to be renowned and honored in the Church of Christ, which should also cause
them to be well reported of unto posterity.

Secondly, observe that Paul joins with him Timothy: he excelled him in the
greatness of gifts, and in the function of Apostle-ship, yet he calls him
his Brother, thereby giving us an example of Christian modesty, whereby it
comes to pass, that the godly, as they are placed in an higher degree, do
behave themselves so much more lowly. So the Apostle wills us, Romans 12, 16
Phil. 2, 3.
Not to be high minded, but to make our selves equal to them of the lower
sort, and to think better of others then of our selves.

Thirdly, albeit he were the principal that wrote, and Philemon the chief to
whom this Epistle is written, yet to himself he joins Timothy, and to
Philemon he annexeth as Helpers in his suit, Apphia his Wife, Archippus the
Minister, and the rest of the Church in his house, all which he mustereth
together as mean, to make an atonement with his Master, which example
teaches all Christians, especially the Ministers of the word to seek peace,
and labor to make peace among Brethren, that one may be reconciled unto
another, and al men live in charity and unity together. Heereunto comes the
counsel and commandment of Christ our Savior; Math. 5, 9.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God.
Hereby we shall give comfort to men's consciences, and remove the stumbling
blocks and offenses that daily arise among Neighbors. On the other side, we
may truly say; Curssed are all debate makers, for they shall be called the
Children of the Devil. For such as make debate and raise contention, and
kindle strife between Brother and Brother is as it were casting Oil into the
fire, are not of God, who is the Author of love, but are guided by the spirit
of the Devil, whose works they follow and practice.

Fourthly, in joining all these as Mediators for Onesimus, we see the singular
wisdom of the Apostle, he leaves nothing unattempted to effect his purpose.
He does not deal slightly and rawly, but uses convenient means and fit
persons to work this reconcilement. For he employeth and joins the help of
Apphia and Archippus to appease the Master, and to draw him to receive his
Servant into his former favor. This is the dealing that Christ prescribes;
Mat. 18, 16.
That we should take with us two or three, that by their authority,
reconciliation may be effected, and every word may be confirmed.

Lastly, observe, that notwithstanding the difference in gifts and sex between
the persons here named and expressed, they have all some mark of love set upon
them, they are Brethren and Sisters, they are friends and fellow-helpers, and
all dear one to another: to teach us that there ought to be a near
conjunction, not to be dissolved; and a fast not of love, not to be loosed
between all those that are true members of the Church, and professors of the
faith.

Paul a Brother of Jesus Christ, and Brother, etc.] Here are many persons
heaped together. In all this, we see the Apostle is exceeding earnest, using
all the reasons and most effectual persuasions that he can, to obtain this
his purpose, whereunto he moves Philemon. He marches together in battle
array, as it were an army of Arguments, to constrain him to yield: yea, every
sentence, or rather word of the sentence, seems to be as a Furnace to
dissolve the heart, and to melt the affections of Philemon into love and
compassion toward his Servant that had so deceived and abused him: the Lord
also, herein showing what care he has, and what care all other Christians
should have for the comforting, releeuing, and courteously entertaining of the
simplest and basest servants of God. Doct. 1. Good things must be earnestly
followed after.
From this practice of the Apostle, we learn that good things must be
carefully and earnestly followed; yea, by all the means we can be pursued
after. It is not enough to do good things, but we must do them in a right
manner, we must be forward and fervent in the doing of them. So does Paul in
this place set upon Philemon, and omitteth nothing that may serve his present
purpose. Great was the Exodus 32, 19, 20, 22.
zeal of Moses for Gods glory against the Idolatry of the people, and
afterward for their pardon and forgiveness. The first Table requires our love
to God, Math. 22.
Withal our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength: and the second
Table requires us, To love our Neighbor as our self: so that whether wye
perform the duties of the first or of the second Table, we must perform them
heartily, sincerely, and earnestly. The Prophet David had a zeal as hot as
fire; Psalm. 96, 10.
So that the zeal of Gods house did eat him up. When we call upon the Name of
God; Romans 12.
We are commanded to be fervent in Prayer. In the high work of the Ministry,
2 Timothy 4, 2.
we are charged to Preach the word in season, and out of season, to improve,
rebuke, and exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. In hearing the word,
we are willed to be swift to hear. In all the works of Sanctification, we
are Gal. 6, 10.
warned while we have time, to do good to all men, and to redeem the time,
because the days are evil. The Apostle notes of himself touching his own
practice; 1 Cor. 9, 19.
That to the Jew he became as a Jew, that he might win the Jews: To the
Gentiles he became as a Gentile, that he might win the Gentiles: to the weak
he became as weak, that he might win the weak: and he became all things to
all men, that by all means he might save some. All which testimonies and
consents, prove directly, that we must follow after good things diligently.

Reason 1.
The Reasone remain to be considered. First, God is delighted with diligence
and earnestness in our callings, and is wont to yield a blessing unto it. He
promises, that such Pro. 2, 3, 4.
As cry after knowledge, and search for wisdom as for Silver, and desire it
as a Treasure, shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge
of God. Earnest Prayer always prevails and avails much with God. Luke 18,
2. Iam. 5, 16. Fervent zeal adds wings, and makes it mount up on high, and
pierce the Heavens, where Lip-labor is lost labor, and brings nothing, but
returns empty to him that made it, like the Dew, that being raised up in the
day by the beams of the Sun, falls down again in the evening.

Reason 2.
Secondly, earnestness and zeal are of great weight and force to provoke
others to imitation. We must be examples to them, and seek to draw them to
follow us. This should comfort and encourage us unto well doing, insomuch as we
shall stir up other to be like us, and to walk in our steps. This is the
reason which the Apostle teaches, writing to the Corinthians: 2 Cor. 9, 2.
I know your readiness of mind, whereof I boast my self of you unto them of
Macedonia, and say, that Achaia was prepared a year ago, and your zeal has
provoked many.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, men's hearts are hardened, and their affections frozen, they shut their
eyes, they stop their ears, and they turn away their hearts from the truth;
and therefore in regard of this Iron or Brazen age into which we are fallen,
all means that can be taken, and all occasions that can be used, are too
little, (though most earnest) to work upon such tough and rough Metal. This
does the Apostle prophecy of long age, when persuading Timothy to wait with
all diligence upon his office, he adds this as a reason; 2 Timothy 3, 4.
For the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome Doctrine, but
having their ears itching, shall after their own lusts get them an heap of
Teachers, and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto
fables. Seeing therefore the earnest doing of good things brings down a
blessing from God, provoke men to an imitation, and seeing many are
hard-hearted, that they will not easily bend and yield; it follows, that we
are bound to do all good duties that belong unto us diligently, not carelessly:
forwardly, not faintly: fervently, not coldly.

Use 1.
Let us now see what good Uses may necessarily be concluded from hence. First,
we learn, that zeal and forwardness is a grace and gift of the Spirit to be
commended, honored, and magnified in the Servants of God. The Lord himself
commended and blessed the zeal of Phinehas. The Apostle Gal. 4, 18.
says; It is a good thing to love earnestly always in a good thing. This
reproves those that reproach it, and cannot abide it in others. They scorn
and scoff at the Servants of God for doing their duty, and so make themselves
culpable of an horrible sin. But let not us be ashamed of the taunts and
reproaches of them that hate us and deride us, because we desire to serve the
Lord in the vprightnes of our hearts. The time will come, when we shall receive
the joy, and they the shame.

We have a notable example hereof in Michall, Saul's Daughter, and David's Wife.
When she not able to comprehend the inward motions of David's joyful heart,
leaping and dancing before the Lord, bringing home the Arc with shouting of
voice, with sound of Trumpet, and with gladness of heart, despised him in her
heart, and came out to meet him, and said; 2 Samuel 6, 20
O how glorious was the King of Israel this day, etc. Then David said unto
Michall: It was before the Lord, which chose me rather then thy Father and all
his House: and I will be yet more vile then thus, and will be low in mine own
sight. Where we see, it is, and ever has been, the lot of Gods Servants, to be
branded and vpbraided for their zeal, it was never liked of cold and careless
men, that are never earnest in any thing but in wickedness, nor forward, but
in following the profaneness of their own hearts. While they delight
themselves in the pleasures of sin, and walk in their own corrupt desires,
they are earnest enough: but when they should practice the duties of
godliness, and show by their godly conversation whose Servants they are, there
appears no life of Gods spirit in them, they remain as dead and senseless
men.

Use 2.
Secondly, negligence and coldness in Religion, and in performing the duties
of Christianity, are great sins which wound the Soul, and procure the wrath
of God. The Prophet pronounces those accursed, that do the work of the Lord
negligently. The Church of the Laodicea is severely threatened, to be Spewed out
Revel. 3, 16.
of the mouth of Christ, because it was neither hot nor cold, but luke warm.
The Idolaters, both among counterfeit Christians, and ignorant Gentiles,
exceed oftentimes the true professors in feruency and zeal, they spare not
their substance and possessions. The Pharisees compass Math. 23, 15
Sea and Land to win one Proselite. It is a shame and reproach for us, to come
behind them that are so blindly led. God will not be dallied withal in the
matter of Religion, either we must serve and acknowledge him as we should, or
not at all. The Prophet cried out to the Israelites; 1 Kings 18.
Why halt ye between two opinions? If God be God, follow him; but if Baall be
God, follow him. It is a vain worship to serve the Lord with the Blind,
Lean, and Lame, as it were with the offall of our affections, or with the
Dregs of our works, and to turn unto him half our face, and the other half
to the Devil, or to our own lusts. Is not this an igdinity Mal. 1, 8, 9.
which a man of any place and reckoning will not take at our hands? It were
better for us never to know or acknowledge true Religion, then to know and
acknowledge it negligentlie, without profit, without conscience, without
zeal, without yiedling unfeigned obedience unto it, having it only swimming in
our Brains, and resting in our Lips, but never entering into our hearts.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing we must be fervent in good things, it serves to season our
zeal, and to temper it with knowledge that it be not blind. If our zeal be
blind and ignorant, the more earnest and forward, the worse it is: the faster
we run, the further we hasten out of the way. True zeal, is a feruency of
the Spirit, arising of a mixture of love and anger, compelling men earnestly to
maintain the glory of God, and drawing from them sorrow and grief of heart,
when he is any way dishonored. This is grounded upon the word, and is caused
by beholding a breach of Gods Commandments. This appeared in Lot, when he
beheld the unclean conversation of the beastly Sodomites. Blind zeal, is,
when we are hot and hasty, beside the warrant of the word of God. The Apostle
Paul witnesses, touching the Israelites; Romans 10, 2.
That they had the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge: yea, he
testifies of himself before his conversion; Gal. 1, 14.
That he profited in the Jewish Religion above many of his Companions, and was
much more zealous of the Traditions of his Fathers. So Christ foretells, John
16, 1.
That the time should come, that whosoever killed them, should think that he
did God service. Let us therefore take heed, that we give not liberty to our
best affections to run out, but rule them as they ought, and order them
within the compass of the word. All things are not to be done of all men.
Every Man must consider what belongs unto him in his place and calling. We
must weigh our gifts, and how we are fitted to every work, so shall we have
praise of God, and comfort in our work. And thus much touching the general
Doctrine, arising from the earnest manner of the Apostles writing, using all
means to persuade Philemon to receive his Servant. Now let us come to the
words particularly, and in order.

Paul a Prisoner, etc.] In other Epistles, he calls himself an Apostle of
Christ, and a Servant of God: but here he calls himself a Prisoner, which
is as glorious a Name, and as honorable a Title, as the other, among all the
faithful, and he does more glory in this, then in the other. He was a chief
Apostle, and pillar of the Church of God, the Teacher of the Gentiles; yet we
see he is imprisoned, and is not ashamed to mention it, but remembers his
imprisonment and suffering, as an advantage to gain credit with Philemon in
his suit. Doct. 2. It is no disgrace to the Servants of God to be cast in
prison for the Gospels sake.
We learn from hence, that it is no indignity or dishonor to the true
Servants of God, to be clapped in the Stocks, to be cast into Prison, or to be
put to death for the Gospels sake. I say, imprisonment, afflictions, and
troubles, fall upon the best Servants of God, without any reproach or shame unto
them. We see this in Joseph, who through the false suggestion of his Mistress,
and rash credulity of his Master, Gen 39, 20.
was committed to prison. When Michaiah had delivered the truth of God, and
resisted the false Prophets that deceived the King; 1 King. 22, 27.
He commanded him to be put in Prison, and to be fed with Bread of Affliction,
and with Water of Affliction, until he returned in peace. Jeremy is put in
prison because he prophesied, Ier. 32, 2.
That the City should be taken, and the people delivered into the hands of the
King of Babylon. John, by the commandment of Christ, writing to the Church of
the Smyrnians, tells them; Reu. 2, 10.
That it shall come to pass, that the Devil shall cast some of them into
Prison, and bring them unto tribulation, but wills them to fear none of
those things which they should suffer. So the Apostle Paul, is not ashamed of
his afflictions, but rejoices in them, and after a sort boasts of them, 2
Cor. 11, 25
enduring the bitterness of the Cross, the hardness of imprisonment, the
danger of death, the bearing with Rods, the perrill of Shipwreck, the
stoning with stones, the buffeting of Satan, the blewnesse of the wounds that
were given unto him. Paul and Silas were cast into prison, Acts 16, 24.
And had their Feet made fast in the Stocks, but they prayed and sung Psalms
unto God, so that the Prisoners heard them. All these consents of Scripture
serve to teach us, that it is no disgrace or reproach unto the Children of God,
to suffer in a good cause at the hands of evil men.

Reason 1.
Let us weigh the reasons which help to wipe away the shame of the Cross.
First of all, God in the sufferings of his Servants, aymeth at their good and
benefit, he would have their Faith purified, their patience tried, and their
obedyence manifested. The Gold is cast into the Furnace, not to consume it, but
to refine it: not to wast it, but to purge it. Thus does Peter the Apostle
teach in his first Epistle; 1 Pet. 1, 7.
That the trial of your Faith being much more precious then Gold that
perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be found unto your praise and
honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. So John teaches the
Church, that the Instruments of the Devil, which are the cruel persecuters,
should cast some of them into prison that they might be tried. He might have
said, that they might be destroyed, that they might murmur against God, and
despair of his mercy, for this was the purpose of the Devil: but he points
us unto the purpose of God, and the end that he respects in all our
sufferings; which is, to prove his own gifts, and to make manifest the
secrets of our hearts.

Reason 2.
Secondly, if we respect the good and profit that redowneth to others by our
sufferings, we should not be ashamed of the Cross, no, nor to lay down our
lives for the Brethren. For they serve for the confirmation of the Faith of
others, that they seeing their patience and constancy may be strengthened in
the truth, and imboldned to make confession thereof with cheerfulness. Thus
does God deal contrary to the purpose of the Devil, and all deuillish men;
who labor by all means to weaken the faith of the Church, by raising
persecutions against the particular members thereof, which God alters and
turns to another end. The Apostle speaking of his own afflictions, says;
Phil. 1, 12, 13, 14.
I would ye understood Brethren, that the things which have come unto me, are
turned rather to the furthering of the Gospel, so that my bands in Christ are
famous throughout all the Judgment Hall, and in all other places, insomuch,
that many of the Brethren in the Lord are boldned through my bands, and dare
more franckely speak the word. Shall we be ashamed of those things which God
has sanctified, to be means of strengthening our Brethren? True it is, if we
should measure things by the corrupt judgment of a natural man, it seems
unlikely and impossible that the sufferings of the godly, should turn to the
gain and furtherance of the Gospel: but God often works out his own glory
contrary to all human wisdom. Who would imagine, that out of death should
spring life, or that the blood of the Marty^ should be the seed of the Church?
But thus it pleases him to manifest his own honor, and to show that he is
infinite in wisdom.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, if we respect the persecuters of the faithful, they must be
discerned thereby, to be wicked men and deadly enemies, working out their own
destruction, and sealing up their own reprobation. For as the cause of the
godly is made more famous, and spread abroad far and near for which they
suffer: so such as persecute them shall come to confusion, and do bring upon
themselves swift damnation. The Apostle speaking of the unbelieving Jews,
says; 1 Thessalonians. 2, 15, 16.
They killed the Lord and their own Prophets, they persecuted the Apostles, and
forbad them to Preach unto the Gentiles, to fufill their sins always, for
the wrath of God is come on them to the utmost. Seeing therefore God will have
the faith of such as suffer tried, the godly that believe confirmed, and the
persecuters discerned to be most wicked men, no man should be ashamed of the
crosses and troubles that befall unto him.

Use 1.
Now let us see the Uses. First, this serves to condemn sundry sorts of men,
that esteem not aright of the sufferings of the faithful, nor judge of them
with righteous judgment. It reprooueth such as wonder at them lying in
affliction, as at Psalm. 102, 6.
an Owl in the desert, or a Pellicane in the Wilderness, so that they are as
a Sparrow upon the house top sitting alone. It reprooueth such as think them
the greatest Sinners, and measure the condition by the chastisement that they
suffer, like the friends of Job, who judged him to be a deep dissembler, and
an hollow hearted Hypocrite, because he suffered such things. How many are
there that insult over the godly, when they are humbled under the cross, and
feel the hand of God upon them? How many are there that esteem of them when
they are in peace and prosperity, but leave them in time of trouble, and
forsake them in the day of their calamity, as the Apostle 2 Timothy 4. complains
of many men?

Lastly, it reprooueth such as are discomforted in their profession, and
offended at the calamities that befall others for the faiths sake, and faint
for the Servants of God. On the other side, let us learn better things, and
not judge rash judgment against the righteous. Let us not think it strange,
to see the best men troubled and euilly dealt withal, by evil and carnal
Wretches of this World. It was the lot of Christ our Savior; Esaias 53, 3.
He was despised and rejected of Men, he was a man full of sorrows, and not
esteemed. It was the lot of all the Prophets and Apostles, and is the portion
of all the Servants of God in these days, and shall be to the end of the
World. It is in vain for us to think, to be exempted out of the common
condition of these men. Let us not be offended at their sufferings, not shrink
back for the troubles that do befall them. Let us not think them the
greatest Sinners for their greatest sufferings, nor reproach them as wicked men,
for sustaining the reproaches of wicked men. All they that judge thus, are
deceived in their judgment. When the Disciples showed Christ of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices, Luke 13, 2.
he answered and said unto them; Suppose ye that these Galileans were greater
sinners then all the other Galileans, because they have suffered such things? I
tell you nay: but except ye amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. Or
think you that those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell and slew
them, were sinners above all men that dwell in Jerusalem, I tell you nay: but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Lastly, let us be so far from
triumphing over them, and trampling upon them that endure affliction, that
rather in their sufferings we should suffer with them; in their weeping, we
should weep with them; in their mournings, we should mourn with them; in their
miseries, we should pray for them; that so we may show our selves members of
one and the same body with them, according to the precept of the Apostle; Romans
12, 16. Heb. 13, 3.
Be of like affection one toward another, rejoice with them that rejoice, and
weep with them that weep: remember them that are in bonds, as though ye were
bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted
with them. And this is a notable Argument and testimony to our own hearts,
that we are lively members of the body of Christ, and serves as a sweet
comfort unto us, that we are of the fellowship and Communion of Saints.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing the afflictions of the faithful are not shameful and
ignominious unto them, we may conclude from hence, that they are blessed that
suffer adversity for the Gospels sake. For seeing Paul glories in this place
of his persecutions, and accounts it a praise to him to be a prisoner of
Christ, we must needs hold them happy and blessed that are in affliction for
righteousness sake, whereby we are joined to the faithful, we are made like
them, and one with them; nay, we are joined with Christ, and made one with him,
so that the deeper we sink down under the cross, the more we are likened to
the son of God. This is it which he teaches his Disciples, Mat. 5, 10, 11.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven: blessed shall ye be when men revile you, and persecute
you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely. See here a
difference between the spirit of God and all carnal men. All men indeed desire
to be happy and blessed in this life, and in the life to come, and they are
much deceived in their judgment and estimation of true happiness. How many
are there that account happiness to consist in honors, pleasures, preferments,
riches, friends, peace, prosperity, plenty, abundance, and worldly dignities?
and esteem of troubles, afflictions, crosses, shame, persecutions, losses, as
the greatest miseries that can befall the Sons of men? But God accounts
otherwise of them, and would have his Saints that suffer for a good conscience,
to account otherwise of them then the world accounts, seeing the fruits of
men's wickedness are turned to be the means of our blessedness. The Apostle
Peter teaches the Church this Lesson, 1 Pet. 3, 14.
Who is it that will harm you, if ye follow that which is good?
Notwithstanding, blessed are ye if ye suffer for righteousness sake: yea, fear
not their fear, neither be troubled. Christ our Savior teaches, that to such
belongs the kingdom of heaven, though they be accounted unworthy of the
company of men, yet they shall enjoy the blessed society of Christ and his holy
Angels: though they be driven out of house and home, yet they shall have their
habitation in the Heavens: though they be taunted and termed by the most
odious names among men, yet they shall have praise and honor of God, and their
names are written in the Book of life.

Use 3.
Lastly, we are put in mind by this doctrine of a necessary duty, that we faint
not under the cross, but go boldly, forward with our profession unto the end,
and rejoice in our afflictions. If we did suffer as evil doers, as murderers
and malefactors, we could have no comfort in our sufferings. Hence it is, that
the Apostle charge, 1 Pet. 4, 15. and 1 Pet. 3, 17, 18
That none of us suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or an evil Doer, or as
a Busie-body in other Men's matters: But if a Man suffer as a Christian, let him
not be ashamed, but let him glorify GOD in this behalf. Many men suffer
shame and reproach, but it is for their offenses: in such sufferings, we want
peace of conscience, and comfort under the cross. If we suffer as drunkards,
as robbers, as riotous persons, we suffer for our merits and deserts, we cannot
rejoice and be glad when we suffer in this manner. But it is better (if the
will of God be so) that we suffer for well doing, then for evil doing, for
Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God. Wherefore, if God at any time call us out for the
Gospels sake to suffer adversity, let us herein rejoice with an exceeding
great joy, and never be ashamed of the Gospel, which is the power of God to
salvation unto all that believe. Many Phil. 3, 19.
there are that glory in their own shame, but some are ashamed of their glory.
We see how many make a mock of sin, and foame out the froth and scumme of
their own shame; they strive who shall exceed and excel one another in
drinking, in reuelling, in whoring, in all vanity, and are not ashamed; nay,
they are past all shame. It were as great a shame for us to be ashamed of our
glory, as it is for these to glory in their own confusion and shame.

Now, to endure affliction for the Faiths sake, is our glory and honor, and
therefore let no man be ashamed of it. As for those that are ashamed of the
Cross, let them also be ashamed of the Gospel; yea of Christ, which is the
subject and substance of the Gospel. Our Savior, declaring that this must be
the condition of all the Servants of God, to be reviled and persecuted, says:
Math. 5, 12.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you. And the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4, 13.
wills the Jews to rejoice, inasmuch as they are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, they may be glad and rejoice.
For if it be no shame or infamy to be persecuted and imprisoned for the truth
of Religion and the testimony of a good conscience, what greater matter of
rejoicing can there be offered unto us, in the midst of our sufferings? What
greater occasion of gladness and cheerfulness of heart can we have, seeing
the goodness of the cause swalloweth up the disgrace of the cross, and the
glory of the Gospel, ouer-shaddoweth all the shame of persecution. This made
the Apostles depart from the council of the Pharisees, Acts 5, 41.
Rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Christ, and
the preaching of the truth. So the Hebrews are commended, Heb. 10, 33, 34.
Who being made a gazing-stocke by reproaches and afflictions, and becoming
Companions of them which were so tossed too and fro, did suffer with joy the
spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance.

[ Of Jesus Christ, etc.] Before we heard that Paul entitled himself a
Prisoner: Now let us see whose Prisoner he was. He was imprisoned by the
authority of Caesar, and the malice of the Jews, yet for the cause of Christ,
and the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles. The cause of his bands and
imprisonment, was not the committing of any heinous crime, but the publishing
of the glad tidings of salvation to the world. In this sense, that Paul is a
prisoner for Christ, that is, for the confessing and preaching of Christ, he
calls himself oftentimes by this title, as Ephesians. 3, 1. For this cause I Paul am
the Prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles. These words are taken in this
place passiuely, not actiuely: passiuely, in that he suffered imprisonment for
Christ's cause, and was cast into prison for the maintaining of the glory of
christ: not actiuely, as if Christ had put him in prison; for in this sense, he
might be called the Prisoner of Caesar, to whom he had appealed, that the envy of
the Pharisees, and malice of the Jews might be repea^ed and defeated. Doct.
3. The persecutions of all true Christians, are the persecutions of Christ.
The doctrine from hence is this, that faithful (...) afflicted for the truth,
may account their tribulations and afflictions, to be the tribulations and
persecutions of Jesus Christ. The persecutions of all true Christians which are
imprisoned for Christ's sake, are the persecutions, and must be esteemed as the
persecutions of Christ himself. This Apostle writing to the Philippians, and
mentioning his Chains, Phil. 1, 13.
calls them his Bands in Christ. And in the Epistle to the Colossians, he
says; Col. 1, 24.
Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church.
Here he calls the afflictions which he in his body suffered, the
afflictions of Christ. So he exhorts Timothy, not to be ashamed 2 Timothy 1, 8.
of the testimony of our Lord, nor of him being his Prisoner, but to be
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God. All
these testimonies do teach us, that all such afflictions as are occasioned
through the Gospel, and brought upon the godly for righteousness sake, are
not only to be called their afflictions, but the afflictions of Christ Jesus,
for whose cause they come upon them.

Reason 1.
The reasons hereof are plain and evident. For first they are sustained for
his names sake, and therefore may fitly be called his. If then we endure them
for his cause, and for the witness of the Gospel, whereof he is the matter
and Author, he is the occasion of their trouble, and therefore they are to be
accounted his. He must needs be a party with us, for whose cause and occasion
we are troubled. A man of any humanity and natural affection, will make
himself a Companion in tribulation with him, who is punished or troubled for
his debt and offense. When Abiathar came to David, and told him how that his
Father and his Fathers house were slain, for succouring of David, 1 Samuel 22, 12
he presently took to himself, saying; I am the cause of the death of all the
persons of thy Fathers House, abide thou with me and fear not, for he that
seeks my life, shall seek thy life also: for with me thou shall be in
safeguard. The truth of this reason is set down by the Prophet, when he says:
Psalm. 44, 22.
Surely for thy sake are we slain continually, and are counted as Sheep for
the slaughter. Hereunto the Apostle alludeth Romans 8, 36.
and concludes the reason, in the Epistle to the Romans. Cha. 8. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or perrill, or sword? As it it written,
For thy sake are we killed, and are counted as Sheep for the slaughter. Seeing
then, afflictions are sustained for Christ's cause, whose shall they be better
accounted then his?

Reason 2.
Secondly, there is a nearer conjunction between Christ and his members, so
that we are made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. If then we be made
one with Christ, Ephe. 5, 30.
even members Of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: the afflictions that
are ours must needs be made his, the persecutions that are ours, must needs
be made his; the persecutions that are ours, are his persecutions; our
imprisonment, is his imprisonment. For they that are faithful, are the body of
Christ, and he their head, so that they with him make but one Christ. Hence it
is, that the Church which is the company of true believers, 1 Cor. 12, 12
is called by the name of Christ. If any member suffer, the head suffers with
it as well as the members, there is such a sympathy and feeling between the^: so
is it between Christ and his Church; their grief, is his grief; their
sorrow, is his sorrow; their trouble is his trouble. This reason is included in
the words of the Apostle writing to the Colossians, when he says; I fulfill
the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body sake, which is
his Church.

Use 1.
Let us come to consider the uses. First, see here what Christ accounts of
the sufferings of his Servants. He accounts whatsoever is done to them that
are faithful, a^ done unto himself, whether it be good or evil, whether it
be comfort and consolation, or trouble and persecution. True it is, Christ
Jesus is ascended into the heavens, and sits at the right hand of his
Father, so that he can suffer no more, he can dye no more: yet now he
suffers in his members that confess his name, and rejoices in his members
that praise his name: when they are troubled, he is troubled, and when they
are comforted, he is comforted. And first touching afflictions, all such as
offer wrong and injury to the Saints, do offer wrong and injury to Christ
himself. This appears in the words of Christ to Saul, who had obtained
letters from the Highpriests to put in prison those that called on his name,
saying to him: Acts 9, 4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? He might have said, why persecutest thou
my Saints? Why bring thou them bound to Jerusalem? But to enforce his
reproof, he tells him with whom he has to deal, and to whom the injury and
indignity is offered, to wit; to Christ. A notable lesson for all persecuters,
to ponder upon, and carefully to remember. Whenever they take crafty and
wicked counsel against the Children of God, and they are plotting and
contriuing any mischief against them: when they whet their tongues, or draw
their Swords, or busy their heads, or set a work their hearts, to overthrow
and destroy them, let them by and by consider, that Christ calls unto them
from Heaven with a revenging voice: Why persecutest thou me? If this voice of
Christ were always sounding in their ears, and entering into their hearts, and
piercing their consciences, it would repress their rage, and assuage their
malice intended against the people of God. If any man among us that lives in
the Church, were asked the question, whether he would persecute Christ in his
person, imprison him, revile him, wrong him, afflict him, and put him to death
if he lived upon the face of the earth: he would be ready to answer, God
forbid; and to defy him that should offer to charge him with it: he would
answer, he looks for salvation from him, and means not to contriue the
destruction of him: yea, he would be ready to say with Hazaell, what? Is thy
Servant a Dog that I should do this great thing? 2. Kings 8. 13. But let us
not deceive in our selves, in vain words that cannot profit, whatsoever is
wrought against the Servant, redowneth to the reproach and contempt of the
Master, and Christ will be revenged of the afflictions laid upon the least
and poorest member that belongs to his body, as if they were infflicted upon
his own person. Hence it is, that the Evangelist describing the form and
manner of his last judgment, when Christ shall break the heavens, and come to
judge the quick and the dead: Mat. 25, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.
Set the Goats on the left hand and say unto them: Depart ye curssed into
everlasting fire, prepaered for the Devil and his Angels, for I was hungered,
and ye gave me no meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink: I was a
Stranger, and ye took me not in unto you: I was naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick and in Prison, and ye visited me not: Then shall they answer him; Lord,
when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or
in Prison, and did not minister unto thee? He shall say unto them: Verily I
say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did
it not to me.

And as the wrongs wrought against the righteous, do reach up to Heaven, and
touch the person of Christ: so on the other side, whatsoever benefit,
whatsoever comfort, whatsoever good, is showed to the faithful, because they
are faithful, shall be rewarded even to a Cup of cold Water, and Christ will
esteem it as do one and offered unto himself. This likewise appears in the
last judgment of Christ, when he shall say to his Sheep standing on the
right hand: Mat. 25, 35, 36, 40.
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me Drink: I
was a Stranger, and ye took me in unto you: I was naked, and ye clothed me:
I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in Prison, and ye came unto me: for
verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. He does not say, ye have
refreshed, ye have visited, ye have clothed, ye have comforted my Servants,
but ye have done all these things to me; I have been filled, I have been
refreshed, it is I, it is I, that have been clothed by you, and comforted of
you.

If any were asked what he would do if Christ Jesus were in necessity among
us, if he saw him naked, whether he would cloth him? If he saw him an hungered,
whether he would feed him? Or thirsty, whether he would give him Drink? Or
in Prison, whether he would visit him? He would be ashamed to deny him any
thing, that has given him all things: he would think himself unworthy to
live in the World, if he should see him want and not supply it. But every
Christian man to another, is as Christ himself, when we feed, cloth, and
visit him, we feed, cloth, and visit Christ; which made the believers set
their Lands and possessions, and lay the price down at the feet of the
Apostles, to be distributed as every one had need. Among all encouragements to
well doing, there cannot be a greater then this, that Christ accepts it as
done unto himself.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing the afflictions of the Children of God, are the afflictions
of Christ, we learn what to esteem of all their afflictions, they are not
shameful and ignominious, but glorious and honorable, as the Crown of a
Prince, or as the Banners and Ensigns of victory. This is it which the Apostle
teaches. Phil. 1, 29. To you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. Where we see, he makes it a
special prerogative and pre-eminence, to endure affliction for Christ's sake,
and makes it as great an honor to suffer, as to believe; and therefore he
joins them both together. The prison into which the godly are cast, is better
then the Palace of a Prince. The Chains that are borne and worn, for keeping
faith and a good conscience, are greater ornaments, then all the Chains of
Gold about the Necks of the Men of this World. The Fetters wherewith the
faithful are laden, are of greater price and estimation, then all the
Bracelets and Abilements, then all the Silver and Gold, that the Sons and
Daughters of Men delight to carry about them. Hence it is, that the blessed
Martyrs that gave their lives for the truth, when they came to suffer death,
kissed the stake to which they were tied, the Chain with which they were
compassed, and the Wood by which they were burned and consumed. We see it is
the manner of the men of this World, to set out themselves with pomp and
bravery, to win credit, and to get themselves honor and estimation, whereof we
have an example in Herod, recorded in the Acts: Acts 12, 21.
Who arrayed himself in roall apparel, cunningly wrought, that it glistred
as the Sun (as Antiquit. Iudaie. lib. 29, cap. 7.
Josephus notes) and made an Oration, and the people gave a shout, saying; The
voice of God and not of Man. This outward pomp and ostentation, are not the
notes and marks whereby true Christians should be known and discerned.
Servants are known whom they serve, and to what Master they belong, by the
Badge on their sleeue. The persecutions and afflictions of the faithful, are
the Badges and Cognizances of Christ, whereby they are known to be his. This
is it Gal. 6, 17.
which the Apostle puts us in mind of. Gal. 6. From henceforth let no man
put me to business, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Where
we see, how the Apostle calls his sufferings for the Gospel, the marks of
Christ. What these marks are, he shows in other places, when he reports
the stripes, whippings, scarres, and blemishes which he bare about in his
body; I think that God has set forth us the last Apostles, 1 Cor. 4, 9, 11
12, 13. 2 Cor. 6, 4, 5. and 11, 23
as men appointed to death, for we are made a gazing-stocke unto the World, and
to the Angels, and to men: we hunger, we thirst, we are naked, we are
buffeted, we are reviled, we are persecuted, we are evil spoken of, we are
imprisoned, we are whipped, we are stoned, we are made as the filth of the
World, and the offscouring of all things. These are the marks which the
Apostle gloryeth in, and whereof he is no more ashamed, then the Soldier is of
his wounds and scarres. We see how Soldiers that fight in a good cause, in
their Princes quarrel, and for the defense of their Country, if they loose an
Eye, or an Arm, or a Leg, are ready to show the place, they account it no
blemish, they are not ashamed of it. If these can vaunt of the marks and
maimes which they have sustained: how much more honor and glory should we
account it, to bear the marks of Christ, and to suffer reproach with the
people of God? Howsoever therefore the World judges of the scourgings,
whippings, and imprisonments of the faithful, they are truly and rightly
honorable with God and good men. And if we will judge rightly, we must
esteem no otherwise of these their sufferings.

Use 3.
Thirdly, we see that it is not the bare punishment, but the cause that makes
a Martyr and Witness of the truth. It is the cause that makes the crosses of
Christians to be the Cross of Christ. The Apostle testifies he was a Prisoner
for Christ and the Gospel, not for his own sins and offenses. It is not our
suffering barely and nakedly considered, can honor us with the reward of
glory, and the Crown of Martyrdom, The cause makes a Martyr, not the
punishment.
but the cause in which we dye, and the quarrel in which we suffer. True it
is, afflictions are common to the godly and ungodly, they suffer alike, they
are imprisoned alike, arraigned, condemned, and executed oftentimes alike, but
albeit the afflictions be one and the same, yet the cause is not one and the
same for which they are afflicted. The ungodly ate punished for their sins;
the godly are afflicted for a good conscience. Abell is murdered of his
Brother; Caine is curssed and condemned to be a fugitive upon the earth: both
of them are afflicted, but the cause is diverse; Abell is killed for his
godliness; Caine is punished for his wickedness. Joseph is sold to Strangers
and cast into prison, so likewise are Pharaohs two Eunuchs, his Butler and his
Baker: they lie all in one prison, but they had not one cause: for he is
committed through the slanders and false accusations of his Mistress, they
for their demerites and offenses against their Master. Christ had his feet
and his hands nailed on the Cross, so had the two Thieves, they suffered al
one punishment, but how contrary were the causes of him and them, seeing he
suffered without cause, but they justly and worthily had the sentence of death
executed upon them? Let us not therefore only fasten our eyes, and look upon
the bare punnishment, but consider what the cause is, and according to the
cause, esteem both of the person and of the punishment. Some are prisoners
Math. 5, 25.
of men, 2 Timothy 2, 26.
others are Prisoners of the Devil, of whom they are holden captive, and both
of them for their wickedness: but if we will be Martirs of Christ, we must be
the prisoners of Christ. This serves to reprove the Church of Rome, who glory
in their Martyrs (as sometimes the Donatists did) and fill up their Calendar
with such as they have canonized for Saints in Heaven, which were no better
then Traitors when they lived upon the earth. The Church of Rome, which
vaunteth her self to be the only true Church of God, and condemns other,
honors diverse Saints which never were in the World; some that were Pagans;
others, that were Jews in Religion, and refused Christ; and others, that were
Heretics and Traitors, that neither had Faith on Earth, nor have salvation in
Heaven, being Rebels to their Princes, and enemies to their Country, and
disturbers of the State. And therefore also it condemns those, who albeit
they live under the Gospel, and shroud themselves under the branches of it, as
under a comfortable shadow, whereby they have refreshed and enriched
themselves, yet they magnify the Church of Rome, and set up the Faith
professed therein, they balance it equal with the true Church of God among
our selves, and thereby seek to shake in sunder the Faith of many. These men
cry out, not only that there are and have been learned men on both sides, but
Saints and holy men on both sides, and true Martyrs on both sides; and
therefore would have the people carried about with uncertainty of Doctrine, as
with a wave of the Sea. But we deny that any have suffered among us for the
Roman Faith, or have been led to execution for their Religion. The truth is,
they have but too much favor showed them, and too great liberty given them.
Indeed, such as have been found factious and forward to advance foreign
power, to adhere to foreign enemies, to stir the people to rebel and take
arms against the Prince, to compass the death and destruction of the Prince,
such as have been Authors of treacheries and conspiracies, and been convinced
to be trumpets of sedition by the deposition of witnesses, by the form of
their trial, and by their own confessions, have been justly executed among
us, as by all men must needs be acknowledged. In the City of Rome, all that
will not take the Popes part, or shall take him to be no Pope, or refuse to
join with him if an Army should be sent against him, are adjudged to be no
lawful Subjects, but disloyal Traitors. No foreign Prince will repute them
for his people and Subjects, that shall deny to take his part against any
foreign Usurper or Inuador whatsoever. So the Laws of our Land have seized
upon some, who have busied themselves in matters of State, bringing over Bulls,
declaring that the Prince was to be deposed, and the Subjects discharged of
their alleagiance. As for points of Faith, they were never mentioned in the
proceedings against them, they were not called into question for their opinion
concerning the Mass, for transubstantiation, for worshipping of Images, or for
any other point of the Romish Religion, or rather superstition. Therefore it is
false, that any have dyed among us as Martyrs, or any otherwise then as
Traitors. The true Who are true Martyrs, and who not.
Church of God ever held them for Martyrs, that dyed for the profession of the
Faith, and the testimony of Christ: but such of the Popish faith and faction as
have been executed among us, dyed for maintenance of the Popes pleasure and
tyranny, taking upon him to depose Princes, and seeking by open arms and
secret Treasons to murder them. True Martyrs suffered for the truth
wrongfully, and therefore deserved commendation, according to the rule of the
Apostle: 1 Pet. 2, 19.
It is thanke-worthy if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully: but these suffer not in matter of wrong, nor for a good
conscience, unless the will of the Pope be the rule of their conscience. True
Martyrs must be endued with Charity 1 Cor. 13, 3.
for as the Apostle teaches; If I give my body to be burned and have not love,
it profits nothing: but these have not any shadow of charity who plot the
death of their Prince, and seek the destruction of their Country. To conclude
this point, unless Treason be Religion, and falsehood truth, and unless
Antichrist be to be received for Christ, these men cannot be esteemed and
honored as Martyrs among us, who dyed not for Christ, but for practicing
against the Doctrine of Christ, which teaches to be gentle, patient, humble,
and not any way to seek revenge.

Use 4.
Lastly, from this Doctrine arises great comfort to the Servants of God, and
as great terror to all their Enemies. It is a great consolation for them that
are afflicted for Christ's sake, to assuage their sorrow, and a great means to
work in them patience, to consider that Christ puts all their tears in his
Bottle, and accounts their afflictions to be his afflictions. If we suffer
with Christ, we shall reign with him: if we dye with Christ, we shall live
with him: if we Romans 8, 29. 2 Timothy 2, 11, 12 1 Pet. 4, 12.
be made like unto him in ignominy, we shall be made like unto him in glory.
The Apostle Peter exhorts the people of God, Not to think it strange
concerning the fiery trial which was among them, to prove them, as though
some strange thing were come unto them, but to rejoice, inasmuch as they were
partakers of Christ's sufferings. If any thing be able to lift up your hands,
and to raise up your hearts under the Cross, this consideration is able to
refresh our weakness, and comfort our feeble Spirits that our afflictions
shall no otherwise be respected and regarded, then if the load were laid upon
Christ himself. On the other side, this serves to terrify the hearts of all
persecuters of the godly, and Enemies of all righteousness, they can never
escape the hand of God and of Christ, whom they do persecute in his members.
They have not to do only with men like unto themselves, but with him that is
the eternal God, against whom they can never prevail. This is it that
deceives the proud persecuters of the poor people of God, they dream they
have to do no further then with weak men, who are not able to resist them,
and that they have no farther account to make. But they must know, that their
persecutions reach to Christ, and that they slander, revile, reproach, and hurt
the person of Christ himself, so often as they slander, revile, reproach, and
hurt the least and lowest member of Christ; and therefore shall not escape
fearful punnishment. Hence it is, that Christ speaking unto Saul when he
was converted to the Faith: Acts 9, 5.
It is hard for thee to kick against pricks. It is therefore a fearful
thing to be a persecuter. 2 Thessalonians. 1, 6.
It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you which are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels, etc. So the Apostle
John describing the tribulation of the Church, says: Revel. 2, 10.
Behold, it shall come to pass, that the Devil shall cast some of you into
Prison. He does not say, the persecuters shall do it, but the Devil: because
he rules in them, he carries them to do his will; albeit they be blind and
see it not; albeit they be hardened and understand it not; albeit they be
senseless and regard it not.

[ And our Brother Timotheus, etc.] Here is the second person writing this
Epistle. Paul joins unto him Timothy, a man of reverent account, and famous
in the Church, as he does in many other places of his Epistles. The former
Epistle to the Corinthians, Magdeb. Centur. lib 2. cap. 7.
was written by Paul and Sosthenes: the latter by Paul and Timothy. Paul and
all the Brethren which he had with him at Rome, joined together in the writing
the Epistle to the Galathians. Paul, Siluanus, and Timothy, wrote the Epistles
to the Thessalonians. So in this place, Paul joins Timothy with him in his
suit, because howsoever he were in great credit with Philemon, and able to
obtain a great matter at his hands, yet he knew he should prevail better by
the help and assistance of another, then he could do himself alone, seeing
two may prevail more then one. He honors him also with the name of a dear
Brother (whom oftentimes he calls his natural Son) that his guiftes and
graces may be considered with his person, and carry the greater weight in his
suite, and so Philemon sooner yield his consent, and grant this request, being
requested, and as it were set upon by so many. Doct. 4. All duties are better
done by the help of others, then alone by our selves.
From this practice of the Apostle we learn, that what good thing soever we
enterprise and take in hand, we shall better effect it with others then alone
by our selves. The joining unto us the hand and help of others is profitable
and necessary to all things belonging unto us for the better performing and
accomplishing of them. This the Wise man teaches. Eccl. 4. when he says:
Eccles 4, 9, 12
Two are better then one. Abimelech, being directed by God to stir up
Abraham, obtains by his means Genesis 20, 17.
who prayed for him) that which he could not compass and accomplish alone by
himself. The like we might say of the three friends of Job, they obtained the
favor of God, Job. 42. 8.
and the accepting of their Sacrifice through the intercession of Job, which
without him they could not obtain. Absalom not being 2 Samuel 14, 4
able to purchase and procure of himself the good will of his Father, moves
Ioab to deal for him, Ioab uses the help of the subtle Woman of Tekoah,
whereby he is reconciled to his Father. Hereby it comes to pass, Ephe. 6,
18. Col 4. 3. 2 These. 3, 1.
that Paul so often requesteth and requires the prayers of the Church, that
utterance may be given unto him, that he may open his mouth boldly to publish
the secrets of the Gospel. All these places of Scripture prove plainly and
directly unto us, that what matter of weight and importance soever we
enterprise and go about, it is good for us to take to our selves the help of
others, to further us therein.

Reason 1.
The truth of this Doctrine will better appear unto us, if we weight the
causes and consider the reasons. For first, the labor and wages of two, is
better and greater then of one alone. In all doing of duties there Psalm. 19, 11.
is profit and reward, but where greater strength is joined and force united,
there is greater fruit of the labor seen. This is the reason urged by the
Wise man. Eccle. 4. where the Doctrine has his confirmation, when he had
taught that two are better then one, he adds immediately; Eccle 4, 9.
For they have better Wages for their labor. It makes us (having company) to
be more cheerful in laboring, it deuoureth the tediousness and
wearisomnesse of the work, and it provoke us to an holy emulation, who shall
go before each other. Hence it is, that Christ Jesus calling and sending out
his Apostles, Mar. 6, 7. Mat. 10, 2, 3.
did send them forth two and two, and the Evangelist does couple, and as it
were yoke them together, Peter and Andrew, James and John, Philip and
Bartlemew, Thomas and Matthew, etc. Thus they were sent, and thus they labored
together. When God had called Moses to go to Pharaoh, and to will him to let
his people go, he sent him not alone, but joined unto him his brother Aaron.
When the Lord Jesus appointed the seauenty disciples to second the labors of
his twelu Apostles: Luke 10, 1.
He sent them out, two and two before him into every City and place whither he
himself should come. So then, there is more profit in a life that has a
fellow, then when all things are done alone, in the earnestness of the labor
the works shall have more force, their strength is increased, their courage is
kindled, by mutual exhorting and cheering up one of another, and by the
mutual example that one gives to another.

Reason 2.
Secondly, in peril and danger if one fall or be overcome, he has by his
fellow, a fitter remedy against all the changes and adventures of this life.
When a man does take a journey into a far place, it falls out oftentimes
that he comes into some great danger, out of which he is never able to rid
himself, and therefore woe to him that is alone. This is more dangerous in the
matters of the soul, if a man fall into sin, and have no man to pull him out
of the pit into which he is fallen. In bodily falls it is accounted childish
and sottish to fall and not to rise again, to stumble and to lie still in the
mire, and therefore he hastes to rise before any man know of his fall. But in
spiritual falls which are more common and more dangerous, the case is far
otherwise. For he that falls into sin, is scarce ever lifted up and set on
his feet, unless by the exhortations, admonitions, and reproves of others he
be restored and recovered. This we see in the examples of David, Hezekiah, and
sundry others, who continued in their sins until the Prophets of God came
and spoke unto them in the name of the Lord. This is the reason that Solomon
uses to commend the sociable life above the solitary; Eccle. 4, 10, 12.
For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: and if one overcome him,
two shall stand against him, and a threefold cord is not easily broken. Seeing
therefore, the recompense of labor, is better of two then of one, and the
danger of falling, is lesser in one that has his fellow with him; in both
respects we see, that the help of others, especially of the faithful, is
very necessary and profitable to all things belonging unto us.

Use 1.
The Uses are now in the next place to be observed and marked. First, this
teaches us, that in all occasions and adventures of our life, both in
prosperity and adversity, we should use and seek the help one of another. We
say commonly, that two eyes see more then one, and three more then two. Two
hands are better to work withal, then one. Two heads are better then one, and
three better then two, to contriue any thing. Man is by Nature sociable, and
loves the company and fellowship of others, Arist. polit. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Cicer. de finib. lib. 2.
more then other Creatures that fly together and flock together. The
Philosophers could say, that such as leave the society of men, and betake
themselves to a solitary life, are either a God, or a Beast. Experience does
teach us, that all of us do stand in need of the help of another; the high, of
such as are low; the rich, of such as are poor; so as we are bound together by
common fellowship, as by a strong band, and one of us cannot be without
another. Let no man therefore despise his Brother, neither let the head say to
the foot, I have no need of thee. The Lion which is accounted as the King of
all the Beasts of the Forest, may want the help of the seely Mouse. Let us
set no man at naught, be he never so seely and simple. All human things are
uncertain and unstable, and are turned as with a swift wheel. Let us
therefore maintain peace and concord one with another, that when we want, the
comfort and counsel, the aid and assistance one of another, we may not be to
seek of them, but have them at hand. Small things are increased by concord:
great reuennues are diminished, and large possessions decayed by discord. A
bundle of sticks taken together, are not easily broken: but being severed one
from the other, they are quickly pulled in pieces without any great pains or
policy. An army of men so long as they incamp together, and march together, 2 Samuel 10, 9, 10, 11.
are not easily subdued, but one serves to strengthen another: but if they go
straggling and forraging out of order, if they fall to the prey and pillage,
every one providing for himself, it falls out oftentimes, that the
Conquerors have been conquered and overcome. And as there is great use and
benefit in the company and society one of another, in regard of earthly and
temporal things, so is there greater profit of it in regard of spiritual
things. We have need to be instructed and comforted, to be admonished and
advised one of another. We want daily, the daily prayers one of another, to
commend our selves and our Brethren to God. The Apostle James says; Iam. 5,
13, 14
Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing. Is any
sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray
for him, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up. So the Apostle Heb. 13. stirs up the Hebrews to this duty, Hebr.
13, 19
Pray for us, for we are assured that we have a good conscience in all things,
desiring to live honestly, and I desire you somewhat the more earnestly that ye
so do, that I may be restored to you more quickly. We want oftentimes, nay at
all times the prayers one of another, and we must continually be ready to help
one another, and mindful of the welfare of the whole Church. This condemns
and reprooueth the solitary and Monkish life of those, that abhor and abjure
the fellowship and familiarity of men, and like the wild Ass, delight in no
place but in the Wilderness, as if it were a work of merit to live alone out
of the company of others. These men glory, that they are the light and salt of
the world, yet they hate the light, and hide themselves in their dens, as it
were in darkness, under a color, forsooth least they gather contagion and
corruption from the base vulgar. But as the Gentiles teach by the light of
nature, Cicer. de offic lib. 1.
that we are not born for our selves alone, so is it their duty rather to come
abroad, to enlighten others with the light which they make boast of, and to
season the unsavory, and unseasoned, and unsanctified manners of the people
which they complain of. Does any man light a Candle Mat. 5, 14, 15 Mark 4,
21. Luke 8, 16, and 11, 33.
to cover it under a Bushel, to hide it under a Bed, or to put it in a privy
place? But he sets it in a Candlestick, and places it on a table, that it
may give light to all that are in the house. And what use is there of the Salt,
unless application be made of it to the meat, that it may be kept from
putrefaction? Away therefore with this Monkish life out of the Church, which
stands neither with the ordinance of God, nor the society of man: and let us
maintain concord and company one with another, not forsaking the fellowship, as
the manner of some is, but remembering that God has said; It is not good for man
to be alone, and that two are better then one.

Use 2.
Secondly, this teaches us to maintain the public meetinges and assemblies
of the Saints, and to magnify the Lords Sabbaoths, when all the Church join
in prayers, praises, and other exercises of our Christian Religion, making even
1 Kin. 1, 40.
Heaven and Earth to ring with the sound of their thanksgiuings, and consents
in the Doctrines of Faith, and fruits of their obedience. For seeing the
doctrine we have in hand, teaches, that the company of others, chiefly of the
faithful, is very available to help us forward, and to further us in all
good duties, we learn the excellent use of all Church-meetings, where with
one mind, and with one mouth, we glorify God the father in Jesus Christ.
Surely, Bab. on Exo. Chap. 25.
as many sticks make a greater fire, and many strings a fuller Music: so is
the meeting of many in the Church, to pray to God together, to hear the word
together, to receive the Sacraments together, to sing the praises of God
together; it is a fire that casts abroad a great heat, and an harmony passing
pleasing in the ears of the Lord.

Now the more gracious these meetings are, the greater is their sin that
break off this fellowship of the Saints, and dissolve the people of God, which
came Psalm. 110, 3
willingly together at the time of mustring together his Army in perfect
beauty. Now the Standard seems pulled down, and the Camp to be broken up,
and the people disperced and scattered as Sheep without their Shepherds,
wandering here and there (as it were) upon the Mountains, to seek pasture to
save their lives. It is noted in the holy History, that a great Famine was sent
upon Samaria, when the Prophets were destroyed; 1 King. 18, 5
So that they sought for the Fountains of Waters, and the streams of the
Rivers, if so be they might find to save the Horses and the Mules alive,
least the Land were utterly deprived of them. The word of God grows precious
in our days, and the people that hunger after the Bread of life, are
constrained to go from place to place to sustain themselves. This made the
Prophet to cry out: Psa. 84, 1, 2.
O Lord of Hoasts how amiable are thy Tabernacles, my soul longs, yea and
faints for the Courts of the Lord, for my heart and my flesh rejoice in the
living God. This serves to reprove those that show no love or liking to
Church-meetings, that despise the grace of God offered unto them, and prefer
any assemblies in the World, and of worldly and wicked men before the
assemblies of the Church. These men (if they be asked) say they hope to be
saved, but they will not use the means of their salvation: they look to come
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but they regard not the way and path that leads
unto it: they will needs be of God, but they will not hear the word of God,
John 8, 47.
and therefore we may truly conclude, that because they hear it not, they
cannot be of God.

Use 3.
Lastly, we must not content our selves, or think it sufficient to pray unto
God, or to praise him alone in the Closset of our house, or of our heart, or in
the company of our Family, when we should do our duties to God publicly, and
join with the rest of the Congregation. Christ Jesus himself repaired to the
Temple, Luke 2, 42.
at the set times of Gods worship: so did the faithful in all ages of the
Church, they were terrified, neither by the coldness of the weather, Psalm. 84,
6, 7.
nor by the greatness of the heat, nor by the length of the journey, nor by
the costlinesse of the worship: but had the greatest solace and chiefest
delight in those holy meetings; Mat. 18, 20. Genesis 28, 17.
where is the presence of God, the joy of the godly, the gate of heaven. Hence
it is, that the Prophet says; Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they
will ever praise thee: a day in thy Courts, is better then a thousand other
where: I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in
the Tabernacles of wickedness. Psalm. 84, 5, 10. True it is, we are commanded
to make private prayers, and to pour out the secret Meditations of our hearts
before the Lord, but when we ought to assemble with our Brethren in one
place, and frequent the meetings of the Church, God will not hear us, nor
accept us if we refuse such solemn meetings, although we privately call upon
him in our houses. They that come sildome to public Prayers, do also most
sildome use private prayers. And such as enter into their Chamber, and when
they have shut the door, do pray unto their Father which is in secret, will
make conscience to enter into the Lords Courts, and to pray unto him with the
rest of the faithful. For if God promise his presence, where two or three are
gathered together in the Name of God: much more will his ears be ready to
hear us, and his mouth open to answer us, and his hands stretched out to help
us, when we shall join together with the rest of our Brethren, as one man to
call upon him. See then the difference between the godly and ungodly. The
Children of God have desired nothing more then to abide and continue in the
house the Lord all the days of their life, as the Prophet makes known his
Psalm. 27, 4. and 42, 1, 2. and 137 1.
request. Psa. 27. One thing have I desired of the Lord that I will require,
even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. And nothing has more
troubled and disquieted them, then when they have been constrained to go from
the house of God, and been banished from the exercises of their Religion. This
we see in the example of the Jews carried into captivity. By the Waters of
Babell we sat, and there we wept when we remembered Sion. But the ungodly are
never more merry nor better contented, then when they are out of the Church:
nor never more heavy and discontented, then when they are in the house of God.
They think every hour seven. They count every Sabbath the loss of a day,
and no time worse spent, then that which is spent in the service of God. All
time is esteemed to little and to short, that is spent in pleasures, in
Carding, in Dyeing, in Drunkenness, in vanity, and in all wickedness: never
considering that we ought to number our days, and redeem the time, because
the days are evil.

[ To Philemon, our dear Friend and Fellow Laborer, etc.] Hitherto we have
spoken of the persons writing: Now we are to proceed to the persons, to whom
this Epistle is written; which are four in number, whereof one is chief and
principal; the other, such as are joined to him as less principal. The
chief person here named, is Philemon. Touching this Philemon, who he was, and
of what calling and condition, it is not agreed among all. Some think he was
in the Ministry, and of some Ecclesiastical function, Call. in Epist. Phil.
Piscat. in hanc locum. Rolloc. annlis. in Epistol. Phil.
because the Apostle calls him a Fellow Laborer. But the opinion and
judgment of these men is not certain, and the reason whereupon it stands,
is weak and wavering. Rather he appears to be a Citizen of Colosse, of good
wealth and worship, because both the Pastor of that Church was Archippus, as
appears Coloss. 4, Say unto Archippus, look to thy Ministry that thou
fulfill it; And many other are called by this honorable Title of
Fellow Laborers, who never had calling to preach the word, as appears in
diverse places, where Paul saluteth not only private persons, but Women, who
were not to teach publicly in the Church by this Name, as Romans 16. Phil. 4. 3.
John. Now the Apostle uses two reasons, to persuade him to yield to his suit
and earnest request; the one, of friendship and familiarity that was between
them; the other, of his zeal and forwardness in furthering the Gospel, as
indeed it is the duty, not only of the Ministers, but of all the godly, to
promote the doctrine of the gospel, and to labor much in the Lord by their
prayers, works, counsels, endeavors, and employments. So then in regard of the
near conjunction of Christian love and common labor in the truth, and for the
truth; the Apostle hops to prevail with him. Doct. 5. A Christian friend will
perform any Christian duty to his friend.
From hence we learn this Doctrine, that where true Christian love is, there
is a willing and ready performance of all Christian duties one to another.
Christian friendship and familiarity, ought to prevail much, to entreat and
obtain duties of love one from another, and to stay unchristian and
uncharitable courses. When a contention grew between Abraham and Lot, and
between the Heard-men of their Cattle, Abraham said unto him; Genesis 13, 8.
Let there be, I pray thee, no strife between thee and me, neither between my
Heard-men and thy Heard-men, for we are Brethren. Jonathan and David (a pair
of sure and fast friends) entered into a covenant of peace and amity, either
with other, 1 Sa. 18, 2, 3.
this love would not suffer any evil to be pretended and plotted against each
other, which they did not willingly disclose and discover. David loved him as
himself, and Jonathan revealed and bewrayed the counsel and conspiracy of his
Father, even to the danger of his own life, and the loss of a kingdom. He
preferred the maintaining of friendship before the gaining of a kingdom. The
love that was in Christ to his disciples, caused him to reveal to them all
things that he had from his Father; John 15, 15.
Henceforth call I you not servants for the servant knows not what his M.
does, but I have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my
Father, have I made known to you. When Christ sitting at the table, told the
disciples, that one of the^ should betray him into the hands of Sinners; Peter
moved John, whom Jesus loved, and who leaned on his breast, to ask who it was
of who^ he spoke, being assured he would not deny to tell him, because he loved
him This the Apostle teaches; Romans 5, 7.
Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteous Man: but for a good man it may
be that one dare dye. So in this Epistle that now we have in hand, verse 9. he
says; For loves sake I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus. All these several
places serve to point out, and to prove this truth unto us, that a friend, a
true Friend, a true Christian friend, will not deny, but readily perform any
Christian duty to his friend.

Reason 1.
The Reasons are; first, because true Friends are as one Soul in two Bodies.
They agree in one, they consent in one, they take such sweet counsel
together, and are partakers one with another, in weal and woe. The Heathen
could say, Arist. Eth. lib 8. c. 1. Cicer. lib de Amicit.
that all things are common among friends: and that a sure friend is as another
the same. It is said to this purpose, that David loved Jonathan as his own
Soul. 1 Samuel 18. So Luke speaking of the faithful members of the Church,
says; Act. 4, 32.
The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one Soul:
neither any of them said, that any thing of that which he possessed was his
own, but they had all things common. Seeing then, that such as are joined in
Christian friendship, have one Soul, one heart, one will, one purpose, how can
they but perform all good things one to another? Who can deny any thing to
himself? Who hates his own flesh, or does not nourish and cherish it by all
the means he can? How then shall not Friends, that have a Title and interest
one of another, demand and obtain any thing that is just and equal?

Reason 2.
Again, this is a note of true love, that it seeks not his own good, but
seeks and desires the good of his Brother. The love that aymeth and ends
at it self, is nothing else but self-love (whereof there is great store in
the World) when Men respect nothing but their own profit. But true love is so
occupied about the thing loved, that in regard thereof, it is oftentimes
negligent about it self, not enjoying all the liberty or commodity that
lawfully it may have. The Apostle 1 Cor. 13, 4, 5
describing the properties of love, says: Love suffers long: it is
bountiful: love enuyeth not: love does not boast it it self: it is not
puffed up: it disdaineth not: is seeks not her own things: it not provoked
to anger: it thinks not evil. Seeing then this is one of the fruits and
properties of love, that it is ready to neglect it own private profit and
pleasure, in regard of the thing loved, we cannot doubt of a careful
performance of all duties and demaundes that are required of it, where it is.

Use 1.
Let us see the Uses of this Doctrine. First, seeing Christian friendship will
perform Christian duties, we learn, that a Christian Friend is a sure
Friend, and Christian friendship, is the best friendship. These love in the
Faith, and therefore cannot start back. Such friendship as begins in the
Flesh, and arises upon carnal causes, and worldly respects, is easily broken
and dissolved, the least displeasure does ouer-turne it: but the friendship
which is in God, and for God, endures for ever, no envy shall undo it, no
occasion shall break it, no time shall dissolve it. This appears Prou. 18,
24.
by the words of the Wiseman. Proverb. 18. 24. A man that has friends ought
to show himself friendly, but a friend is nearer then a Brother. Seek such
friends as fear God, and be Christianly minded. Choose none to be thy friend
but him that is the friend of God. Let none be thy Brother, that is not the
Brother of Christ. One such friend, is worth ten thousand others. If thou have
in all thy life found by trial and experience such an one, make more account
and reckoning of him, then of a natural Brother (which band is but in the
flesh) assuring thy self, that grace will work above nature, and therefore
prefer him before al earthly treasure. If then thou be careful to keep thy
temporal Riches and Possessions, much more ought thou to be careful to
keep a faithful friend, and join thy self in amity with him. True it is,
there is a kind of friendship and familiarity among Drunkards, among
Adulterers, among Robbers, and among all Malefactors; as Prou. 1, 14.
Solomon teaches. Proverb. 1. 14. These sometimes seem most nearly joined,
but by the least occasion that can be, they are easily separated. There is in
all places and parishes, almost a band and knot of these friends, and good
fellows. But such as the word of God makes Friends, and the band of the
Spirit gleweth together, are not easily sundred and disioyned, but have a sure
and steadfast conjunction, and are builded upon a strong and stable foundation.
These love more in adversity, then in prosperity, and in time of need do show
what their friendship is: whereas the friendship arising upon worldly causes,
will fail and abate when wealth decays, when the world lowreth, when trouble
comes, and so show themselves not to have been the friends of us, but of
our wealth: not of our persons, but of our prosperity.

Use 2.
Secondly, we learn from hence, to be bold with all Christian friends, and to
suffer them to be bold with us. It is a true note of a true Friend, of a
faithful friend, to deal plainly, to reprove, comfort, exhort, commend
without flattery, without partiality. There is none of us all, how great soever
our knowledge be, how great soever our graces be, how much soever we have
profited in the faith of Christ, but sometimes we have need to be instructed,
sometimes to be comforted, sometimes to be reproved, and sometimes to be
threatened. It is a great blessing of God, when he gives a friend, by whom (as
by a true Glass) we may perceive and know our wants and blemishes. We shall
find every where such as will be ready to sooth and flatter us in our offenses,
and to tell us all is well done: but few there are that will deal faithfully
with us.

This a great plague, and a great judgment, commonly waiting upon great men,
and rich men, that they find few or none that dare admonish them of their
faults, or tell them of their offenses; and so many times are suffered to run
on to their destruction. Let us account it as a special blessing sent unto us
of God, when we have a friend by whom we may hear what is amiss in us. We
could give him thanks, that would tell us of some spot in our faces, or
blemish on our Garments; and shall we envy or malign him, that will discover
unto us the sins of our Souls, which do more soil and defile us, then all
the blemishes of the Body? The Prophet David having found the benefit and
comfort of a godly reproof, when he was reproved by Nathan the Prophet,
says; Psalm. 141, 5.
Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit, and let him reprove me,
and it shall be a precious Oil that shall not break mine head. To this end
speaks Solomon in the Proverbs: Prou. 9, 8.
Rebuke not a Scorner, least he hate thee: but rebuke a wise Man, and he will
love thee. The correction of a Friend, is as the Rod of a Father: the end is
not to destroy, but to save: not to overthrow, but to deliver from death. We
are all of us bound, as it were in a bond or Obligation, to perform this duty
one to another: and we must in humility submit our selves, under the reproof
of our Christian friends.

We cannot better make manifest our love unto our Brethren, then by
admonishing of them, and reproouing of them. This is it which Moses teaches in
the Book of Leuiticus; Leu. 19, 17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy Neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Can a Physician show his love
better, then by telling his patient his disease, and declaring unto him the
means whereby to cure it? Can a Man meeting his Brother, wandering out of his
way in Hills and Dales, in Woods and Wilderness, show his love better unto
him, then by bringing him into the way, and laying his error before his face?
So that no man can give a sounder Testimony of his sincere heart, and unfeigned
love toward his Brother, then by dealing plainly with him when he walks not
uprightly. For a Friend is unto the Soul, as Physic is to the Body: and the
admonishing of our Brother, is as the directing of a Trauailer. Let us
therefore suffer the word of exhortation, 1 These. 5, 14
Knowing that such as are out of order must be admonished; the feeble-minded,
must be comforted; the weak, must be strengthened; the evil, must be
reproved; the obstinate, must be terrified and threatened. And let us not fret
and rage against our Brethren, when we are checked and controlled for our
sins. It is a sign we are persuaded and resolved, to continue in our
sins, when we cannot abide to be reproved, but are ready to say with Ahab:
Have thou found me o mine Enemy? The word of God is good to him that walks
uprightly: and we shall find in the end; Prou. 27, 5.
That open rebuke is better then secret love; yea, that the Wounds of a Lover
are faithful, and the Kisses of an Enemy are pleasant.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing one Friend (especially a Christian Friend) may challenge and
claim much from his Friend, we must know that it is a fearful sin, under
color and show of friendship, to betray or undermine one another. Of such
false and fained Friends, David complains in sundry places of the Psalms;
Psalm. 41, 9 and 55, 12, 13, 14.
My familiar Friend whom I trusted, which did eat my Bread, has lift up the
heel against me: Surely mine Enemy did not defame me, for I could have borne
it: neither did mine Adversary exalt himself against me, for I would have hid
me from him, but it was thou, o Man, even my Companion, my Guide, and my
Familiar, which delighted in consulting together, and went into the house of
God as Companions.

This falsehood have the faithful felt in all Ages: This had Christ himself
experience of, being betrayed of one of his own Disciples and Household. So
have his members continually proved the same, being exercised by the deceit
of false Brethren. This was the sin of Caine; Genesis 4, 8.
Who spoke friendly to his Brother, but when he had him alone in the Field, he
rose up against him and slew him. This was the sin of Ioab, 2 Samuel 20, 9.
his false and fraudulent dealing with Abner and Amasa, he spoke peaceably, but
meant treacherously; Art thou in health my Brother? And so smote them with the
sword that they dyed. This was the sin of Judas, Mat. 26, 48.
who had Hail Master in his mouth, and covered the hollownesse and Hypocrisy
of his heart, with the kindness of a Kiss: but this was a token of his
Treason, and the sign that he had given to apprehend him. It was not a Kiss
of love, but a Testimony of his villainy; and therefore Christ said unto him:
Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a Kiss? Hence it is that the Apostle John
exhorts. 1. John 3. 1 John 3, 18 19.
My little Children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in
deed, and in truth: for thereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall
before him assure our hearts.

This is the true love which stands not in word, but in deed: which lies
not in the tongue, but in the heart: which consists not in an outward show,
but in the inward truth. Such was the love of the godly gathered together after
the ascension of Christ, they loved together in truth, and had all things
common in the use: For Acts 2, 44, and 4, 32, 34, 35.
all that believed were in one place, and had all things common: they were of
one heart and of one Soul, neither any of them faide, that any thing of that
which he possessed was his own, neither was there any among them that lacked.
Where the Evangelist declares, that their hearts and affections were so joined
in God, that being all members of one body, they could not suffer their
fellow members to be destitute, accounting the defeating and defrauding of
them, as it were a spoiling and robbing of themselves.

We must not deny our help to them that are in Christ, but show our selves
ready to cloth him, to feed him, and to visit him in all his members, as we
showed before, otherwise we are no true members, but dead members.

[ And to our dear Sister Apphia, etc.] Hitherto we have spoken of the first
and chief person, to whom the Epistle is directed: Now let us come to such as
are less principal, being joined with him, which are these: first, Apphia:
Secondly, Archippus: Thirdly, the Family of Philemon, to whom this Epistle
was to be read. The first that comes to be considered, is Apphia, whom he
calls a beloved Sister. This Woman seems to be the Wife of Philemon, my
reason is, because she is placed immediately after Philemon, and before the
Minister and Pastor of the Church. For no cause can be assigned why she should
follow Philemon, and go before Archippus, but that she was the Wife of
Philemon; and therefore the Apostle joins her next unto him in place, as she
was joined to him by the ordinance of God. And this Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Phil.
Theophyl. in Epist. Phil.
is the judgment of many.

Now, as Paul before did join with himself Timothy, so in this place he
joins Apphia, as a Companion with Philemon, that thereby he might make the
way more open to ob^ine his purpose. Good Women ought to do much with their
Husbands: and the Apostle provoke her by naming and saluting her, to be a
moouer and perswader of her Husband, to this charitable and Christian duty.
Doct. 6. Christian women should be helpers of their husbands
We learn from hence, that it is required of all Christian Women to be helpers
and furtherers of good things in their Husbands. It is the duty of Wives to
stir up, and spur up their Husbands to all Christian duties and holy
fruits of Religion.

The end of her Creation was, that she should be an Helper unto Man,
especially in the best things, for the Woman was made for Man, and not Man
for the Woman; and therefore GOD said from the beginning: Genesis 2, 18.
It is not good for Man to be alone, let us make him an Helper meet for him.
Solomon describing in the Book of Proverbs a virtuous Woman, whose price is
far above Prou. 31, 10 11, 26, 27.
the Pearls, (he says) The heart of her Husband trusts in her; and he
shall have no need of spoil: She will do him good, and not evil, all the
days of her life, etc. She opens her Mouth in Wisdom, and the Law of
Grace is in her tongue, she ouer-seeth the ways of her Household, and eats
not the Bread of idleness. An example of this duty, we have in the Wife of
Manoah, the Mother Judge. 13, 22 23.
of Sampson, when her Husband was greatly affrighted and astonished, at the sight
of the glorious departure of the Angel of God, who ascended up in the flame of
the Altar, and cried out in the perplexity of his Spirit, and terror of his
heart: We shall surely dye, because we have seen the Lord: She encouraged him
and comforted him, being greatly cast down, If the Lord would kill us, he
would not have received a burnt offering, and a meat offering at our hands,
neither would he have showed us all these things, nor would now have told us
any such. Another example we have in the Shunamite, a Woman of great
estimation, when she perceived the Prophet Elisha to come often that way, 2
King. 4, 9.
she said unto her Husband: Behold, I know now, that this is an holy Man of
God, that passes by us continually, let us make him a little Chamber, I pray
thee, with Walls, and let us set him there a Bed, and a Table, and a Stool,
and a Candlestick, that he may turn in thither when he comes to us.

Where we see she stirs up her Husband to do good to the Prophet, and to
prepare him a study by himself, fit for his Meditations. And the Apostles do
often urge this duty, and teach, that all Women should be helpess, not
hinderers: furtherers, not discouragers: stirrers forward, not houlders
backward from good things.

Reason 1.
The Reasons are plain. For first, they may by the gracious goodness of GOD
be blessed Instruments to win their Husbands to the Faith, by beating
themselves toward them with meekness of Spirit, and by patient waiting for a
blessing from God. The Water by often dropping, pierces the hard Stone: the
earth by continual touching, wears the Tough Iron: and what is it that
length of time does not alter? The Apostle Peter 1 Pet. 3, 1, 2.
exhorts; Wives to be subject to their husbands, that even they which obey
not the word, may without the word be won by the conversation of their Wives,
while they behold their pure conversation which is with fear. Likewise Paul
persuading the believing Wife to dwell with the unbelieving Husband, and not to
depart from him, gives this reason; 1 Cor. 7, 16.
What know thou, o Wife, whether thou shall save thine Husband? Seeing
therefore they may be effectual means to save the Souls of their Husbands,
and to win them without the word, and so gain them a good report and a
sweet Name in the Church, they must consider that it belongs unto them to be
helpers unto their Husbands.

Reason 2.
Secondly, she is his yoake-fellow, and ought to draw with him in an eeuen and
equal course, to make her obedience to him easy and cheerful in the Lord.
The Oxen that draw in a yoke together, are an ease of the work and burden
one to another. Such a pair of yoake-fellowes were Abraham and Sara, Isaac and
Rebecca, Luke 1, 6.
Zachary and Elizabeth, and sundry others. The man and Wife are as the two eyes
in the head, or as the two feet in the Body. The two eyes if they go
together, and look both one way, be it upward or downward, be it to the
right hand or to the left hand, all is well and comely in the face: but if they
be severed and the one look one away, the other another way, what a blot and
blemish is it to the face? The two feet, if they walk together, and one step
do follow another, they become the body well, and one furthereth another: but
if one step one way, and another step another way, there is no agreement in the
body. So the man and the woman being made to draw in one yoke, being as the two
eyes, the two hands, the two feet in the body, working together, and helping
one another, should never be severed and divided to cross one another, to
reproach one another, to shame or depart one from another. This piety and
honesty, God and Nature does teach us to practice.

Use 1.
Let us see what are the uses of this doctrine. First, seeing the Woman is made
by the Law of her Creation to be an helper; we learn, that a good and
Christian Wife that is wise and godly, encouraging her Husband, and stirring
him up to godliness, is a great blessing of God. If she find her Husband
backward and untoward, cold and careless in good things, she will labor
wisely to bring him on, and to conceive a liking of them, that before distasted
with him. If she perceive him forward, she will endeavor to make him yet more
forward. If she find a spark, she will strive to kindle the Coals, and make
it flame out to the comfort of many other. If she see him waver and wax faint,
she will never cease until she have strengthened and sustained him. If she find
a good beginning, she will further it by a timely proceeding, and a
conscionable perseuering unto the end. It is a worthy saying set down by
Solomon: Pro. 18, 22. and 19.
He that finds a Wife, finds a good thing: and receives favor of the
Lord. And in another place; House and Riches are the inheritance of the
Fathers, but a prudent Wife comes of the Lord. He is blessed of God that has
such a portion. She brings a blessing to his person, to his Children, to his
Family, to the means of his maintenance, and to his whole estate. She will
seek to better his estate (howsoever she find it) both with God and the world,
in heavenly things, and in earthly. This reproves such as destroy or hinder
his estate, impouerish him, decay him, or undo him, whether by dainty and
delicate fare, or by gay and gorgeous apparel, by costly and sumptuous
furniture, by feasting or idleness, by carelessness and negligence, or by any
vanity whatsoever. A wise Woman (says the Prou. 14, 1.
Wise man) builds up her house, but the foolish destroys it with her own
hand. Secondly, it reprooueth such Wives as are uncomfortable and vncheerefull,
much more such as are bitter and reproachful to their Husbands, such as Micholl
was to David. Of such Solomon says; Prou. 19, 13.
A foolish Son is the calamity of his Father, and the contentions of a Wife,
are like a continual dropping: Where he compares the braulings and chidings
of a Woman, to the cover of an house, which is so broken, that when it raineth,
the Water droppeth in upon the Planckes and Walls, and rotteth the Timber of the
house, so that in short time, it is very ruinous and ready to fall. So when
Women are given to contention and brauling, they are the cause of great
mischief and destruction to the whole family. Civil wars were always held
among the Heathen most dangerous: but the iars that are at home, and made
within the Walls of the house, are as noisome and grievous, and do threaten
the ruin thereof. Every bitter word is as a shower of rain that falls into
the House. This makes many Husbands ill husbands, and causes them to delight
any where, rather then where they should delight to be, and to desire any
company, rather then to be with the Companion of his life, which he ought to
desire. An house thus divided cannot stand long, albeit for a time it may
continue.

Use 2.
Secondly, it serves as a notable direction for godly Women, in regard of the
honorable Name and Title of an helper given unto them, to teach them to watch
all occasions, and wait all opportunities offered them to do good, and not to
slack them. It is a great point of wisdom to take the occasion: and there is
a fit time for every purpose under the Heavens. Hence it is, that the Apostle
charge 1 Cor. 7, 20.
every one to abide in his calling, when he speaks of the Woman's winning of
her Husband. And we have a notable example hereof in the behavior of Abigail
toward Naball, a wise woman, toward a churlish and drunken Husband, 1 Samuel 25,
36
when she saw evil ready to come upon her and her Husband, and the whole
Family, yet she told him nothing, neither more nor less until the morning
arose, because he was drunken, and so had no reason to consider, or to conceive
what she had done for their deliverance: but in the morning when he had slept
out his drunkenness, and the wine was gone out of Naball, then she told him,
and set before him the wickedness of his heart, the purpose of David, the
danger of death, and the working of the safety of the whole Family. It is a
great profit and advantage to do a thing in season. On the other side, it is
the note of unwise and wicked Women, to draw their Husbands to all wickedness
and outragiousnesse, to further them in impiety and ungodliness, and
consequently to hasten their own and their Husbands ruin and destruction. If
there be any spark of godliness, they are as water to quench it in their
Husbands. An example hereof we have in Iezabell, when Ahab longed after the
Vineyard of Naboth, and could not obtain it, so that he came to his house
heavy and in displeasure: did she persuade the Kings heart to be content? Did
she tell him he had enough, or move him to suffer Naboth to enjoy his
possession in peace? No, as if he had not been of himself mad enough, she
pricketh him forward; she says unto him, 1 Kin. 21, 7.
Do thou manage the Kingdom of Israel? Art thou fit to be a King? I will
give thee the Vineyard, up, eat Bread, and be of good cheer. The like we see
in the Wives of Solomon, that were Heathen, they turned away his heart from
God, and provoked him to set up Idolatry. When Mordecai refused to bow down to
Haman, and to give him the honor that was due to God, Ester 3, 5. and 5, 14.
he was full of wrath, so that the glory of his Riches, the multitude of his
children, the favor of the King, the greatness of his honor, the advancement
of his Name, did nothing avail him, so long as he saw Mordecai the Jew
sitting at the Kings Gate: Did his Wife persuade him to be patient? Did she
show him, that favor is deceitful, that wealth is uncertain, and that honor
is as a blast of wind; yea, lighter then vanity it self? No, she moves him
to set up a tree of fifty cubits high, and to speak to the King that Mordecai
might be hanged thereon. It is great means to goodness, to delight in good
company. It is a great allurement to wickedness, to follow evil company. A
day-companion is strong to draw men to all impiety: but the Night-companion is
stronger, and prevails farther, and oftentimes brings to the hight of all
iniquity.

Use 3.
Lastly, as the consideration of the Name being made to be Helpers, puts
Wives in mind of their duty: so it teaches all men two things. First, they
must remember, that it stands every one upon, to have a care in his choice
and match, to get such as may brook their Names, and be indeed Helpers, and
not hinderers unto them. It is the greatest calling that we can enter into,
and a band never to be broken. Therein stands the comfort or discomfort of
our whole life. It is is our duty to be careful to marry in the Lord, that
Christ may be bidden as one of our Gueste, and not shut out of our meetings.
It is a profane marriage where he is not entertained, and we can look for no
blessing to come upon such assemblies. The Apostle teaching, That the Wife is 1
Cor. 7, 39.
bound by the Law, as long as her Husband lives, and that her Husband being
dead, she is at liberty to marry with whom she will, he adds, only in the
Lord. The same Apostle charge us, Not to be unequally yoaked with the
unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6, 14, 15.
because there can be no fellowship between righteousness and
unrighteousness, no communion between light and darkness, no concord
between Christ and Belial. Such unequal marriages between the Sons of God,
and the Daughters of men, Genesis 6, 1, 2.
brought an universal flood upon the Earth. How greatly God detesteth this,
the Prophet Malachi declares. Cha. 2. 11. Judah has transgressed, and an
abomination is committed in Israel, and in Jerusalem, for Judah has defiled
the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and has married the Daughter of a
strange God. This condemns such matches as are sought out for beauty, for
riches, for honors, but no mention made of godliness, or of Religion. The
chiefest things to be respected, are not wealth, and such outward things, of
the world, for a man may be advanced in his estate this way, and yet in the end
be cast down to hell.

Secondly, such as have received by the blessing of God, such helpers and
comforts of their life, must learn to love, and delight in such wives, as in
those companions that God has sent them. This does Solomon Prou. 5, 19, 20,
21.
teach, Rejoice with the Wife of thy youth, let her be as the loving Hind, and
the pleasant Roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, for why should
thou delight, my Son, in a strange Woman, or embrace the bosom of a Stranger?
For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondreth all his
paths. Where he teaches, that the delight that the married folk ought to take
one in another, is a notable preservative to keep them from uncleanness. They
must confess, that it is God that has knit them together in such wise, that
the one should not desire to be separated from the other. The Apostle writing
to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5, 25, 28, 29.
wills Husbands to love their Wives, as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it: and shows, that men ought so to love their Wives as their
own bodies; So that he which loves his Wife, loves himself, for no Man
ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the
Lord does the Church.

[ And to Archippus our Fellow-Souldier, etc.] Hitherto of the two first
persons, to whom the Epistle is sent; to wit, Philemon and Apphia, the Husband
and the Wife. Now follows the third person, who was the Pastor of the
Church, described by his propper Name, Archippus: and by his Office, a
Fellow-Souldier. True it is, all Christians in this life are Warriors, and
fight the battles of God, against sin, the world, and the Devil: and so may
be called Fellow Soldiers, in as much as they are members of the Militant
Church: yet the Ministers of God are in a peculiar and special manner, so
called, because they are as it were the Captains and Standart-bearers to go
before others, and to order the battle. This Title to be called a Soldier, is
a borrowed speech, (for their Weapons are not carnal) and imports great
labor and much trouble, it signifies the necessity of the calling, and
points out the danger and opposition that is made against it. Doct. 7. The
calling of a Minister, is a painful, needful, and troublesome calling.
The Doctrine from hence is this, that the calling of a Minister is paineful,
most needful, and a troublesome calling, resisted and opposed against by
Satan and wicked men. When Christ saw the people scattered abroad and
dispersed, as Sheep without a Shepherd, he had compassion upon them, and
said to his Disciples; Math. 9, 37.
The Harvest indeed is great, but the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore the
Lord of the Harvest, to thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest. Where we see,
he calls the Ministers of the Gospel Laborers in the Haruest-fielde, and
gatherers of the Lords Corn. We see what great pains men take in Harvest, and
how necessary Laborers are, when the Corn is ripe and ready to be reaped. The
Apostle Paul speaking of himself, and the rest of the Apostles says; 1 Cor.
3, 9.
We together are Gods Laborers. And in another place; 1 Timothy 5, 17
The Elders that rule well, is worthy of double honor, specially they which
labor in the word and doctrine. Hereunto agrees that which he writes in
another Epistle: 2 Timothy 2, 15.
Study to show thy self approved unto God, a worke-man that needs not to be
ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright. All these testimonies teach us this
truth, that the office of the Ministry is not so much a dignity, as it
implies a duty; it is not only an honor, but a burden; it is not only a
Title of renown, but a work of labor.

Reason 1.
This will better appear, if we mark the Reasons following. First, the
ordinance of God appoints, that every calling should eat their Bread in Genesis
3, 19.
the sweat of their brows; that is, should be industrious and painful in
their several vocations, whether it be in bodily or in spiritual labor. The
bodily calling, requires bodily labor: the spiritual calling, requires
spiritual labor. Idleness and negligence in any Ier. 48, 10.
work of the Lord is accursed. An idle hearer, that joins not practice, is
abominable: a loose and careless professor, that adds not obedience, is a
bad professor.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the Ministers of God fight the Lords spiritual battles for us, by
their prayers, care, watchfulness, faith, and the whole Armor of God: by
opposing and setting themselves against Heritiques, Atheists, Worldlinges,
Schismatiques, Wicked men, and all things that exalr themselves against God.
Is not this a great work, of great labor, to resist the budding and growing
of so many sins as daily rise up, as men that strive with the whole Earth? To
labor, in study, in word, in doctrine, in zeal, in watching? According to
that which the Apostle says; 2 Cor. 11, 27, 28.
I was often in weariness, and painfulness, in watching often: besides the
things which are outward, I am combred daily, and have the care of all the
Churches: who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not?
How did Moses fight in prayer, Exodus 32, 31
and labor in zeal for the people of Israel, when he stood in the gap and
stopped the wrath of God that was kindled against them? If then we would reason
from the general to the special, waying the purpose and appointment of God,
who has annexed labor to every calling, or consider that the Ministers of the
word are the Soldiers of God, to fight his battles against sin and sinful
men; in both respects we may conclude, that the calling of the ministry, is an
office of great necessity, and of much labor.

Use 1.
This doctrine teaches us, and offers unto us diverse Uses. First, let us
learn to acknowledge the work of the Ministry, to be a work of great
diligence, painfulness, and labor, if it be performed as it ought to be. We
must keep back Act. 20, 27, 28.
nothing from the people, but show unto them the whole counsel of God. We must
lay the Foundation of Religion among them, and build constantly upon it, which
cannot be done without faithfulness. If we take heed to our selves, and to
all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made us Ouer-seers to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood, we shall find our
function to be full of labor and sweating, to receive much evil entreating,
and hard entertainment here in this World. The Apostle teaching the duty of
the hearers toward their Ministers, says; 1 Cor. 3, 1, 2.
Let a man so think of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
secrets of God: and as for the the rest, it is required of the Disposers, that
every Man be found faithful. So he teaches in another place: 1 Timothy 3, 1.
This is a true saying, If any Man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a
worthy work. Where he shows indeed, that the calling is a worthy calling,
but it requires also worthy laboring. This will farther appear unto us, if
we consider the Titles that are given unto them. They are called Builders, that
are continually busy in building, hewing tough Timber, and squaring rough
stones. No Timber, no Stones of themselves so unfit for building, as we are by
Nature to be coupled together, and to grow unto an holy Temple in the Lord.
They are called Soldiers, they are always fighting or looking for their
enemies, and drawing out the Sword of the Spirit, Ephe. 6, 17.
which is the word of God. Is any calling under Heaven more necessary, then the
profession of a Soldier in time of danger? And when an assault is made, or the
battles join, is any profession more painful? Sometimes they are called
Husbandmen. Is not the life of the Husbandman a painful life, and is not
the ending of one work the beginning of another? Does not every season of the
year bring his several travel? So that no calling is accompanied with more
labor and less ease. Sometimes they are called Watchmen, who stand
continually on their watch Tower, to discry the coming and approaching of the
Enemy. Sometimes they are called Shepherds, abiding in the field, and keeping
watch by night over their flock; they are in the day consumed with heat, and
with Frost in the night, and their sleep departs from their eyes. Seeing
therefore the Ministers aie builders of the Lords house, Soldiers in the
Lords Camp, Husbandmen in the Lords field, Watchmen in the Lords City,
and Shepheardes over the Lords flock, which he has redeemed with his
precious blood; we must all confess, that the Ministry of the word is a work
of great labor, if it be discharged aright. For this, if we know not by
practice, we may see by experience, that to study with constantnesse, to
meditate with earnesse, to instruct with diligence, to exhort with
carfulness, to reprove with zeal, to comfort with cheerfulness, to
convince with boldness, to watch over the people with a godly Heb. 13, 17.
ouer-sight, as they that must give accountes for their Souls, to conceive
godly anger and great sorrow for sin, to pray in public and private, to go
in and out before the people of God in the doctrine of Faith, and in example of
life, to prepare themselves to handle the word, and to deliver it with power
and evidence of the spirit, with earnest affections, being thus prepared; I say
to perform all these duties, does more consume the inward parts, wast the
body, impair nature, decay strength, spend the vital Spirits, and cause them
to be subject to sundry infirmities, sicknesses, and diseases, then any the
strongest labor that is used among men. For this we may observe, that the
labors of the body (though they be great) maintain strength, preserve the
stomach, increase the appetite, and add vigor to every part: but it is far
otherwise in the labors of the mind, they weaken the natural powers, they
wast the vital Spirits, and they decay the health of the body. Hence it is,
that the Apostle gives this precept to Timothy, a Minister of the Gospel; 1 Timothy 5, 23.
Drink no longer Water, but use a little Wine for thy stomachs sake, and
thine often infirmities: declaring thereby, that it often falls out, that the
Ministers of the Gospel which take pains in their callinges, are feeble in
body, weak in strength, sparing in diet, and subject to diseases.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing the calling of a Minister requires pains and labor, it
reprooueth those that be Idol Shepherds, dumme Dogs, evil Beasts, slow
bellies; not laborers, but loyterers; not worke-men, but sleepers: which make
not the calling painful, but gainefull. How many are there that enter into
this weighty and worthy calling for their own ease, and to follow idleness and
pleasure? How many, to enrich themselves, and to gather wealth? The Prophet
Esaias Esaias 56, 10
complains greatly of such in his time. Chap. 56. 10. Their Watchmen are all
blind, they have no knowledge, they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark:
they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping. Let all such consider the
greatness and height of their excellent caling, and remember the honorable
Titles whereby they are called, that so they may be put in mind of their
duties. Let them Pro. 27, 23.
be diligent (according to the counsel of Solomon) To know the State of their
flock, and take heed to the herds: for Riches remain not always, nor the
Crown from generation to generation. And howsoever many that possess the
places, occupy the rooms, and usurp the Titles of Pastors, do glory in their
calling, and account themselves sent of God: yet so long as they loyter in the
Lords Harvest, and will take no pains to win Souls to God, they are but
Idols, Psalm. 115, 6, 7, 8.
They have eyes and see not, they have a mouth and speak not, neither make
they a sound with their throat, they that make them are like unto them, so are
all that trust in them. True it is, they can say somewhat for themselves, and
can allege sundry reasons to maintain their ease and idleness; Pro. 26, 16.
And the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render
a reason: as appears in the example of the sloathfull Servant, who did hide
his Masters Talent: notwithstanding, if the diligence in their calling, be not
answerable to the dignity of their office, they shall have the reward of
sluggards, they shall have the Talent and gifts which they have received, taken
from them, and the blood of those that perish through their negligence, shall
be required at their hands.

Again, it condemns and conuinceth the senseless opinion of vain and
unthankful men, that cry out against the Ministers in every place, accounting
their calling easy, and themselves idle, as living by the sweat of other men's
brows, and receiving their means and maintenance without any manner of
pains. Albeit, this objection be indeed idle, and deserve no answer, and
that it is in vain to reason with the belly, that has no ears to hear, nor
heart to conceive; and albeit I stand in a slippery place, because I should be
censured to speak rather for our selves, then for others, and to respect more
our own gain, then the good of others: yet somewhat must be said to this
foolish and peevish conceit. Indeed, I acknowledge freely, some are
unprofitable drones, that do not gather, but eat the Honny: and some idle
Shepherds that fleefe the sheep, but feed not the Flock: these I confess
have their living come in easily, who indeed deserve no living, and because
they will not labor, they should not eat; and woe be to them if in time they
repent not. But these men that object as before, do exclaim and cry out, not
against the abuses of the office, or the slothfulness and negligence of men,
but against the calling it sefe, contrary to the saying of Christ, who
teaches, Math. 10.
that the Labourer is worthy of his hire, and the workman of his meat: and
opposing themselves against the ordinance of God, who has appointed the
Ministry to be maintained: for as 1 Cor. 9, 13, 14.
they that Ministered at the Altar, did live of the Altar: so God has ordained,
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. As these men
are ignorant of this high ordinance of God, so they seem not to know
themselves. They are so blind, so brutish and blockish, that they know not by
any experience from themselves, There is a labor of the soul as well as of
the body
that men have souls, and that there is an immediate soule-labour, far
greater then bodily labor, and likewise a soule-suffering (which they shall
one day feel, if they repent not) many ways exceeding and surpassing bodily
suffering, or any torment that befalls the body. Remember with me, and consider
a little, (though it be in an higher degree) the sorrow of the Soul that was
upon Christ in the Garden, without any the least touch and visitation of the
body, whether it were painful and laboursome or not, Luke 22, 44
When it so heated and crushed him, that it caused him to sweat drops of
blood, that trickled down to the ground. Many diseases of the body are very
painful and hard to be borne; but the grief, and anguish, and horror of the
soul, is a thousand times more painful, according to that which Solomon
speaks in the Proverbs, Pro. 18, 14.
Chap. 18. The spirit of a Man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear it? Furthermore, there is persecution Whitae. de apontif.
Romans quaest. 5. cap. 2.
of the Soul, as well as a persecution of the body; and these two are
distinguished, and differing one from the other. For when Tyrants persecute the
Church, and rage with fury against the Saints, their faith is not shaken, but
Religion then flourishes most of all, as we see when Israel was in Aegipt.
The greatest slavery and slaughter, is, when men's souls are corrupted with
false doctrine. Lastly, is the calling of a Prince, of a Counselor, of a
Nobleman, an idle calling, because they use not bodily labor? This is, as if
a man should say, Cicero de Senectute.
that the Governor of the Ship does nothing in sailing, because while some
climb the Masts, other walk upon the Hatches, he sits quiet and holds
the Stern: he does not indeed as they do, but he does far greater and
better things. The Church and Commonwealth are not unfitly compared to a man's
body, which consist of many parts, all needful and necessary, yet all have
not the same uses and functions. If the members of a man's Halicar. Roman.
antiquit. lib. 6. Plutar. in vita Coriolani. Liui. decad. 1. lib. 2.
body should rise and rebel against the belly, if the feet should plead, that
they only bear up the weight of the whole body, if the hands should affirm,
that they labor painefully, earne their living, and bring many other
commodities: if the shoulders should say, that they bear all burdens: or the
head, that it sees and hears: the mouth, that it speaks: and then if all
jointly should turn themselves to the belly, and accuse it to be without
profit, to remain in the midst of the body, without doing anything, and
sustain no labor to the maintenance of the rest of the parts: were not this
a foolish conceit of reasoning, and would not this tend to the ruin of the
whole body? In the body politic, if the people that dig and delue, should
complain and conspire against the Prince and Nobles, (who labor by care, rule
by authority, foresee by wisdom, and manage by government) because they work
not with their hands, would not this draw with it the destruction of the
Commonwealth? So is it in the Church, and in the offices of the Church. As the
people labor by working, so do the Ministers in studying and preaching. All
have not one office, all have not one use. Therefore the Apostle says; 1 Cor.
12, 14 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
The body is not one member, but many: if the foot should say, Because I am
not the hand, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the body? And if the
ear should say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body, is it
therefore not of the body? If the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? And if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But now has
God disposed the members, every one of them in the body at his own pleasure:
for if they were all one member, where were the body? But now are there many
members, yet but one body: and the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need
of thee: nor the head again to the feet, I have no need of you. Whereby we
see, that the body consists of many members, all have their necessary use for
the preservation of the whole, and yet all have not one and the same function.
So then, they despise the Ministers of the Gospel, and so account the
Ministry of the word needless and unprofitable, because they work not with
their hands, and not labor with bodily labor; are as mad and monstrous, as
they that would have all the body to be an hand; no mouth, no head, no foot.
For albeit, the Teachers of the Church be not the hands of the body, to handle
the Carpenters Axe, or the Shepherds Crook, or the Husbandmans Plough, or the
saw of the Sawyer: yet he is as the eye of the body, to give light to them that
sit in darkness and in the shadow of death: as the mouth of the body to
speak to God, and to pour out supplications before him for the people: yea,
he is also as the belly, for as the belly which receives all meats that
nourish man's body, does send them back again with advantage, to the
nourishment of the whole body: so the Minister receiving maintenance from the
Church, does feed them again, and nourishes them with the bread of life to
the salvation of their souls. He receives temporal things, but he sows
unto them spiritual things. The Apostle says; 1 Cor. 9, 7.
Who goes a warfare any time at his own cost? Who planteth a Vineyard, and
eats not the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the
Milk of the flock? The Soldier lives by the receiving of his wages; the
Husbandman, by the fruits of his labors; the Shepherd, by the increase of his
flock: and therefore it must not seem strange unto us, that the Lords Soldiers
should enjoy their pay, and that his Workmen should have their hire.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing the celling of the Pastor set over the people, is painful,
it offers good considerations and profitable Meditations, both to the
Pastors, and to the people. Touching the Ministers, it serves as a good
admonition to such as purpose and intend to enter into this great calling of
the Ministry, that they do it wisely and warily, that they run not before
they be sent, that they enter at the Door, and climb not in at the Window,
that they considet what provision, and store of new and old they have, to go
through the work. Such as mean to build, Luke 14, 28, 31.
do first make great provision and preparation. The Kings of the Nations, and
Princes of the Earth, with great advise and consultation, do proclaim wars.
The Ministry is a going to Warfare, it is a building of Gods House; and
therefore it is to be enterprized not rashly, but advisedly: not meanly
stored, but plentifully furnished with all manner of provision fit for the
Lords work. Again, being the Soldiers of Christ, and the leaders of his
people, they must seek to please, Gal. 1, 10.
not men, but their Captain that has chosen and called them, they must take
heed they do not entangle and snare themselves in worldly matters, and so
hinder their work in hand, whereby they are made unfit to serve God and his
Church. The order and discipline of the Wars is such, that so soon as the
Soldier has enrolled and given his name to his Captain, he leaves his house
and other affairs, which might withdraw his mind, and minds nothing but
the battle. So ought we to be wholly loosed, and thoroughly freed from the
impediments and encumbrances of this World, that Christ may have our service
in this warfare. This is that use which the Apostle makes of this Doctrine. 2.
Tim. 2. Thou therefore suffer affliction, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4.
No Man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this life,
because he would please him that has chosen him to be a Soldier. Touching the
people, they must know, that when God sends such Laborers among them, they
must be esteemed and accounted as the greatest defense and preservation of a
City and Kingdom. This is confessed by Ioash the King of Israel (when Elisha
fell sick of his sickness, whereof he died) 2 Kin. 13, 14.
O my Father, my Father, the Charet of Israel, and the Horsemen of the same.
The prayer of Moses, Exodus 17.
prevailed more then the Sword of Joshua, and all the furniture of war against
the Amalekites. The Apostle writing to the Hebrews, exhorts the^ Heb. 13, 17.
To obey them that have the ouer-sight of them, and to submit themselves,
because they watch for their souls as they that must give accounts, that they
may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for them.
Secondly, it teaches them to account them worthy of their hire and wages, and
to esteem them worthy of double honor. It is a grievous and a Iam 5, 4.
crying sin, to keep back the laborers wages, to diminish it, to grudge at it,
and to take it to themselves, and it calls for vengeance, and enters into
the ears of the Lord of hosts. The Ministers are the Lords laborers and
workmen, hired to labor in this Vineyard, to sow, to plant, to water, to
prune, to dig, and he has appointed to them their portion for their
maintenance: if this therefore be detained from them by In-iustice, it cries
unto God, and brings oftentimes his curse upon us, both in spiritual and
temporal things. In spiritual things, because he deals with us in
heavenly things, as we deal with his Ministers in earthly things. If we
detain from them their maintenance, he will detain from us his blessing. If
we be sparing in giving them their hire, he also will be sparing in bestowing
upon them his graces. As we sow, so we shall reap. In temporal things,
because God promises a blessing to such as pay the Lord his due, and
threatens to curse them that spoil him in his Tithes and offerings. This we
see in the Prophet Malachi, Mal. 3, 8, 9, 10.
where God complains of their spoiling and defrauding of him, he says; Ye
are curssed with a curse, for ye have spoiled me, even this whole Nation:
bring ye all the tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
House, and prove me now here with, says the Lord of Hoastes, if I will not
open the Windows of Heaven unto you, and pour you out a blessing without
measure. If then we desire the blessings of God to come upon us in spiritual
graces, or in earthly things, we ought not to withold the Laborers wages,
that plough up our fallow grounds, and Till our barren hearts. It is a worthy
exhortation, which the Apostle gives to the Church of the Thessalonians,
touching their Ministers, 1 These. 5, 12
We beseech you Brethren, that ye acknowledge them which labor among you, and
are over you in the Lord and admonish you, that ye have them in singular love
for their works sake. For seeing the true Pastors of Christ bestow their
labor among us, and consume themselves as the Candle, to give light to others,
we ought to show the bowels of love and compassion toward them, we ought not
to be wanting unto them in the fruits of our love.

[ And to the Church that is in thine House, etc.] Hitherto we have handled
the third person written to; namely, Archippus, together with the description
of him to be a Soldier of Christ, and a Fellowe-Souldier with the Apostle:
Now, we are to proceed to the fourth and last which yet remains, which is a
joining of many persons together, for he adds to the former, The Church
which is in thine House. He adorneth the Household and Family of Philemon, with
the Honorable and renowned Title of a Church. This serves to commend as well
Philemon the Master, who had instructed his Family in the Doctrine of
godliness, as also the Household it self, which had been taught and trained
up by him.

We see here a private House is called a Church. For seeing where two or three
are gathered together in the name of Christ, Math. 18, 20
he is there in the midst of them: every assembly or meeting of the Saints, is
called not unfitly by that Name. Philemon to his perpetual commendation, had
by his care and industry, made of his house a little Church, instructing,
guiding, governing, framing, and ordering them in the knowledge and fear of
God. Doct. 8. It is the duty of all householders to teach their Families.
We learn from hence, that all Householders ought to prepare, instruct, and
order their Families in the knowledge of God, and obedience of godliness, that
the house of the Master may be the Church of God. And that it is the duty of
all such as have the government and oversight of others to see the^ taught and
instructed in the ways of God, it appears by many precepts and examples set
forth unto us in the Scriptures. This is it which Moses gave in charge to the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 6, 8 and 11, 19. and 4, 10, 11.
Ye shall lay up these my words in your hearts, and in your soul, and bind
them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as a frontlet between your
eyes, And ye shall teach them your Children, speaking of them, when thou
fittest in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. So the Prophet speaking of the great works of
God, wrought for the safety of his people, and the overthrow of their enemies,
declares, Psalm. 78, 4, 5, 6.
How he establed a testimony in Jacob, and ordained a Law in Israel, which he
commanded our Fathers, that they should teach their Children, that the
posterity might know it, and the Children which should be borne, should stand
up and declare it to their Children, that they might set their hope on God, and
not forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments. This it is which
Solomon speaks. Prouer. 22. 6. Pro. 22, 6.
Teach a child in the Trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it. Heereunto also agrees the saying of the Apostle; Ephe. 6, 4.
Ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in
instruction and information of the Lord. Now, as we have seen sundry
precepts, pressing us to the performance of this duty, so we have many
examples of the godly, that have put it in practice, and gone before us in
their obedience. Abraham the Father of the faithful, is commended of God, for
his care and conscience this way. Gene. 18. 19. where he says: Genesis 18, 19.
I know him that he will command his Sons, and his household after him, that
they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment. Job is
reported to have sanctified his Children, when the days of their banqueting
were gone about, Job 1. 5.
He rose up early in the Morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the
number of them all. Cornelius, a Captain of the Italian band, feared Act. 10,
2.
^od with all his Household. The Parents of Timothy, his Grandmother and
Mother, brought him up in the knowledge of the Scriptures of a Child, 2 Timothy 1,
5. and 3, 15.
Which are able to make us wife unto salvation through the Faith which is in
Christ Jesus. To these precepts and example before remembered, we might add
diverse other out of the Book of God, to teach us, that to whom soever GOD has
vochsafed this grace, and given this honor to make him a Father of Children, a
Master over Servant, a Governor over an Household; he requires with all
this duty, and therefore lays it as a burden upon his Shoulders, to teach,
to exhort, to admonish, to reprove, and to instruct all those that are under
his charge and jurisdiction.

Reason 1.
The Reasons enforcing this Doctrine, are many in number, strong in value, and
manifest in the view of all that will rightly consider of them. For first, all
Christians are generally charged Leuit. 19. Hebr. 3 13. 1 These. 5, 11.
to exhort and admonish one another, as we see. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. Heb. 3. 13.
14. Leuit. 19. 17. So then, unless the rulers of Families will exempt
themselves out of the number of Christians, they cannot shake off this yoke,
but they are bound to edify and exhort daily their Families, least their hearts
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. If then we be bound generally to
admonish one another, even those to whom we are less bound, much more are we
to do it to such, as we are tied unto by a double band, and a nearer
conjunction.

Reason 2.
Secondly, every Man's house is his private charge, which he must ouer-see, it
is as his Flock which he must attend, it is as his City, over which he must
watch: and thereby fit them for the hearing of the public Ministry of the
word; and therefore must answer for their negligence. This we see in the
example of Eli. 1. Sam. 2. 29. He is charged with the sins 1 Samuel 2, 29
of his Children which they had committed, and to have honored them above the
Lord. This is a grievous fault, and an horrible offense, to set yp our Sons
in stead of God, and to make more account of them then we do of the most high.
Hence it is that Solomon says; Pro. 27, 23.
Be diligent to know the State of thy Flock, and take heed to the Herds. Such
as are Shepherds, over the Sheep of the Pasture which are unreasonable, ought
to care and provide for them: much more ought such to be diligent and
watchful, as have the people of God committed unto them, and have a charge to
look to his sheep which are endued with reason, whose Souls are immortal,
who bear the Image of God upon them, and for whom Christ Jesus shed his most
pure and precious blood. Every man has some charge or other, greater or
lesser, in the Church, in the Commonwealth, or in the family: and every one
must be diligent to know the estate of this charge, laboring earnestly to
discharge it. And if we will make conscience of our duty, we shall find the
least flock enough for our feeding, the least field sufficient for our
tilling, the least house great enough for our teaching and ordering.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, we may be drawn to the discharging of this duty, if we consider the
profit and benefits that arise from hence. First, it will be a means to
make them more carefully to learn to know the will of God, when they consider
it shall be required of them, and an account taken how they hear. Secondly, it
will cause them to retain in mind and memory the better, the Lessons which
they have learned, when they have whetted them upon their Families. Thirdly,
God will increase his guiftes and graces that are in them already, he will
bless them with a new supply, for to him that has shall be given, and he
shall have abundance. Fourthly, it will breed and begin great obedience and
dutifulness in all the degrees of their Families; first to God, then to
themselves; and afterward to others, to the preventing of a thousand household
greefes and troubles, that arise for want thereof. This obedience is a thing
which all Fathers and Masters greatly desire. Every one desires to have
dutiful Children and faithful Servants: this is the way and course to be
taken, that we may attain unto it. So when such as have been instructed and
nurtered by us, shall go abroad into other families of their own, and grow
to have houses themselves, as they have been instructed, so will they instruct
their Servants, and deal toward them as they have been dealt withal
themselves. Lastly, the public ministry is made more fruitful unto them, in
that the seed sown in their hearts is watered, and thereby made to spring up.
And this is found true by daily experience in our assemblies, that let the
Minister teach never so diligently in his charge, unless there be a seconding
and furthering of his labors, in several families at home, all the doctrine
delivered and heard, is trodden under foot, choked, and forgotten.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, innumerable are the evils, and manifold are the mischiefs that
come of the neglecting of this duty. First, it is the Mother of all the
ignorance and gross blindness, that ouerfloweth and overthrows the Church.
For from what cause comes ignorance, but from the want of teaching, as
darkness proceeds from the want of light? Secondly, it causes the Lessons
and instructions taught on the day of the public assembly, to be forgotten
of Master and Man, of Mother and Daughter, of Father and Child, before the
next day. Often teaching and much repeating, make a diligent Master, and a
profitable Scholar. Thirdly, from hence come all domestical braules,
contentions, stubbornness, and disobedience, that the House is divided against
it self, which would be remedied and prevented by this means. Lastly, the
neglect of this duty, brings Gods judgments upon the whole Family. So then,
whether we consider the common duty of exhorting that lies upon all, or that
the private house is a private Church, or that the benefits are many where this
duty is practiced, and the evils many that grow where it is neglected: in all
these respects we see, that it is a special duty required of all governors,
to labor, to plant, and to sow the Seeds of true Religion in the heart, as it
were in the ground of those that are committed unto them.

Object. 1.
Before we come to the uses of this Doctrine, certain Objections are to be
removed, whereby many stumble and fall down. The Sluggard pretends there is
a Lion in the way, and fears danger when there is none. So soon as Adam had
sinned, by and by he sought Fig leaves to cover his shame. Many are the
devises of men, dawbing with untempered Mortar, to excuse their neglect or
contempt of this duty. Some say, they are ashamed to pray, to read, to teach in
their families and households, and to call them together for such ends. They
are ashamed of it, because it is good, because it is commanded: but they are
not ashamed of committing open sins in open places. They shrink back when
any good duty is to be performed: but they blush not with brazen faces and Iron
foreheads, to break out into all profaneness. Let these take heed Math.
10, 33
least Christ be ashamed of them when he comes into his kingdom. If we be
ready to confess him, and to profess his truth, he will acknowledge us before
his Father which is in Heaven. Object. 2.
Some say, it is a note of hypocrisy to perform these duties, and condemn
them as Hypocrites that teach their Families. These are evil Servants, that
out of their own mouths may be judged. Let them pray to have their stony
hearts taken away, and new hearts given unto them; 1 Ioh. 3 20.
For if their hollow and hypocritical hearts do condemn them, God is greater
then their hearts, and knows all things. And let them take heed, they sit
not in judgment upon others, least with the same measure that they mete, it
be measured to them again. Let them judge nothing before the time, but
reserve judgment to the Judge of the whole world.

Object. 3.
Others say, it will let and hinder their Servants work, we must have so much
praying, that we shall have little working. These men can alot and allow no time
for the Lord, but think every hour lost that is not spent in business of the
World, and affairs of this life. These are like to profane Saul, who when
the Philistims pressed toward him, and he was to ask counsel of the Lord; 1
Sa. 14, 19.
He commanded the Priest to withdraw his hand; that is, he said unto him,
the season serves not to seek unto GOD, we cannot spend the time in calling
upon him, let us go unto the battle and fight against our Enemies. These men
are like to wretched Pharaoh, when Moses called upon him Exodus 3, 4.
to let the people go into the Wilderness to serve and sacrifice to the Lord,
he is charged to make them idle, and to cause them to surcease from their
works. These men are like to covetous Judas, John 12, 4.
who when Mary anointed Christ's feet, complained of the wast, and said; Why
was not this Ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor.
Wherefore our Savior answers such, in his reply to Martha, who was much
troubled and cumbred about much serving, Luke 10, 41
One thing is needful, Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be
taken away from her. Nay, to be instructed in true Religion, and to set out a
time for calling upon the Name of God, is so far from hindering our Servants
work, that it shall further it, and give a blessing unto it.

We are commanded to meditate in the Law of the Lord day and night, Josh. 1, 8.
that so we may make our way prosperous, and have good success in the works
of our hands. And the Prophet teaches, That except the Lord build the House,
and watch the City, the labor of the Builder, and of the Watchman, is in
vain. Object. 4.
Others say, they shall be mocked, taunted, and scorned by the World, they
shall be termed Precisians, they shall be called Puritans. But we must not
seek to please men by running into the displeasure of God. For oftentimes it
falls out, through the just judgment of God, that whilst we hunt after the
pleasure and favor of men, against God, we have the favor neither of God nor
Men. The Apostle says of himself, writing to the Galathians Gal. 1, 10.
If I should yet please Men, I were not the Servant of Christ. It was the lot
of Christ, it has been the portion of all true Christians, to be scourged by
the viperous and venomous tongues of ungodly men, that care not for God, nor
regard any Religion. We are faint Soldiers, not worthy to bear the Name of
Christ, if we fly out of the field for every idle word, and taunt of the
tongue cast out against us. We must prepare our selves against greater
encounters, Ephe. 6, 11.
and arm our selves against words and Swords, we must buckle both with the
Devil and with Deuilish men, hand to hand, except we will yield him both our
bodies and Souls to our destruction. Object. 5.
Some say, they cannot bring the unlearned to knowledge, and that youth are
stubborn, they will be youth still, and we were once youths, and they should
hardly keep any Servants, if they should strictly tie them to this order; nay
they should fly the Parish rather then bear this yoke. I answer, first, let
us remember, that GOD gives the knowledge of his Mysteries, even to the simple
and lowly minded that fear him. Secondly, consider, that young men are
commanded Eccle. 12, 1.
to remember their Creator in the days of their youth, and shall give an
account of all things unto God. As for their stubbornness, the word of God is
the best remedy to bend them, and make them pliable unto all goodness: so that
the Prophet says; Psalm. 119, 9.
Wherewith shall a young Man redress his way? In taking heed thereto
according to thy word. But if they be so stiffely and stubbornely minded, that
they will not be reclaimed and reformed, their room is better then their
company. If admonitions will not win them, they are to be avoided: thy house
is better without them, then with them. Neither are we to fear their flying
away, and departing to another place: for if this course of instruction were
taken in hand every where, the Objection were answered, and their mouths
stopped. For whether would they go to escape this training up in the
principles of Religion? It is certain they could turn themselves no whither,
but it would meet with them in all places. Object. 6.
Others object, our Fathers did well enough without observing any such order; I
trow you will not condemn them. Why should we make ourselves wiser then they?
They troubled not themselves or their Children with learning of Catechismes:
and we see men do well enough prosper in the World, yet busy not their heads
about this. I answer, if they mean those forefathers and Ancestors, whose
steps we should follow, as Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joshua, David, and
diverse others, which were indeed our Fathers, then we may be assured out of
the word of truth, that these busied and bestirred themselves this way: they
taught their Children, they instructed their families, they reformed disorders,
they removed the disordered. If they mean our forefathers that lived in
latter times, when darkness covered the earth, no marvel if they were not
urged, thereunto themselves, or that they urged not others, for then they lived
at the diet of the Prelates, and nothing pleased the Prelates better then the
ignorance of the people, Math. 15, 14
they were the blind Leaders of the blind, they could neither enter into the
Kingdom of heaven themselves, nor suffer those that would enter.
Notwithstanding, we will not meddle with condemning our forefathers, neither
will we justify them, both these belong unto God; and therefore are not to be
usurped by any man. We must judge the best of them, according to the rule of
Charity, 1 Cor. 13, 7.
Which hops all things, and believes all things. We know God reserved to
himself 1 King. 19, 18.
7000. in Israel, in the days of Ahab, that never bowed the knee to Baall:
and he has a few Revel. 3, 4.
names yet in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, which shall walk
with him in white, for they are worthy. We may say with the Apostle of them;
Acts 17, 30.
The time of this ignorance God regards not, but now he admonishes all men
every where to repent. We are not therefore to look what they have done, but
consider what by the word they should have done, and what by the same we ought
to do. And touching the thriuing and prospering of them that neglect this
duty: this is an Objection fitter for Atheists, then Christians to use. Christ
has taught us, that this is no rule to measure good or evil: he shows,
Math. 5, 45.
That the Father makes his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon the just
and unjust, upon the godly and the ungodly. The Wiseman has taught, that by
outward things we cannot Eccle. 9, 1, 2
understand, whether we be loved or hated of God. We see the wicked for the
most part prosper more in the World in worldly things, then the godly, as we
read Psalm. 73. 3, 4, 5. and Job 21. 8. 9.

Object. 7.
Lastly, it is objected, that some which have been diligently and duly
taught, do yet live as leudly and profanely, as they that never knew any
thing of God. I answer, it may be this is thy wrong and rash judgment. The
world speaks evil of those that will not follow them into all excess of
riot. But let us grant it to be so: yet herein they play the wrangling
Sophisters and Cauillers, alleging a false cause for a true. For I am sure,
this course of learning is not the cause of the looseness of their living. If
grace had been in their hearts, it would be a means to make them believe and
live better. He that knows his Masters will, is more likely to perform it,
then he that knows it not, nor cares for the knowing of it. He that has his
eyesight, is more likely to walk without stumbling and falling, then he that
is blind: so he that is instructed in the ways of godliness, has better
means to walk in the fear of God, then he that is ignorant and knows
nothing. True it is, some that know their Masters will do it not: some that
have their eyes open, fall down now and then: yet none can be so void of
reason to conclude from hence, that it is not necessary to know his will, or to
open our eyes. Thus much for the removing of the objections, and the scattering
of those Mists and Clouds that stood before us.

Use 1.
Now let us come to the Uses of this Doctrine. First, seeing it belongs to
the Masters and Governors of Families, to instruct them in godliness, we
gather, that it is not enough for them to provide for the bodies of such as are
under them, and belong unto them in this life, but they must care most
especially for their souls and bodies in the life to come. They then are
greatly deceived, who when they have given them meat and Money, think
themselves sufficiently discharged. If we only feed them and fill them to the
full, what do we more to them then to our brute Beasts? If we only cloth
them and pay them their wages, Math. 5, 20.
what do we more to them then the Turks and Infidels that fear not God,
that know not God, do perform to their Children and Servants? If we think
our selves discharged by providing for them, and leaving unto them a temporal
patrimony and possession, and never regard to make them heirs and Inheritors
of the Kingdom of Heaven, what do we more then the Jews or Gentiles, that are
ignorant of Christ and his Gospel? What should it avail us or them, to leave
them rich in the World, and poor in God? To lay up for them treasures on
earth, and to neglect the treasures of Heaven, which are the true and enduring
substance? True it is, Fathers and Mothers are bound concerning this bodily
life, to make honest provision for the sustenance of their Children; and
therefore all unthrifty Dicers and Drunkards which wast and wash away their
goods (whose Children may well be accounted fatherless, and their Wives as
Widows) have no 1 Timothy 5, 8.
spark or portion of natural Fathers in them: nevertheless, they are charged,
not only to bring them up in the World, but to prepare them for the World to
come. It is a vain and foolish imagination to dream that we have done our
part, or discharged a Fathers and a Mothers duty, when we have nourished,
appartelled, and brought up our Children, whereas we have a far greater
account to make before God for their souls. They are also greatly deceived,
who if they send them to the Church on the Sabbath day, and bring them to the
place of Gods worship, they think they have answered the charge required of
them. These men post over all their duty to the Minister, and lay the burden
(to ease themselves) upon his shoulders. They care not, they spare not to lay
load upon another back, that they may not bear it, or touch it with their
little finger. But God cannot thus be mocked or deluded, or defrauded, who
commanded that themselves should rehearse his Laws and Commandments to
their Children and Households.

Indeed, it is a commendable duty to see that they serve God, and to accompany
them unto the house of God; but this is only half (if half) our duty, or
rather to do our duty to halues; we must both provide that they may be
taught, and also teach them our selves: when the Minister has planted, we
must water: when he has preached, we must see how they profit, and by all
means assist him in the work of the Lord. They are also greatly deceived, who
take themselves to be discharged of their duty, when they have taught them to
say the ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Creed, or the Articles
of Faith, because they say they have done what they can, and are able to
perform no more. If they can do no more, it is a shame for them that they
will be Fathers, before they can do that which is the duty of fathers. It is
one thing to teach them to say them; another to understand them. It is not
enough for us to help them to speak the words, unless we labor to make
them conceive the meaning of the words. The Commandments of the Law, and the
petitions of the Lords Prayer stand not in the bare words, but in the true
meaning. Let them know therefore, that they must render a greater account then
of teaching them to utter and pronounce the words, they must cause them to
understand them, they must sow the Seeds of Christian Religion in their
hearts, they must instruct them with all diligence, they must exhort them with
all earnestness; they must charge them to fear God, and to walk in his ways:
that so their children may be made Gods Children, and so give them to him
again, of whom, and by whose blessing, at the first they received them.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing all Householders must teach their families, it is their duty
first of all to reform themselves, that so their people may be reformed. They
that are the chief in the Family, must look unto themselves, and go in and
out before them by good example, that so they may the better look unto those
that are under them. It is a Testimony of our great love toward them, and an
earnest desire to win them to the truth, and to embrace true godliness, when
we seek to save their souls. He that loves the soul, Plutar. in Alcibia.
loves truly: for the foul is the principal part of man. They therefore
that are careless in training up their children in religion, cannot assure
themselves that they bear any true love unto them. Let them show never so much
comfort and compassion to their bodies, yet all their mercies are cruel, so
long as they neglect the chiefest care that ought to be in them toward their
souls. We may judge the^ to be more inhumaine and unnatural, even more then
savage beasts, who not only by neglect of teaching their Children the fear of
the Lord, but by corrupt example of living do lead them into evil, and so
murder their souls. For how many children in stead of good education and
godly instruction, do hear their Fathers delight in swearing, do see them
deal deceitfully and unjustly, and walk in every evil way? If we should
behold a man killing his own children, and laying violent hands upon his own
flesh, if we should see him destroy his posterity, and shed the innocent blood
of those that came out of his own loins: who would not accuse and condemn
him of unnatural murder and barbarous cruelty? But there are many, many
thousand Fathers in the world that are the Murderers and Butchers; yea, the
death and destruction of their own Issue. They gave them life, but they are
the causes of their death. They gave them a temporal being, but they bring
them to eternal condemnation. They should direct them in the right way to
Heaven, but they lead them into the paths of sin, and so thrust them down
to Hell with their own hands. For so long as we teach them not to honor God,
but to dishonor him, and regard not whether they know Christ Jesus or not, but
are patterns and presidents unto them of all profaneness, we are guilty of
their blood, and are worse then those that take away their natural life, and
shall one day hold up our hand at the bar of Gods Judgment, to be
arraigned for it. For they only kill the body, and when they have done, can
do no more: but we cast away and spill the Souls of our Children, which is the
greatest rigor, the vilest murder, and the extremest cruelty in the world.
If therefore we would be clear and pure from the blood of our children, let us
train them up in godliness, and take heed to our selves, reforming our own
ways, and endeavoring to be examples unto them in all holiness and true
righteousness. This is it which Joshua Josh. 24, 15.
professes in his exhortation that he makes to the people, that they would
with full purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord. Joshua 24. 15. If it seem
evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve,
whether the Gods which your Fathers served beyond the flood, or the Gods of the
Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell: but I and my house will serve the Lord. The
like we see in the answer of Queen Ester to Mordecai, when she had exhorted
to gather the Church together to Fasting and Prayer, that God might be
entreated to open a way for their deliverance Ester 4, 16.
she adds; I and my Maids will do likewise. A like practice we find in
David. Psalm. 101. as he declares that his eyes should be upon the faithful
of the Land, that they may dwell with him, and that such as are upright should
serve him: so he professes, Psa. 101, 2, 3
He would walk in the uprightness of his heart in the midst of his house,
he would set no wicked thing before his eyes, but hate the works of them that
fall away. For well did David know, that if the Master of the house were
evil, the Family ordinarily could not be good, and that the example of the
highest, it alleged as a warrant to the lowest to follow. It is great pity,
that a Child should hear an evil word, or see an evil deed, they are so
ready to imitate that which they hear and see. Let us therefore look
diligently to our selves, what examples we lay before them.

Use 3.
Thirdly, this doctrine directs us to have in our private Familes, the
private exercises of Religion. It is no small praise of the house of Philemon,
that he had so taught and instructed his Family, that he had the lively Image
and true representation of a Church in it, discharging after a sort, the duty
of a Pastor within his own walls. So the Apostle Paul saluteth Aquila and
Priscilla, Romans 16, 3, 5 and 1 Cor. 16, 19.
and the Church that is in their house. Every Governor of an house, and
Master of a Family must endeavor, that his household may deserve the Name of
a Church. He should be the speaker, they the hearers: he the Pastor, they the
flock: he the Minister, they the people: he ready to instruct, they ready to
be instructed. A private Family, should be as a private school, the Governor
is the Master of the School: every one within his government, is a Scholar
to learn of him.

This shall be a singular commendation unto us, if we so order our several
charges and places of government, as that they may be called rather Churches,
then private Families: rather Schools, then Houses: rather Temples of GOD,
then dwellings of men: rather Tabernacles set up to serve the Lord, then
buildings erected to serve our selves. Now we shall attain to this praise and
estimation among the faithful, if our houses do resemble Churches, by the
practice of such exercises as are performed in it. For the Master is both a
King and a Pastor within his own house: a King, to rule and correct: a Pastor,
to instruct and reprove; yea, to remove such as are obstinate and obdurate.
Let us therefore all of us set up little Churches in our houses: let us use in
them prayer to God, Catechizing of our youth, teaching of the ignorant, reading
of the Scriptures, singing of Psalms, conferring one with another, examining
of our people, Math. 13, 51
taking an account how they profit, comforting them that are weak, encouraging
them that are willing, discountenancing them that are froward and untoward,
showing gentleness unto all, suffering the evil, and instructing them with
meekness that are contrary minded.

Thus doing, we shall begin a Church in our houses, we shall erect a temple
and Tabernacle unto God, and give to those that live with us, and depend upon
us, an entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. But alas, May we speak and
write to many Masters in our times, as Paul does in this place to Philemon?
May we truly call their private houses little Churches, by reason of the
exercises of Religion used in them? Nay, I would to God, there were not great
multitudes swarming among us, which have such dissolute and disordered houses,
so far from being Images and likenesses of a Church, that they are lively
pictures of the profane World, and very representations of the Kingdom of
darkness, and of the bottomless pit of Hell. These men, howsoever they
shroude themselves under the names of Christians, and would be accounted
faithful men, yet it is manifest, that they are far from true Christianity,
and from a godly and religious mind. For shall they be esteemed sound and
sincere What the houses of the ungodly are.
Christians, that suffer their Families to be full of swearing, lying,
railing, roysting, quarrelling, contention, and all other wickedness, and
never go about to examine them, or exhort them to any goodness? So that it is
a very hell to dwell in them, a very death to live in the^, a loathsome and
stinking person to remain in them; yea, a foul and filthy lakes to abide in
them, wherein all unsavory and unseasoned practices, are contained and
continued. I dare boldly avouch, and constantly defend, that a man were far
better to thrust his Son into a Pesthouse, or place of infection, then to
commit him to such Masters of misrule, and teachers of all abominations, most
noisome and dangerous to Soul and Body, where those corruptions are quickly
learned, which are afterward hardly forgotten, and bred in the bone, which are
not easily removed out of the flesh. We usually and commonly say of him that
lives in a contagious place, Lord have mercy upon him: but much rather, and
far better may we say and pray for such as are in lewd and ungodly houses,
Lord be merciful unto them, and deliver them from evil. For if the plague and
pestilence walk among us, and we among them, they can but kill the body, and
make an end of this Mortal life: but the contagion of sin will bring
fearful destruction, both upon Soul and Body, and will root out whole
Houses and Families, wast Towns and Cities, and consume utterly Countries and
Kingdoms. We see how by the instinct of Nature, Parents have a care to place
their Children, where they may be well used, and where they may be well
provided for, that they want nothing: but what folly is this to look to the
body, and to have no respect to the Soul? To be curious in the least, and
careless in the principal thing? To see that the back be clothed and the
belly filled, and never require or inquire how the soul (which is the chiefest
part) be provided for and sustained? To be angry if they want food for this
life, and yet to seem pleased and contented, though they never taste of that
bread and of that meat, which indureth to everlasting life.

It has always been otherwise with faithful Governors and Christian
Parents, they have made conscience of their duties to God and their Families.
It is noted touching Jacob, when he was to go to Bethell the house of God,
Genesis 35, 2.
he sanctified and prepared his people, he reformed and redressed the abuses
that were crept in among them, before they came to the worship of God. Abraham
had in his house three hundred and eighteen persons which he had well
instructed, Genesis 14, 14.
who were ready to adventure their lives with him in the battle. The Apostle
gives this commendation to Timothy, That he had known the Scriptures of a
Child, who are able to make him wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3, 15
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. His first years as it were the
first fruits of his age, were seasoned with the doctrine of Christ, which was
done by a familiar and easy order of instructing him. Our government
therefore over others, must not be a meet civil government (as the government
of most men is) but a religious government, to feed the soul as well as the
body, to provide for the life to come, as well as for this present life.

Use 4.
Fourthly, it is required of us, to bring our several Families to the public
exercises of Religion, of the word and prayers, that we may know how to use and
practice these aright within the Walls of our private houses. It is not enough
for us to serve God alone by our selves, and to plant true Religion in our own
hearts, but we must endeavor to bring others to God, especially those that are
nearest unto us. It is not enough for us, nor a sufficient discharge of our
duties to go to the Church our selves, and to frequent the places of Gods
public worship Math. 21, 13
to come to the house of Prayer, and to attend to the preaching of the word on
the Lords day: but we must look to our Children and Servants, we must have an
eye over them, we must see that they be not absent, but present: and when they
are present, that they attend and hearken to the Ministry of the word: and
when as they are departed, we must know what they have profited. When we send
our Servants to the Market, we will see what they bring home, and how they have
provided for our bodies: much more when we send them to the Market of their
Souls, should we require an accounts of them, where they have been, and what
they have done, and how they have heard. How many are there among us that have
a care to come to this place themselves, that have no conscience to look to
their Children, whose salvation should be as dear, and as much desired as
their own? Yea, even among you that are at this present in this place, if
diverse were asked; Indeed here you are, here you sit, but where are your Sons,
where your Daughters? Where are your Man-Seruants, where your Maids, for whose
Souls ye must give an account, what reasonable answer could ye make? Nay,
how many are there to be found, who, if they have their work well done on the
weeke-daies, care not what they do, how they behave themselves, or where they
become upon the Sabbath day? And so they make themselves guilty and partakers
of their sins through their negligence, as Eli did of the offenses of his
Children.

Hence it is, that in the fourth Commandment, prescribing the time of Gods
public worship, Exodus 20, 10
the Householder is charged to have care of his Son, of his Daughter, of his
Servant, of his Stranger. Jacob called for his people, and assembled them
together, Gene. 35, 2.
when he went to Bethell. David went with a great train and company into the
house, as those that go to a Feast; when he says; Psalm. 42, 4.
When I remembered these things, I powered out my very heart, because I had gone
with the multitude, and led them into the house of God with the voice of
singing and praise, as a multitude that keeps a Feast. Behold here, the
godly devotion of a religious heart, as the Heart brayeth for the Rivers of
Waters, so his soul panted after God and his public worship: neither could he
content himself to go alone, but it was his comfort and delight, to lead
others as it were by the hand with him, that they might find that sweetness
in the word that he found, and be partakers of the benefit that he reaped
thereby.

Use 5.
Lastly, seeing it is so necessary a duty to teach our Households, we must
acknowledge that it is as necessary for Children and Servants to be taught and
instructed. It should be therefore our care and desire, to dwell and inhabit
in such places and houses, as that we may be trained up in godliness, and
learn our duties to God and man. It should be our care and desire to place and
bestow our Children with such persons, as that they may be brought up in the
fear of God. There is not one of those in our Families, even the lowest and
meanest, but of meat, drink, clothing, or wages, be at any times denied or
detained from them, they will think themselves wronged and misused, and are
ready to complain of the injury. How much more (if there were in them any care
of their Souls, or love of the life to come) would they mourn and lament when
they are debarred and defrauded of this most necessary portion (the knowledge
of true Religion) appointed by the Lord to be bestowed upon them. If a man be
to take any Farm, he will not do it hand over head, but he will know what
Acres he shall have, what arable ground, what Meddow, and what means of his
maintenance: but how many are there that seek to others for their service, who
never consider what instruction they shall have, or whether they be likely ever
to hear of the Name of God? There is no Man so simple in wit, but if he put his
Son to be an Apprentize, and his Master within his years do not teach him
his occupation, he will and may justly think his Child much misvsed: what a
wonderful blindness and blockishnesse then does it argue in them, that care
not where they put, and with whom they place their Children, so they learn
their occupation, they regard not whether they learn any Religion, and never
enquire whether their Masters take any pains or not, to teach them the
precepts and instructions that belong to a Christian, which of all callings
under heavens, is both the most honorable, and in the end, shall be
acknowledged to be most profitable. Let us therefore put out our Children to
be the Servants of those, that may learn them to be the Servants of God. Let
us so bind them to their Trade, that we may be sure they may learn the Trade
of Trades, the Art of Arts, the Mystery of Mysteries; that is, Religion and
Godliness. If we have little to leave our Children, and small wealth to
bequeath unto them, yet if we bring them up to this Trade, and bind them fast
unto it, we shall leave them a worthy and wealthy portion: for all men must be
of this Trade. We see how costly other Trades are, and what a round sum must
be given with our children to serve for them: but we may Esaias 55, 1, 2.
without cost, and without Money, make our Children of this Trade, which is the
best and most gainefull of all others. 1 Timothy 6, 6.
For godliness (says the Apostle) is not only gain, but great gain, if a
man be contented with that he has. If thou have not learned this gainefull
and profitable Trade, thou will be never but a Beggar and a Bankerout: for
being destitute of this, thou art without Grace, without God, without Heaven.
Thus much of this doctrine.

3 Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.


The order of the words, and the interpretation of the same.
Hitherto we have spoken of the first part of the Praeface of this Epistle,
touching the persons writing and written unto: Now we come to the second part;
to wit, the prayers which he makes, which are of two sorts: a salutation, and
a thanksgiving: the salutation is a greeting, which the Apostle wishes to all
the persons before named, wherein we are to consider two points; first, what
blessings the Apostle desires to be given unto them. Secondly, from whom he
craves them. The blessings which he prays for, are two; namely, Grace and
Peace. By Grace, we must understand the free favor, mere mercy, and good will
of God toward us, whereby he has eternally and undeservedly loved us in
Christ, who are a people by nature not beloved, but deserving to be disgraced
by him, and hated of him. The second blessing that he beggeth for them, is
peace, whereby is meant all kind of benefits, spiritual and temporal, which
flow unto us from this Fountain, and grow out of the root of grace; and
therefore ordinarily in other Epistles, it is annexed unto it. Grace here
mnntioned, is not any gift in us, but it is Gods, and in God; it is his
gracious favor, free love, and good will, whereby he is well pleased with his
elect, in, and for Christ. Peace, is not any gift in God, but in us, and is
that holy unity and blessed concord, which is in the Kingdom of God among Gods
Children: this concord and agreement of Gods Children, is a fruit and effect of
grace. Paraphr.
So then, the meaning of the words is this; We wish unto you all the favor of
God in Christ, and that concord which is propper to Gods Church and Children,
having peace with God, with his holy Angels, with his Church, with your own
hearts, with your enemies, and with all his Creatures.

Secondly, in this verse is set down the cause, the worker, and author from
whom these blessings come; to wit, the Father, and Jesus Christ. God the
Father, the Fountain of them; and Christ our Lord, as the Cunduit pipe, by
whom they are carried and conveyed unto us. Object.
But it may be objected, why is the holy Ghost left out? why is not he named?
do not these gifts come from him as well as from the Father and the Son?
Answer.
I answer, It is a general rule in all Arts, and true in Divinity; That which
is understood is not wanting. So then, the holy Ghost, the third person in
Trinity is not omitted, though not expressed: for he must of necessity be
understood, who proceeds from them both; namely, from the Father and the
Son. Christ says in his John 17.
Prayer. This is eternal life, to know thee to be the only true God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ: yet the holy Ghost in this place, is not excluded
from both the persons, but included and comprehended together with them, for
these three are one, John 5.
as the Apostle teaches. Thus much touching the order and meaning of the
words: Now let us proceed to the observations out of the same, and then come
to the Doctrines.

Observations out of this ver.
The observations out of this verse, containing the salutation, are not many,
which we will point out. First of all, we see the matter of his Prayer what it
is; he asks not the favor of Men, but of God: he craves not earthly and
worldly peace, but spiritual and heavenly. True it is, the favor and good
will of Men, the outward peace and tranquillity one with another, are worthy
and excellent guiftes, but the free and fatherly favor of God, together with
peace with GOD the Father, being reconciled unto us in his dear Son, are
much to be preferred in our desires. Hereby we have that peace Phil. 4, 7.
of conscience which passes all understanding, which teaches us to rest in
God as in a most loving Father, with all confidence and assurance.

Secondly, as we learn chiefly to ask spiritual blessings, so we see
what blessings among such as are spiritual, are the principal and
predominant; to wit, the favor of God and peace of conscience. He that is
possessed of these two, has an hid Mine of Treasures, with which, all the
Wealth and Riches of the World are not to be compared unto. For these
blessings are heavenly, are spiritual, are eternal: whereas the substance of
this World is Temporal, is Transitory, is corruptible. The World it self
must pass and vanish away, and all these earthly things must decay and perish
with it.

Thirdly, the Apostle in some of his Epistles, uses three words; 1 Timothy 1, 2.
and 2 Timothy 1, 2. and 2 John 3.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace: here he contenteth himself with naming two, Grace
and Peace, omitting and leaving out Mercy: wherein there is no contrariety or
diversity, for as much as Mercy is included under Peace. For by Mercy is
understood our Justification, which consists partly in the forgiveness of
our sins, and partly in the imputation of Christ's righteousness, which do
bring true peace with them.

Fourthly, we see from whom he asks all these; to wit, first from God the
Father, to teach that he is the Author of every good giving and perfect gift.
If then we stand in need of them, we must go to him, we must ask them of
him, we can receive them of none but of him, Iam. 1, 5, 17
as the Apostle James teaches.

Fifthly, we see that to God the Father he joins Jesus Christ: for all
blessings are bestowed upon us through Christ, the Mediator of the New
Testament. God the Father is the Fountain, Christ is the Pipe or Cunduit, by
whom they are conveyed unto us. He that has not him, has not the Father. He
that is not in him, remains in death. Hence it is that the Evangelist says;
John 3, 36.
He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, and he that obeys
not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Sixthly, observe the Title given unto him, he is called the Lord of his Church:
it is a Kingdom, whereof he is the Prince: it is a City, whereof he is the
Governor: it is an house, whereof he is the Master: it is a body, whereof he
is the head. So then, all obedience is due to him, and all men (how great
soever) must acknowledge his Lordship over them. Lastly, in that he craves
grace and peace from Christ our Lord, as well as from God the Father, it
confirms our Faith in a Fundamental point of Christian Religion, touching
the Deity of Christ; Phil. 2, 6.
Who is GOD equal with, the Father; against the Arrians, and other Heretics
that deny his Eternity. For seeing he gives grace and peace as well as the
Father, we conclude him to be true God Co-eternall, and Co-equall with the
Father.

[ Grace, etc.] This word in the Scripture has two significations, the
ignorance whereof has bred great error, and be one the occasion of stumbling
in the Church of Rome. First, it signifies Gods good will and favor:
Secondly, some gift of God freely bestowed, which is grace of his grace: and
so the Romans 5, 15.
Apostle does distinguish the grace of God from the gift that is by grace. In
this place, we must understand, not any particular gift of God infused into us,
as faith, hope, love, and such like; but the free favor and love of God,
whereby he accepts of some in Christ for his own Children: for we see
here, it is discerned and distinguished from peace, which is a gift of Grace,
and therefore cannot signify the same thing. This grace and good will of God,
is the Fountain of all Gods blessings, and the foundation of all man's
happiness. All that we have is of Grace, it is the beginning of all good
things in us. Our Romans 11, 5. 2 Timothy 1, 9. Rom, 3, 24. Ezekiel. 36, 27. Ephe. 2,
10. Romans 6, 23.
Election, Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and
Glorification is of grace only, we can ascribe nothing to our selves. Now in
this Divine Salutation, and Apostolical Benediction, mark that the Apostle
begins with this grace. Doct. 1. The free favor of God is of us chiefly to
be desired.
From hence we learn, that the favor of God is to be sought for above all
other things. The free grace and undeserved love of God, is the first, and
highest, and only cause of all blessings, is above al things to be desired and
entreated at the hands of God. Consider the example of David. Psalm. 4. Many
say, Psalm. 4, 6.
who will show us any good? But Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon me. As if he should say, let worldly men seek what they will, and let them
place their happiness in riches, pleasures, and vanities, but my desire is
after thy love and favor above all. Hence it is, that he calls and
accounts God his portion, Psalm. 16, 5. and 18, 2.
his lot, his inheritance, his rock, his refuge, his shield, and Castle of
defense; to show, that all his joy was in Gods favor, all his comfort in Gods
love, and that he preferred his grace before all things in the world besides.
This affection is also expressed in the 73. Psalm. Psalm. 73, 25, 26.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? And I have desired none in the earth with
thee: my flesh fails, and mine heart also, but God is the strength of mine
heart, and my portion for ever. So the Apostle Paul accounts all things as
loss and dung in comparison of the grace of God. Whereby we see, that all men
should principally, and in the first place, seek, wish, and entreat for the
feeling of Gods favor in Christ, as the blessed Fountain of all good things
to come upon us.

Reason 1.
Let us consider the causes and Reasons of this point. First, one drop of his
free love, is better worth then all the World, and it shall yield us more
sweet and sound comfort in the latter end. If we should put the grace of God
and the glory of the world, and peize them together in the balances, the least
dram and drop of the favor of God toward us, would ouer-weigh, and ouer-sway
all the whole World, and all the things that are in the World, which worldly
men make their chiefest Treasure. This the Prophet David found by experience,
so soon as he had prayed for the loving countenance of GOD, he adds; Psalm.
4, 7.
Thou have given me more joy of heart, then they have had, when their Wheat
and their Wine did abound. This gives a man more sound comfort, then he can
find elsewhere. We have a common saying that runs in every Man's mouth,
Give a man good luck, and throw him into the Sea. But this is a Divine truth,
Let a man have the free Grace and favor of GOD, and then neither Sea nor Land;
neither Fire nor Water; neither Sword nor Pestilence; neither force nor Famine;
neither any other thing shall be able to hurt him. We see this Exodus 14, 30.
in Moses and the Israelites, when they were come to the Red Sea, and Pharaoh
with his Army followed at their backs, they were brought through the Sea as on
dry Land, and were carried safely in the Wilderness as on Eagles Wings by the
providence and protection of God. The three Children Dan. 3, 27, and 6, 22.
were cast into the Furnance, Daniell was thrown into the Lions den: yet they
were not consumed with the Fire, neither he devoured by the Lions. This made
the Prophet say; Psalm. 23, 4.
Though I should walk through the Valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
none ill: for thou art with me, thy Rod, and thy Staff, they comfort me. All
other comfort is no better then discomfort; all other joy is no better then
sorrow and vexation of Spirit without this; according to the saying of the
Wiseman: Eccle. 2, 2.
I said of laughter, Thou art mad; and of joy, what is this that thou do?

Reason 2.
Secondly, the grace and love of God, blesses, sanctifies, and furthereth all
other things unto us, honor, wealth: wisdom, riches, strength, favor,
friendship, and whatsoever befall the Sons of Men. The Prophet testifies.
Psalm 45. Because God had blessed him for ever, Psalm. 45, 2, 3.
therefore it is said unto him, prosper thou with thy glory, ride upon the
word of truth, and of meekness. On the other side, the want of the love and
grace of God, curses all other things unto us; yea, defiles and poysoneth
them, and makes them deadly, our honor it turns into shame, our strength
into weakness, our wisdom into foolishness, our riches into snares, our
beauty into vanity, our savor into hatred. We have many examples in the word
of God, and by daily experience offered unto us of this truth, the wisdom of
Achitophell, the honor of Haman, the valor of Ioab, the beauty of Absalom,
the knowledge of Judas, all these were good and great blessings of God, but all
are turned to be cursses unto them, because wanting the free grace of GOD, they
wanted the sanctified use of them. Seeing therefore, the love of God is of
greater price, and more excellent value then all the world, and seeing his
grace sanctifies and seasoneth all other blessings, and the want thereof
brings a curse upon them, we conclude and gather from these reasons, that
the free favor and mercy of God in Christ Jesus, is first and above all other
things, to be entreated and desired for our selves and others.

Use 1.
Now let us make use of this point. First, let every one of us seek to have
our hearts established and settled in this free grace, to find and feel in us
his love shed in our hearts by his holy Spirit. Let this be our first, our
chief, our principal and special care, to obtain the love and favor of God,
that we may be beloved of him. This was the prayer of the Prophet, Psalm. 51,
12.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.
So the Apostle teaches; Hebr. 13, 9.
It is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace. We see how men
are filled and carried away with natural presumption, even from their Cradle,
persuading themselves to stand in a sure estate, and thinking to escape the
wrath of God: but of this free grace they have no taste, no desire, no feeling
of any want. They imagine themselves to stand in no need thereof, they presume
they are in the favor of God; they dream that he cannot choose but love them.
If we want any earthly blessing, the help of Friends, the health of body,
the Treasure of this World, we can very quickly feel it, our senses are sharp
enough to discern it: but though we want the grace of God and his favor
toward us, we have no more feeling then dead Men has, we neither feel it,
nor desire it, nor once regard it.

We spend our strength, wast our life, and consume our days in seeking riches,
honors, pleasures, and preferments, but we never look so high as to the
grace of God. We lie groueling like the Beasts upon the Earth, we use every
day; nay, every hour, nay, every minute, the blessings of God, Acts 17, 28.
In whom we live, and move, and have our being: yet we will not lift up our
eyes to the chief cause of all, the Grace of God. Let us therefore above all
things, seek earnestly for the grace of God, wherein the Foundation of all
our happiness is laid. He that lives in his favor, has comfort in all
sorrows and miseries. He that dies out of his favor, dies as a Beast; nay,
worse then a beast, and shall have fellowship with the Devil and his Angels,
it had been good if such a one had never been borne. For even as the rich man
in the Gospel, desired Luke 16, 24
one drop of Water to quench the fire, and to cool his tongue, and if he might
have gotten it, he would have preferred it before the gaining and obtaining of
a thousand Worlds: so when God shall set our sins in order before us, and the
Gulf of his wrath ready to swallow us, we shall cry out for one drop of Grace,
for one drop of Faith, for one drop of comfort, to refresh our pining Souls,
and to deliver us from the shadow of death.

Now is the time to desire and seek after grace, if we let slip the present
occasion offered unto us, we shall afterward cry out for it, and complain of
the want of it, and yet shall never attain unto it. Thus was it with the rich
Man, when he entreated Abraham to have mercy on him, and to send Lazarus, that
he might dip the tip of his Finger in Water to cool his tongue, being
tormented in that Flame: Abraham answered; Son, remember that thou in thy
life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus pains: now therefore
he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Thus was it with the foolish Virgins
who slumbred and slept, and regarded not to procure and provide Oil Mat. 25,
10, 11.
for their Lamps: for when the Bridegroom was come and had shut the Gate,
they cried in vain, Lord, Lord, open unto us, who received their answer,
Verily, I say unto you, I know you not. Thus it shall be with those in the last
day, which shall say; Math. 7, 22.
Lord, Lord, have we not in thy Name prophesied? And by thy Name cast out
Devils? And by thy Name done many great works? For then he will profess unto
them, he never knew them, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. So shall it be
with those that have neglected the time, and passed over the opportunity, Luke
14, 25 26.
who begin to say, Lord, open unto us, we have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our Streets: to whom he shall say, I know you
not whence ye are. Let us all be wise, and beware by their examples, that we do
not delay the time from day to day. Let us crave this gift of God, that we may
have it in time of need, and in the hour of tentation. If now while we have
time, we shall desire and labor to obtain grace, we shall not need
hereafter to stand in fear of Death, or to cry out through horror and
despair! O that I had one drop of Faith! O that I had one drop of Grace.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing grace is in the first place, above and before all other
blessings to be desired and required at the hands of God, let us learn the
highway, and enter into the beaten path that leads to this Grace, and when
we have learned it, let us walk in it, in a constant and settled course. Now
the steps Three steps leading us to find Gods grace.
that we must make to trace it, and find it out, are these. The first degree
or step, is to dislike our selves, and to be in disgrace with our selves.
Every man naturally, is in love with himself, and his own shadow. But we
must cast off this self-love, that cleaves so fast and hangs on, and learn
to know our selves, and to hate our selves.

No man can magnify Gods mercy sufficiently, until he attain to the
knowledge of his own misery. Daniell, a man gracious and dearly beloved of
GOD acknowledged this in his prayer, and as it were ascends into the presence
of God by this step, Dan. 9, 7, 8.
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame, as
appears this day, to our Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, and unto
every Man of Judah, because we have sinned against thee. This was the course
that the Prodigal Son took, and the way that he entered, Luke 15, 21
Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son. Thus did the poor Publican insinuate himself into the
grace of God, and departed justified in his sight, he smote his breast, saying;
Luke 18, 13
Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner. To be proud, and puffed up with our own
righteousness, and to trust in our own wisdom, is the forerunner of a fall.

The second step to obtain grace, is, after we have felt this want and misery
in our selves, we must not rest there, but earnestly desire, and inwardly
hunger and thirst after the love and favor of God in Christ, above all earthly
things. First, we must feel our selves empty, before our Souls can have this
hunger. Our Savior describing true blessedness to his Disciples, and showing
wherein it consists contrary to the judgment of the World, he says; Math.
5, 3, 6.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit; that is, that know themselves poor, that
feel themselves poor and void of righteousness: and then he adds, Blessed
are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. We must John 6, 27. and 4, 14.
hunger after the meat that never perishes: we must thirst after that Well of
Water which springs up unto everlasting life. If we never hunger after
grace, we shall never have grace. The whole desire Math. 9, 12.
not the Physician, but they that are sick: They John. 9, 41.
which think they see, are made blind, and their sin remains.

Lastly, it is required of us, to lay hold by the hand of a true Faith, upon
the grace and mercy of God in Christ Jesus, offered unto all of us in the
promises of the Gospel generally, and learn to apply them to our selves
particularly. Christ calls those Mat. 11, 28.
that are weary and heavy laden, promising to ease end refresh them. In the
last and great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying; John 7, 37.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He teaches; Mark 16, 16
That he that shall believe and be Baptized, shall be saved. These are general
promises, these require particular application. We cannot receive them into
our hearts, and make them our own, except we lay houlde of them by a special
Faith. This lively Faith, brings Christ home to us, and opens the doors of
our Souls to entertain him. If then we feel our own misery, if we hunger
after mercy, and if we apply the promises of the Gospel to us particularly,
we shall be assured to find the grace of God, and taste plentifully and
abundantly of his love. So many as truly desire grace, must look to attain
it by these means, and climb up to the top of it by these steps and degrees,
as by certain stairs.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing grace is first of all to be craved, it directs us to
observe and keep a good order, in seeking and craving things at the hands of
God. We are taught first to seek his grace and favor, as the root and
Fountain, and then peace, welfare, and other blessings. He that will receive
fruit from the tree, must come to the root and body, before he can come to the
branches: so if we would have peace, health, wealth, a good name, favor,
friendship, or other gifts of the Spirit, we must begin at the root; that is,
entreat first for the grace of God, take hold of his free love, and above all
things, beg his fatherly favor to compass us, as with a garment, and to
defend us as with a shield. It is in vain to ask any thing, it is in vain
to hope for, and to expect any blessing as a blessing, before this be asked and
obtained. This order is to be observed, if we would enjoy and possess Gods
blessings. When the grace of God comes, and makes us accepted, it comes
not alone, but comes accompanied, and brings a train of all other
blessings with it.

He that will seek a benefit from a Prince, must first seek to be gracious
with the Prince and get his favor: he must never look to be respected and
regarded in his suit, that is out of the Princes favor: so if we would have
wealth, welfare, ease, honor, peace, prosperity, or any other gifts, we must
before all things, labor to be gracious with the great God of Heaven, and
seek to be accepted in his beloved. This serves to reprove the preposterous
course of carnal Men, Horac. epistol lib. 1. Epist. 1.
who set the Cart before the Horse, and place the Boby before the Soul, and
advance the Earth above the Heaven, and so overthrow the whole order of Nature,
laboring first for wealth, and afterward for virtue; first, for Riches;
afterward, for Religion: first, to be great in the World; afterward to be
gracious with God. These men seek from day to day, and from year to year for
earthly profits, and vanishing pleasures: but never think on the root of all
blessings, the grace of God. This corruption is reproved by Christ, who
prescribes unto us a better way, when he says; Math. 6, 33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. If the things of this world be the first in
our thoughts, the cheifest in our desires, the greatest in our estimation, and
the best in our imagination, we have our reward, we must look for no other
reward at the hands of God.

Use 4.
Lastly, when we have found our hearts persuaded, and our Souls possessed of
this grace of God, let us delight in it, let us rest upon it, let it be made
our stay and comfort in all times, and upon all occasions. Let us remember to
be more thankful to God for it, and more joyful in it, Esaias 9, 3.
then those that rejoice in Harvest, or such as find great spoils and rich
booties. If thou should find Mines of Silver and Gold, and Mountains of
Pearls and precious Stones, they could not give such comfort and contentment
unto thy Soul, as this grace of God is able to do, which is a Jewel of
Jewels. Blessed is the man that finds this Treasure, and gets it into his
heart, for the Pro. 3, 14, 15
Merchandise thereof, is better then the Merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof is better then Gold: it is more precious then Pearls, and all things
that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto it. For these treasures of
the earth, which worldly men have in so great price and estimation, are bought
at a dear rate of the owners, but the Lord offers and gives his grace
frankly and freely unto us, which need the same, as we read in the prophecy
Esaias 55, 5, 1 James 1, 2.
of Esaias, and in the Epistle of James.

Secondly, the Merchandise of these Pearls may be stolen from us, we cannot so
safely and closely lay them up, but time will consume them, rust will rot them,
and Thieves will steal them, Math. 6, 19
as our Savior teaches in the Gospel: But the grace of God shall never dye
or decay, but is ever flourishing, and everlasting. Lastly, the gain of Silver
and Gold, if we could possess it in the greatest measure, is but to maintain
the body, and to provide for this present life for a season: but the gaining of
grace and the favor of God, is an entituling of us to the Kingdom of heaven,
and to eternal life, which he that has this grace of God in his heart, shall
possess for ever. Indeed, few men do believe this, because they make more
reckoning of things earthly, then heavenly: but all men shall find it to be
true in the end. This treasure the poor may have as well as the rich. In all
tentations this will stand by us, and raise us up when we are cast down, and
strengthen us when we are weak. This grace (whereby we are freely beloved)
will go with us abroad, will stay with us at home, will lie down with us in
bed, will sit with us at Table, will direct us in prosperity, will stick to us
in trouble, will comfort us in sickness, will solace us in death, and will
accompany us to heaven. To desire this, is the best covetousness, and that
which only has alowance and approbation from God, 1 Cor. 14, 1
and therefore the Apostle charge us to covet spiritual things. All these
things teach us to rest and rely upon the grace of God, as upon the only
comfort of our Souls, and the very life of our lives, according to the
practice of the Prophet. Psalm. 4. after he had desired of God to lift up his
loving countenance upon him, he adds; Psalm. 4, 8.
I will lay me down and also sleep in peace, for thou, Lord, only make me
dwell in safety.

[ And peace, etc.] Hitherto we have spoken of the first blessing, which the
Apostle craves for them; to wit, the grace of God, which is the grace of
graces: Now follows the second, which is peace, which is a notable fruit,
growing upon the blessed tree of grace. This signifies the quiet concord and
unity, which the faithful are made partakers of, being once ingrafted into
Christ, and brought into the bosom of the Church. They find peace and are at
an agreement, which has many branches, and stands of many parts, every one
whereof is a most worthy blessing. First, Romans 5, 1.
we are at peace with God, when we are reconciled unto God in Christ, so that
he has no quarrel or controversy against us. Romans 5. 1. Secondly, we are
at peace with the elect Angels, Psalm. 91, 11.
which pitch their Tents round about us, and are set to guard us, least we dash
our foot against a Stone. Thirdly, we are at peace with our selves, when our
consciences enjoy quietness and tranquillity, not accusing or condemning, but
excusing and clearing us, being washed in the blood of Christ, Phil. 4, 7.
This is that peace of God which passes all understanding. Fourthly, we are
at peace with Gods Children, Esaias 11, 6.
foretold by the Prophet, that the wild Beasts and tame should dwell together,
the cruel and the gentle should couch together, and practiced by the Church
and believers, Acts 4, 32.
who are said to be of one Soul, and of one heart.

Fifthly, we have peace with our enemies, who are charged not to touch the Lords
anointed, and to do his Prophets no harm. This is so far verified, as is
expedient to set forth the glory of God, to procure the safety of the godly,
and to repress the rage of the Reprobate. Thus Joseph was at peace with
Pharaoh, Obadiah with Ahab, and Daniell with Nabucadnezzer, Mordecai and the
Jews with Ahashuerosh: and thus is the saying of the Wiseman verified; Pro.
16, 7.
When the ways of a Man please the Lord, he will make also his enemies at
peace with him. Lastly, we have peace with the Beasts of the field, the Fowls
of the Heaven, and all the Creatures of God, so that we shall find help and
comfort from them, Hos. 2, 18.
as we see in the Prophet, God makes a Covenant with them for his people. Hos.
2. In that day I will make a Covenant for them, with the wild Beasts, and with
the Fowls of the Heaven, and with that which creeps upon the earth: I will
break the Bow and the Sword, and the battle out of the Earth, and will make
them to sleep safely. Lo here how large and ample is this peace, and how
many and worthy preheminences there are thereof. This peace follows grace,
as a fruit of it, and therefore (we see) it is joined unto it both in this
place, and in sundry other Epistles. Doct. 2. Such as are in Gods favor have
all his blessings following them.
We learn hereby, that such as are under the grace and covenant of God, living
under his protection and obedience, have assurance of all Gods mercies,
spiritual and temporal, of this life, and of the life to come, all which do
belong unto them, and shall follow them, and overtake them. I say, such as are
under the grace and favor of God have all his blessings following them, so
far as they may further their eternal happiness. Moses shows Deu. 28, 3, 4
Deuteronomy. 28. that when once they belong to God, and are under his grace, as under
the shaddowe of his Wings, all his blessings should follow them, and come upon
them from Heaven and Earth, from house and field, from soul and body, that
they should be blessed in the fruit of their body, in the increase of their
Cattle, and in the abundance of all things. Aaron and his Sons did thus
bless the people, Number. 6. 6. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and
give thee peace. Where we see, he sets peace after the shining of Gods
gracious countenance upon them. This the Apostle teaches in the Epistle to the
Romans, having proved at large that we are justified without the works of the
Law, he adds; Romans 5, 1.
Being then justified by Faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. The Prophet David, expressing that God is his Shepherd, to
refresh him with his grace, to feed him with his word, to rule him by his
staff, and to deliver him from danger, Psalm. 23, 1, 6, and 84, 11.
concluded hereupon; I shall want nothing, doubtless kindness and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life, and I shall remain a long season in the
house of the Lord. The like we see in another place; The Lord God is the Sun
and Shield unto us: the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will
he withold from them that walk uprightly. The Apostle Paul sets down at
large the blessings flowing from this love of God, Ephe. 1, 5, 6.
Who has predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, in himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherewith he has made us freely accepted in his beloved, by whom we
have Redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according
to his rich grace, whereby he has been abundant toward us in all wisdom
and understanding. Where he teaches, that the free grace of God, whereby we
are accepted in his beloved, in whom he is well pleased, and exceedingly
contented, is the cause of all other mercies, and therefore such as are in his
favor, shall find the fruits thereof to their comfort, and have all his
blessings to overtake them.

Reason 1.
If any doubt yet remain in us to trouble us, and hinder our faith from
receiving and believing this Doctrine, as a pregnant and certain truth,
consider with me a little farther the reasons, to ground and establish us
herein. For first, when the wrath of God is once appeased, and the love of God
opened unto us, we have free and bold access unto him, and to the Throne of
grace, as* to a most merciful Father. The Apostle having declared, that we are
at peace with God through Christ, he adds immediately; Romans 5, 2.
By whom also thorough Faith we have this access into this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. We may freely come into
the presence of God, we have boldness to ask any thing that we want, we have
assurance to be heard when we call upon him.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is the free love and favor of God, that spared not his own
Son, but bestowed him upon us, who is our life, our peace, our atonement.
Now seeing it is his grace only that has given us the blessing of all
blessings, we shall with him, and by him, have all other guiftes to compass us
about, and to come upon us, according as the Apostle teaches. Romans 8. If God
be on our side, who shall be against us? Who spared not his own Son, but
gave him for us all to death, Romans 8, 32.
how shall he not with him give us all things also?

Reason 3.
Thirdly, his love reconcileth all his Creatures, and opens the way to his
mercies toward them whom he loves. This is it which Moses speaks to the
Israelites: Deuteronomy. 7, 8.
Because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had
sworn unto our Fathers, the Lord has brought you out by a mighty hand, and
delivered you out of the house of bondage. And afterward he puts them in
mind, Deuteronomy. 23, 5.
That the Lord would not hearken unto Balaam, but the Lord their God turned
his curse to a blessing unto them, because he loved them. Thus does the
Prophet tell the people of God; Psalm. 44, 3.
That they inherited not the Land by their own Sword, neither did their own
Arm save them, but his right hand, and his Arm, and the light of his
countenance, because he did favor them.

Reason 4.
Lastly, they love God again whom he loves. His love works love, and
constrains them to express back again that which they have received. They
that love him shall never be destitute, but feel the fruit thereof to their
endless comfort. The Prophet says Psalm. 91, 14.
to this purpose. Psalm. 91. Because he has loved me, therefore will I deliver
him: I will exalt him, because he has known my Name. Lay now all these
things together, and consider, that seeing we have free access to the Throne
of grace, seeing we have Christ, the greatest blessing of all given unto us,
seeing all Creatures are reconciled unto us: and lastly, we being loved, do
love God again, and pour out streams issuing from his Fountain, and all
this proceeds from his grace: we conclude, that such as are in Gods favor
have his blessings following them.

Use 1.
Now let us handle the uses. First, seeing the favor of God is the Fountain
of all goodness and graces in us, we learn, that no favor is like to the
favor of God. The grace and love of Princes, brings many privileges and
preferments with it: but can they assure us of every good thing? Or do they
remain and continue with us for ever? Nay, they are most unstable, and
uncertain, their honor is turned into dishonor, and all their glory is
changed into shame and confusion. Haman was the happiest man in the kingdom in
his own eyes, and in the eyes of many others; one day he was next unto the
King, Ester 5, 12. and 7, 9.
and the next day he was most wretched; one day in favor, the next day out of
favor; one day honored, the next day hanged. Nay, thus it fares and falls
out oftentimes with the godly, as we see in David; who was greater in Saul's
Court then he? Who was more praised and preferred? Was made the Son in Law of
the King, and the Captain of the Host: yet by and by he was disgraced,
degraded, and depraved by flatterers and false informers, cast out of the
favor of the King, and put in danger of his life. It is not so with God, it is
not so with his favor showed toward the godly: whom he loves once, John 13,
1.
he loves ever: he does not change, he cannot lie, he will not repent. He is
unchangeable, there is no shadow of change with him, his gifts are without
repentance. There is great comfort in such favor, seek therefore for his
favor, above the favor of Princes: and make much of it when we have found it.
Great is the love of Parents toward their Children: but the love of God
surmounteth them all, and that love which can be in them.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing such as are gracious with God, are laden with many
blessings, we may see hereby the blessed estate of all that live under the
grace of God, all things do serve them that serve the Lord, and have tasted
how gracious the Lord our God is. He is counted happy in the World that has
the favor of Princes. The Queen of Sheba pronounced 1 Kin 10, 8.
the people and servants of Solomon happy, which did stand ever before him to
hear his wisdom. When Elisha demanded of the Shunamite 2 Kin 4, 13.
what he should do for her, or whether there were any thing to be spoken for
her to the King, or to the Captain of the host: she answered, I dwell among
mine own people. She lived in peace and quietness, she had no cause to make
any complaint against any her Neighbors, she was not driven to make any suit
to King or Captain, she troubled not others, and others troubled not her, and
this she accounted an happy life. But the happy estate and blessed condition of
the faithful, is a thousand times greater: they are at peace with heaven and
earth, with Men and Angels, with themselves, and with all others, with life and
death, nothing shall be able to hurt them.

True it is, they have no promise to be free from tentations and troubles,
Famine may come, Persecution, Pestilence, nakedness, poverty, peril, and
tribulation may come, and death shall come: but we have a gracious and sure
promise, that they shall not hurt us, or destroy us, or hinder our salvation,
they are all Enemies without Armor, as Soldiers without a Sword, as Serpents
without a sting, and as Aspes without venom. This is it which the Prophet
handles at Psalm. 91, 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10.
large. Psalm. 91. Who so dwells in the secret of the most High, shall abide
in the shadow of the Almighty: surely, he will deliver thee from the Snare of
the Hunter, and from the noisome Pestilence: thou shall not be afraid of the
fear of the night, nor of the Arrow that flies by day: nor of the Pestilence
that walks in the darkness, nor of the Plague that destroys at noonday,
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come near thee: there shall none come unto thee, neither shall any
Plague come near thy Tabernacle. He means not in these words, that the
godly shall be free from troubles, sicknesses, and al calamities, but that God
does so care for them, and watch over them, that nothing shall be able to hurt
and harm them, but he will give them a sanctified use of the Cross, and make
all things turn to their good, and further their salvation. This is it which
the Apostle Paul offers to our considerations; 1 Cor. 3, 21, 22, 23.
Let no man rejoice in men, for all things are yours: whether it be Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death: whether they be things
present, or things to come, even all are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ,
Gods. Great is the dignity and excellency of the godly, that all things are
made to serve to their use, and are appointed in the ordinance of God to serve
for their profit: according to that which he has in another place, Romans 8, 28
We know that all things work together for the best unto them that love God,
even to them that are called of his purpose. Where we see he teaches, that not
only things present are ours, but things to come: not only life is ours,
but also death, which is a gain and advantage to the godly, and an entrance or
door that leads to everlasting life. What greater glory can befall us, or
what greater happiness can we desire, then to have all things ours. Life is
ours, death is ours, the world is ours, the Cross is ours, the Crown is ours,
heavens is ours, the Angels are ours, Christ is ours, God is ours, all is ours,
and what is there that is not ours? What a great honor is this? Or who is it
that can doubt of these things? Or whom should not these privileges move?
The World is a place of our resting: Life the time of our bettering: Death, is
a change of our misery, and an entrance into glory: things present, are the
beginning of our comfort: things to come, are the consummation of our comfort:
the Cross is our instruction: the Angels are our Watchmen: the heaven is our
happiness: Christ is our Savior: God is our Father: all things are favorers
and furtherers of our salvation. It is a comfort of all comforts, that we are
at peace with God, that he is our friend, and that he has no controversy
against us. If God were against us, who should be able to stand for us, or
dare take upon him the protection and defense of us? But being justified by
Faith, we are at peace with God. It is a great blessing to be at peace with
men: but it is a greater blessing to be at peace with God. We are at peace with
the blessed Angels, Hebr. 1, 14.
Who are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for their sakes which
shall be heirs of salvation. They guard us from dangers, they carry us, as a
Nurse does her Child in her Arms, that we be not hurt by the Devil, or his
Angels, or his Instruments.

We are at peace with the Church; that is, with all such as fear God, and
believe in Christ. The Prophet Esaias speaking of the Kingdom of Christ, and of
the fruits of the Gospel, foretells; That Esaias 11, 6.
the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kidde, and the
Calfe, and the Lion, and a fat Beast together, and a little Child shall lead
them, etc. Meaning thereby, that when a man is called into the State of grace,
howsoever by Nature he have the greediness of a Wolf, the wildness of a
Leopard, the fierceness of a Lion, the cruelty of a Bear, he shall lay away
his savage and brutish Nature, and become gentle, and live peaceably with all
men. We are at peace with our own selves, which is the peace of a good
conscience, when it being washed in the blood of Christ, cease to accuse and
terrify, and begins to excuse and comfort us; when neither Hell, nor Death,
nor damnation, nor any danger does dismay us, or bring us to despair: but in
the midst of all, Col. 3, 15.
we have the peace of God ruling in our hearts, as the Apostle speaks.
Coloss. 3. 15. If a man wear at peace with the Angels, with men, and with all
the Creatures, if he had no Enemy to encounter him, but lived at peace with
others: yet if he were at war and Mortal enmity with himself, if he felt
the terrors of conscience, and his own heart condemning him, he should
quickly find what a great blessing it is to have a clear conscience, which is
a continual Feast. This peace was in David, when he said, in the midst of
manifold dangers, Psalm. 3, 5, 6.
I laid me down and slept, and rose again; for the Lord sustained me: I will
not be afraid of ten thousand of the people that should beset me round about.
This is of such excellency, that it is called Phil. 4, 7.
The peace of God that passes all understanding: it is in stead of a guard, to
keep our hearts and minds in Christ. We are at peace with our enemies, both
because so soon as we believe in Christ, we seek to have peace with all men,
so far as is possible, Romans 12, 18
and as much as lies in us, and because God restrains the malice of the
Enemies, and inclines their hearts to embrace peace; Thus God brought Abraham
and Isaac into favor with Abimelec King of Gerar, that he was ready and
willing, no only to receive peace when it was offered, but to crave peace when
it was not desired. Thus God brought Daniell into favor with the chief of the
Eunuchs and sundry others, to find the fruits of love at the hands of their
enemies, because he has the hearts of all men in his own hand, to wind them
and turn them at his own pleasure.

Lastly, we are at peace with all Creatures in Heaven and Earth; above and
beneath, which are made to serve for our benefit and salvation. The Prophet
says; Psalm. 91, 13.
Thou shall walk upon the Lion and the Aspe, the young Lion and the Dragon
shall thou tread under foot. And God promises, To make a Hos. 2, 18.
Covenant for them with the Beasts and Fowls, that they shall walk safely.
All these privileges teach us (having such a large peace with God and his
Angels, with the Church and our own selves, with our Enemies and all
Creatures) that it is the most comfortable thing in the world, to be under the
grace and Covenant of God, and that nothing is more to be desired, then to
feel the favor of God toward us: for having this, we possess all things. If
we want him and his favor, though we have all the world, it will not nor
cannot content us, but all things are curssed to us, and we to them.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing all that are accepted of God, are blessed with all good things,
this teaches us the wretched and fearful condition of all such, as by reason
of sin are out of favor with God, they shall find no rest, they shall have
no peace, heaven and earth shall conspire against them, and deny them succor
and comfort in the day of Gods punnishment and visitation. It is said of
Ismaell, that his hand should be against every man, and every man's hand against
him: so is it with all the ungodly, not reconciled to God, they shall find no
sound comfort in any Creature, but shall have all the World against them. This
is a great misery and torment, lying heavy upon the wicked, and piercing their
Souls as the flashings of Hell, according to the saying of the Prophet; Esaias
57, 19, 20, 21.
I create the fruit of the lips to be peace; peace unto them that are far
off, and to them that are nere, says the Lord, for I will heal them: but the
wicked are like the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and
Dirt, There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. God sets himself
against them, and all Creatures shall confound them and fight against them,
until they are confounded and overthrown. And as the Apostle speaking of the
blessed and happy estate of the godly, declares, that all things are theirs:
so on the other side we may truly say of the ungodly, that nothing is theirs;
they have Title and interest in no creature to receive any comfort in them, or
stay from them, or protection by them. God is become their Enemy, the Angels
are armed to destroy them, their own consciences convince and condemn them,
the Heaven is shut against them, death is the gate of Hell unto them,
affliction is a means of murmuring in them, the World is a Snare unto them,
Christ is a Rock of offense unto them, the Gospel is the favor of death unto
them, the mercy of God is made a Packe-horse for their sins, all the
ordinances of God are abused by them, and all the works of Gods hands shall
be Instruments of their confusion. If any thing may be accounted theirs, it is
Dan. 12, 2. Math. 13, 42.
destruction of their Souls, confusion of their faces, contempt of their
persons, horror of their consciences, the company of the Devils, the
tormenting of their bodies, the feeling of Gods wrath, and the separation from
his presence and glory; all these shall indeed be theirs, and wholly theirs,
and only theirs, and always theirs, when their secret sins and wickedness
shall be reueiled. Then they shall call to the Hills to cover them, and try to
the Mountains to keep them from the sight of God, from the seat of his
judgment, and from the fierceness of his wrath and indignation. And as the
Apostle teaches, concerning the godly (as we showed before) that all things
work for the best to them: so we may truly teach on the contrary, that to
those which love not the Lord, nor the Lord them, all things turn to their
destruction, and further their condemnation; the Word, the Sacraments, and all
other exercises of Religion, Deuteronomy. 32, 15 and 2^, 4.
as we see in the Israelites, and in Judas, whom no instructions could convert,
no miracles could move, no means could profit or bring to repentance. If a
man had any suit in some Princes Court to make, or a supplication to put up,
and there should find the Prince, the Peers, the Nobles, the Commons, and all
men set against him to cross him and contradict him, to resist and gainsay
him, his case would be judged of all men to be most miserable: but thus the
case stands with all evil and ungodly men that stand in need of God, and of
good men, and of all Gods Creatures; yet shall have no relief or refreshing
from them: God will deny them, Christ will not know them, the Spirit will not
comfort them, the Angels will not guard them, the Prayers of the Church will
not help them, the Gospel shall not pardon them, the Sacraments shall not
strengthen them, the Beasts shall not spare them, the Creatures shall not
sustain them. And if they shall peradventure find any comfort or consolation
in them, yet what would that avail them, when their own conscience within
their own breasts, should arraigne them as a Malefactor, convince them as a
witness, condemn them as a Judge, and torment them as an Executioner? This we
see in the example of Caine, when he had made a breach and wound in his
conscience, he could rest no where, he could abide in no place, he stood in
fear of every Creature, he cried out; Ge. 4, 13, 14
My punishment is greater then I can bear: Behold, thou have cast me out of
this day from the Earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and shall be a
Vagabond and a Runnagate in the Earth, and whosoever finds me shall slay me.
In this State and condition do all the Reprobate and unregenerate stand, they
shall find no peace in any Creature in Heaven and Earth, and their own
conscience as a thousand witnesses shall torture and torment them. And if any
time they seem to have peace and to find rest, their peace is a false and
deceitful peace. They laugh sometimes, but it is from the teeth outward, and
in mirth the heart is heavy. They have riches, but they are as Usurpers and as
Thieves have them, who shall come to be arraigned and condemned for them. Their
outward estate seems happy, but it is most slippery and uncertain: when they
say, peace, peace, then comes sudden destruction, as the pain upon a Woman
in travail. But the righteous, howsoever they seem many times miserable in
trouble, and destitute of all good things, do indeed want nothing which God
sees to be for his glory and their good, they have that true peace which our
Savior promises to leave with them, and to bestow upon them: John 14, 27.
Peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives,
give I unto you: let not your heart be troubled, nor fear. Mark then the
difference between the godly and the ungodly: the condition of the godly is in
show miserable, but indeed most blessed; 2 Cor. 6, 9.
They are as unknown, and yet known: as dying, and behold they live: as
chastned, and yet not killed: as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing: as poor,
and yet making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. On
the other side, the condition of the wicked is in show blessed and happy, but
indeed and in truth, most wretched, lamentable, and miserable. Their laughter
is madness, their peace is unquietness, their joy is sorrow of heart, and the
end thereof is heaviness. To this purpose the Wiseman says; Pro. 14, 12, 15.
There is away that seems right to a man, but the issues thereof are the
ways of death. So then, howsoever the ungodly eat and drink, sing and
dance, jest and talk of vain things, howsoever they labor to avoid grief,
and put away the evil day far from them; howsoever they pass away the time
merrily, and live as if they had made a Covenant with death, yet they cannot be
in quiet and rest, for they have an Hangman and Tormentor within them, from
whose hands they cannot be delivered; to wit, their conscience which does
check them and terrify them, before the judgment seat of God, although they
strive to make themselves believe that there is neither God not Devil; neither
heaven nor hell; neither salvation nor damnation. Thvs much of the blessings
craved in this salvation.

[ From God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.] Now we come to
consider from whence these gifts come, and who is the Author of them, to wit;
from God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. So then, these graces here
entreated, are craved and wished from the blessed Trinity, distinguished into
three persons. Doctrine 3. All blessings are to be craved from God alone in
christ Jesus.
We learn from hence, that all good things of what sort soever, either for
obtaining blessings, or avoiding judgments, are to be entreated and requested
from God. All things temporal and eternal, are to be asked and begged from
that one God, which is reueiled unto us by the Scripture, in the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. When Isaac purposed and prepared Genesis 27, 28.
to bless his Son Jacob, and to pronounce what blessings should come upon
him and his posterity, he said; God give thee of the Dew of Heaven, and of the
fatness of the Earth, and of the plenty of Wheat and Wine. God gave this form
to Aaron and his Sons, of blessing the Children of Israel: Number. 6, 24, 25.
The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee,
and be merciful unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and
give thee peace. The Book of the Psalms does plentifully offer this truth
unto us in the practice of David, and other the dear Children of God, Psalm.
123, 3.
Have mercy upon us, o Lord, have mercy upon us, for we have suffered to much
contempt. This is the direction that the Apostle James gives; James 5, 5.
If any of you want wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. This is that which
the Apostle both teaches and craves: The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. The like we
see used by the Apostle John. Revel. 1. 4. All which testimonies serve directly
to teach us, that what blessings soever we want, we must beg them of God, and
of him only.

Reason 1.
Let us see the Reasons to confirm us in this truth. First, God is the
fountain of all good things, and the Wellspring of all graces whatsoever.
He is a most bountiful and liberal Giver, none can help us but he alone. If
he shut his hands, who can open them? If he stop his ears, who can hear?
If he turn away his eye from us, who can see our wantes? If he close up his
heart, who can show mercy? Hence it is that the Apostle says: Rom 11, 36.
For of him, and through him, and for him; are all things: to him be glory
for ever, Amen. And James, in the first Chapter of his Epistle. Iam. 1. 17.
James 1, 17.
Every good giving, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the three persons in Trinity, do work jointly together, even from
the first beginning of our creation, to the last finishing of our salvation. It
is said, all things were made by the Son, John 1, 3.
and that without him, nothing was made that was made; the Spirit also did
sustain and uphold that confused Lump, which was the matter of the
universal: so that they are said and set down to be Creators as well as the
Father. In the work of our salvation, the Father wills it, and electeth us;
the Son meriteth and deserves it, the Holy Ghost applies and appropriateth
it. This is it which Christ himself John 5, 17. and 16, 13.
says. Ioh. 5. My Father works hitherto, and I work. And Chap. 16. When he
comes, which is the Spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth. So we
might say the like, touching the gifts of Sanctification and Justification,
the Father forgiueth and washes away sin by the blood of Christ, through the
sprinkling of the Spirit: he mortifieth sin by the power of the death of
Christ, through the working of the Holy Ghost: he raises unto newness of
life, by the power of Christ's Resurrection applied by the Spirit: he
justifies us by the righteousness of Christ, imputed and appropriated unto us
by the Spirit. Seeing therefore that God is a most munificent and liberal
giver, rich unto all, and niggardly to none, and seeing these three persons
being one God, do work jointly together in all things touching the creation
of the World, and the salvation of man, and the redemption of our Souls; it
follows, whenever we want any gifts needful for Soul or body, for this
life, or the life to come, we must ask the supply of them at the hands of God
only, the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost.

Use 1.
Now let us handle the Uses breefely that arise from hence. First, we see, that
it is necessary for all that would pray aright, and would obtain that which
they desire, to be well instructed in the Unity of the Godhead, and the Trinity
of the persons, and to know the distinct properties of the persons, without the
understanding whereof, we worship not the true God, but an Idol. Our Savior
in his conference with the Woman of Samaria, charge the John 4, 12.
Samaritans to worship they know not what: so do many in our days, both
Heretics and ignorant persons, they call upon God confusedly, but they have
no particular knowledge of God at all. We must conceive no otherwise of God in
our mind, then he has expressed in his word. The scripture teaches to
knowledge, to believe, to worship one God, and him only. If we conceive or
imagine, or receive a multiplicity of Gods, we turn the truth of God into a
lie, and we erect unto our selves so many Idols. Again, the same Scripture
sets before us three persons in that Godhead; the Father, which is the first
person in the Trinity of himself; the Son, which is the second person,
begotten of the Father; the holy Ghost, which is the third person, proceeding
from the Father and the Son. The Father is God, the Son is God, the holy
Ghost is God, and yet these three persons are not three Gods, but one only
God. And here we have in this place a notable Testimony of the Godhead of the
Son, where the Apostle desires, and prays for grace and peace to be given
to Philemon and his Wife, to Archippus and the Church, not only from God the
Father, but from the Lord Jesus Christ. This had bin monstrous and horrible
Idolatry and blasphemy. Lastly, if Christ had not bin in Nature, Majesty, and
glory equal with the Father, he of whom, and from whom, we crave spiritual
and eternal gifts, John 1, 16.
And of whose fullness we receive, and grace for grace, must be confessed and
believed to be God: but such is Christ Jesus, and therefore let this be an
article of our Faith written in our hearts, acknowledged with our mouth, and
confessed in the Church for ever, that Christ is true God.

Use 2.
Secondly, all good things are to be craved of God, whether it be the supplying
of his graces, or the remoouing of our troubles, we are taught to go
immediately to God by Christ whenever he blesses us, and to return unto
himself the praise of his own work. This duty being required, it serves to
meet with many corruptions that are too common in the world. It conuinceth
such Heathnish minded men as are of dead hearts, and have no spark of the life
of Gods Spirit in them, that receive and swallow up daily diverse blessings,
yet never look to GOD that blesses them, but we are like unto the Swine that
go groueling to the ground, like the Horse and Mule that have no understanding
at all, and so use all the profits and pleasures of this life, without any
acknowledgement and consideration from whence they come, and of whom they have
received them: Ezekiel. 32, 6.
or like unto the Israelites when they had forsaken God. They sat down to
eat and drink, and rose up to play: or as Genesis 25, 34.
Esau, He did eat and drink, he rose up and went his way, he filled his
paunch, and such was his profaneness, that he was touched with nothing.
These men do daily devour infinite mercies of God, and yet never call upon
him. In him they live and move, and have their being, yet never acknowledge
him, from whom they receive life, and breath, and being. This is an evident
argument of a profane Spirit, Psalm. 14 4
and made the mark of an Atheist, not to pray to God. Moreover, it reprooueth
such as having great benefits bestowed upon them, do not magnify the Author
and giver of them, but some praise themselves, and ascribe them to their own
power, and so sacrifice to their own yarne, as Dan. 4, 27.
Nebucadnezzao did. Dan. 4. 27. Is not this great Babell that I have built, for
the House of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty? This way do the greatest sort of men offend, if they have any thing,
they impute it to themselves, and thank their own hands, and ascribe it to
their own labors, to their early rising, to their late going to bed, but
never remember the Name of God, nor consider that whatsoever we have for Soul
and Body, and all things belonging unto them are from God, whether of
necessity, plenty, or pleasure. Let us learn to confess, and say with the
Psalm. 23, 5.
Prophet. Psalm 23. Thou do prepare a Table before me in the sight of my
adversaries, thou do anoint mine head with Oil, and my Cup runs over.
Some likewise bless their Idols and the works of men's hands, which is
detestable Idolatry, as Dan. 5, 4.
Belshazzar did, who when he brought forth the golden Vessels that were taken
out of the Temple of the Lords house at Jerusalem, he praised his Gods of
Silver and Gold, to whom he ascribed the praise of the victory, and contemned
the true God who lives for ever. Others, call upon Saints and Angels, instead
of flying unto God; as they do that embrace the Religion of the Church of Rome,
who for every purpose and use have a several Saint; as likewise the Heathen
had that knew not God. For touching the Idolatry of the Gentiles and of the
Papists, touching superstition of the one and the other, blood cannot be more
like to blood, Milk to Milk, or an Egg to an Egg, then one of them is to
another, as may appear Muscul. comment. in Psalm. 16, 1.
by the conference and comparison of them both. For first, there was no Nation,
no Province, no City, no House, which had not some peculiar protecting God to
stand for them against Enemies, and to defend them from evil; as Babylon had
Belus; Aegipt had Isis and Osyris; Athens had Minerua; Ephesus, Diana, etc.
Thus is it among the false Catholics, and false Christians; Spain has James;
France has Saint Denis; Germany has Saint George; Venice has Saint Mark;
Coloine has the three Kings; Rome has Peter and Paul; the Hungarians have
Ludouick; Milen has Ambrose; and so other people, other Patrones: Secondly,
among the Gentiles, the Elements had their several Gods to rule over them, and
to bear all the sway in them, as the Heaven and Fire, had Jupiter; the Air,
Juno; the Sea, Neptune; and Hell had Pluto: not much unlike is it among the
Papists, where Agatha rules over the Fire: Nicholas over the Sea: Valesianus
Theodulus over the tempests, etc. Thirdly, the Gentiles had a certain God
assigned to their Cattle; as Apollo and Pan the Sheepheards God, and likewise
to the fruits of the Earth: as Apollo ripened their fruit: Bacchus increased
their Wine: Ceres sent them store of Corn: so is it among the Romanists:
Wendelinus takes care of their Sheep, Eulogius of their Horse, Pelagius of
their Oxen: Anthony of their Pigges and Swine: Iodocus over their Fruits of
trees: Vrbanus over their Vines: and (to show themselves no wiser then a Goose)
they gave the charge of their Geese to Gallus. Fourthly, the Religion of the
Gentiles assigned several Gods for several diseases, and those they called
upon to heal them and help them, they called upon Apollo for the plague; upon
Hercules for the falling sickness: upon Juno for Women in travail: so the
superstition of the Papists, has assigned and deputed diverse He-Saints and
She-Saints to the same purpose: Chemnil. exam part. 3. de innocat. sanct.
they pray to Sebastian against the Plague: to Petronella against the Ague: to
Saint John against Poison: to Apollonia against the Toothache: to Anastasius
against the Headache: to Mark against sudden death: to Liberius against the
Stone: to Margaret for Women in travail: to Vincent, for the recovering and
restoring of things lost: Saint Felicitas gave Male Children: Anna, Riches:
and Barbara provided that none should dye and depart before that they had
received the Sacrament.

Fifthly, the Heathen had peculiar Gods that were the Patrons of learning and
learned men, and gave knowledge in Handy-crafts, as such as were studious
Apollo, Minerua, and the nine Muses: Smiths, had Vulcane: Physicians,
Aeculapius: Soldiers, Mars: Hunters, Diana: Mariners, Castor and Pollux:
Harlots, had Venus, Flora, Lupa, and the like: If we come and compare these
with the Church of Rome, we shall see the like practice, for among them the God
of the learned, is Gregory: of the Painters, Luke: of the Physicians, Cosmas
and Damianus: the God of Soldiers, is Saint George: of Smiths, Eulogius: of
Shooe-makers, Crispin: of Tailors, Gutman: of Hunters, Eustachius: of Harlots,
Magdalena and Asra. Lastly, the superstition of the Papists in worshipping
Idols, is the same with the Idolatry of the Gentiles: for the Heathen did build
Churches and Chapels, erected Altars, ordained Priests, set up Images,
appointed Feasts and forms of prayers, offered gifts, burned Incense, and
fell down before their false Gods, which are the true works of men's hands.
They swear by their names, when they entered into their Temples, they sprinkled
themselves with holy Water, and they carried about with them their Images to
worship. Let any man compare Virell. principi. Christ. relig. lib. 2.
the Roman Religion, and the manners of worship retained and practiced in that
Church, and then let him openly declare, whether (the names only of the Idols
being changed) the same Idolatry be not still maintained and continued; and
whether the old Idolaters, which were the Gentiles; and the new Idolaters,
which are the Papists, do any whit differ? But to leave them either to the
mercy of God, to open their eyes, or to judgment, to make them that see not,
more blind, let us acknowledge God only to be our Patron and Protector, who
rules over Sea and Land, who takes care of us and ours; whom we Psalm. 50, 15.
Are commanded to call upon in the day of trouble, with promise to hear us.
Christ Jesus teaches us a form of prayer, and wills us to say: Our Father:
and therefore let us go to the root, not to the branches; to the Fountain,
not to the streams: to the Creator, not to the Creatures.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing all guiftes come from God by Christ, we are put in mind to use
them all to his glory, of whom we have received them. If GOD have given us
wit, wisdom, knowledge, authority, credit, riches, strength, honor, and such
like, we must remember wherefore they have been bestowed upon us, and must be
referred to their right end; not thereby to magnify our selves, and to set
up our own Names, but to glorify the Giver of them, and to praise his great
Name. If this be not the mark we aim at, and if every blessing do not make
us gain some glory to God, who has thus magnified us, and lifted up our heads
above our Brethren, it had been better for us we had never received these
blessings, but had been as wandering Clouds without Rain, as corrupt Trees
without Fruit, and as empty Vessels without Water. Hence it is, that the
Apostle remembering, that through Gods blessing we are made partakers of food, 1
Cor. 10, 31
he adds; Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do; do all
to the glory of GOD. It is a notable comfort unto us, to use his blessings
aright, that they that used their Talents well, were honored of the Master,
and had more given unto them.

It is a fearful sin to abuse them, and to turn them to the dishonor of
God, to the hurt of his Church, and to his own destruction. This is a common
sore and sickness in our days. Whatsoever we have received, we have received
in not for our selves alone, but for the good of others, and the glory of God:
so that wear not to be lifted up in the pride of our own hearts, nor
disdain or contemn our Brethren, but consider that there is nothing which we
have not received, and therefore we must not boast as if we had not received it.

4 I give thanks to my God, making mention always of thee in my Prayers.

5 (When I hear of thy Love and Faith, which thou have in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and toward all Saints.)


The order of the words, and the interpretation of the same.
We showed before, that the Prayers used by the Apostle, are partly a
salutation; and partly a thanksgiving. Of the salutation we have spoken
hitherto: Now follows the Thanksgiving, wherein he gives thanks to God
for such good things as were found in him, and thereby conceiueth hope to
obtain of him that which he requested. The Thanksgiving is set forth: First,
by the subject or person, to whom thanks are rendered, to God. Secondly, by the
time, when he prayseth God for him, not sparingly, or sildome, but oftentimes,
and continually when he prayed unto God, and poured out his supplications unto
him. Thirdly, by the efficient cause, the hearing of his virtues and graces
that abounded in him; to wit, his Faith in Christ, and his love to the Saints,
the poor afflicted members of Christ. So then, we see to whom he gave thanks,
to God: when he gave thanks for him, always when he prayed: and wherefore he
gave thanks because he heard of his faith and love. As if he should have said;
As I wish unto you all the full favor of God, and all prosperity, both of
Soul and body: so I cease not to rejoice in thee, and to offer praise and
thanks for thee to God whom only I serve and hang upon; even so often as I
pray unto him, I remember thee, and that upon good ground and trial, for I do
daily hear from the Churches of the worthy fruits of the Spirit of God that
dwell in thee; namely, of thine unfeigned Faith which thou have toward the Lord
Jesus Christ, and of thy fervent love which thou show to all the Saints,
that stand in need of thy relief and comfort. Thus much touching the order
and meaning of the words.

The questions propounded.
But before we proceed to handle the several Doctrines offered to our
considerations in this division, it shall not be amiss for us to answer three
doubts that may arise out of these words. First, the question may be asked,
why the Apostle calls God, his God, as if he were no man's GOD but his.
Secondly, the Rhemists The. test. upon Phil. ver. 5.
in this place gather two notable errors, Justification by works, and Prayer to
the Saints, and make Faith to be no less in the Saints then in Christ. The
like collection is made by Bellarmine, Bellar. de sanct. beatit. lib. 1. cap.
20.
that we must believe in them, and hope in them, as in our Patrones, because
the Apostle makes mention of Philemons Love and Faith toward Christ, and
toward the Saints; so that they gather, that there is Faith toward the Saints
as well as toward Christ. Thirdly, it may be demanded why Philemons love is
limited to the Saints, and to no other. Touching the first doubt arising out of
the fourth verse, The first question answered
it may seem strange unto some, that the Apostle should say, I thank my God.
Is he not the God of the rest of the Apostles and of all believers, as well as
his God? Is he the God of the Mountains, and not of the Valleys? Is he the
God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles? Yes, even the Gentiles also.

Paul therefore may be thought of many, to enclose a Commons, and to incroach
upon the right of others, he may seem very courteous, and to claim and
challenge as proper to himself, that which belongs generally to all the
faithful. But the Apostle setting down his right and interest in God, does
not deny or debar others of their privilege. He does herein express the
nature of a true Faith, which is to believe, not only that he is the God of
other Men, but that he is his God, and that he was to believe in him, to rest
in him, to depend upon him, to look for all good things from him. Hence it is,
that the Prophet Daniell praying unto God, says sometimes; Dan. 9, 17, 18, 19.
O our God, and sometimes again, O my God. To say (our God) is a word of
Charity: to say (my God) is a word of Faith: the one, respects others; the
other, reflecteth upon our selves. When we pray Our Father, we show our love to
the Brethren; when we say, My Father, we show our Faith, that we have our part
and portion in God as well as others, and are to apply the promises of Grace,
(made to all believers) particularly to our selves, otherwise they cannot help
us and avail us. But of this we shall speak more afterward, when we come to
the Doctrines.

The second question answered.
The second question arises from hence, that Paul seems to make Faith
respect the Saints, and so to teach us to believe in them, and to pray unto
them. For in the fifth verse he says, he heard of Philemons love and Faith
which he had toward the Lord Jesus Christ, and toward the Saints. But if the
Apostle had meant to teach Faith to men, and to direct us to believe in Saints,
he should be contrary to the Doctrine delivered by himself, contrary to the
rest of the holy Scriptures, and contrary to the Articles of our Faith.
Contrary to himself, because he teaches, Romans 10, 13, 14.
that we cannot call upon any, whom we do not know out of Gods word, and
believe to be both able and willing to help us, saying: Whosoever shall call on
the Name of the Lord, shall be saved: how then shall they call on him, on whom
they have not believed? Where he reasons thus, that we must believe only in
God, and therefore pray only to God. He should be contrary to other
Scriptures, because we are Heb. 4, 16.
taught by them, To come with boldness to the Throne of Grace; and therefore
the invocation of Saints is vain and needless, seeing we have a free access
and bold approaching unto God through Christ: again, they are Ier. 17 5.
Curssed that trust in man, and make flesh their Arm, and so withdraw their
heart from the Lord. Christ calls us unto himself, and commanded John 16, 20
us to ask the Father in his Name, for the Father himself loves us. He
should be contrary to the Articles of Faith, wherein we are taught to believe
only in God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Again, such as are
not obstinately blinded, and peruersely disposed, may easily distinguish the
Apostles words, and see that he refers not Faith both to Christ and the
Saints, but Faith to Jesus Christ, and love to the Saints. For after that he
had commended Philemon, for two chief gifts of God, Faith and Love, in both
which, consist the perfection of a Christian man, he assigns to either of
them their propper subject; namely, that Faith is in our Lord Jesus Christ, and
Charity is toward all the Saints, which distinction and diverse Relation, may
appear by the Latin Interpretour, and by their own Rhemish Translation,
altering the preposition, and reading it thus; In Jesus Christo and in omnes
Sanctos.
Love and Faith in Jesus Christ, and toward all the Saints. Thirdly, the
Apostle elsewhere having occasion to mention these two graces of God, he does
describe them distinctly by their several obiectes, and expressly refers
Faith to Christ, and love to the Saints, Ephe. 1, 15. Col. 1, 3, 4.
as writing to the Ephesians he says; Therefore also, after that I hear of the
Faith which ye have in the Lord Jesus, and love toward all the Saints, I cease
not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers. So in the
Epistle to the Colossians, We give thanks to God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, always praying for you: since we heard of your faith in Christ
Jesus, and of your love toward all Saints. Compare these two places with the
words of Paul in this place, and we shall see they serve as a Key to open
this, and do utter that plainly which here is spoken more darkely. Thus we
see by the way, that the Scripture is the best Expositer and Interpretour of
the Scripture, August. lib. 2 de doctr. Christ. cap. 6.
and that which is spoken obscurely in one Book, is made evident and manifest
in another. Fourthly, it were not hard to produce and allege sundry
authorities and testimonies of elder times, thus distinguish the words as we
do, and auouching that no Faith and confidence is to be put in any of the
Saints, Theodoret, Ambrose, Theophylact.
as if the Apostle had said; I know how great Faith thou have reposed in our
Lord which has saved us, and with how great Charity thou have relieved them
that are the Servants of God, and esteem godliness. Lastly, Faith in the Saints
cannot be proved, and invocation of them established and grounded from hence,
because the Apostle speaks of the Saints living, not departed; in the Church
Militant, not Triumphant: the Saints on Earth, not in Heaven. For the Saints on
Earth want our help, and crave our relief to be extended toward them: but they
that are in glory and have received their Crown, do not stand in need of our
comfort and refreshing: and therefore this is a weak foundation to build the
Popish Faith and belief, in Saints that are dead and departed out of this
life, seeing the Apostle understands it of one sort, and they take it and
stretch it to another.

The third question answered
The third question is this, why the Apostle restrains Philemons love to the
Saints, whereas love is a common debt that we owe to all men, as the Apostle
says; Romans 13, 8.
Owe nothing to any Man, but to love one another, for he that loves another,
has fulfilled the Law. Seeing therefore, love should not be restrained to the
Saints, as though we ought to shut up our bowels of pity and compassion from
others, and seeing we are not to despise our own flesh, but honor the Image
of God engraven in our Nature: how is it, that his love which ought to
comprehend all mankind, and enlarge it self to all others, is only mentioned
to have been toward the distressed Saints and Members of the Church? The
reason is, they which are of the Household of Faith, are tied to us by a
stronger and straighter band of friendship and familiarity, and God commends
them unto us more particularly, and so they ought to challenge the first
place, in declaring the fruits of our love. The Apostle does direct us to this
point, when he says; Gal. 6, 10.
While we have time, let us do good unto al men, but especially to them which
are of the Household of Faith. We are charged to love all, but we must love the
Saints with a peculiar and special love, even as heirs with Christ, and
Members of the same body with us. God requires of us to love al men as his
Creatures, but the godly as his Children. Though therefore our love should be
common, and extend it self far and near into all the world: yet there
should be certain degrees, and an order in our love should be observed. We
are commanded to love all, but we are not commanded to love all alike. We are
bound to love the godly and ungodly, but we are not bound to love the ungodly
as the godly; the Reprobates as the elect; the Vessels of wrath, as the Vessels
of honor; the Children of Belial, as the Children of God. We are therefore
here directed, whom we are most nearly and deerly to love, even those that
have Christ dwelling in their hearts, and grace shining in their faces. Contrary
to the practice of worldly Men, who only love such as are of this World; their
love is like themselves, profane men, a profane love: carnal men, a carnal
love: they love evil men for their evil, because they partake with them in
evil: they hate the godly for their godliness, because they are unlike them,
and will not run with them into all excess of riot, Psalm, 38, 20.
according to that which the Prophet has, They that reward evil for good are
mine enemies, because I follow goodness. This agrees with that which Christ
told and taught his Disciples, John 15, 19.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you. Thus much touching the deciding of the doubts and answering of the
questions, that arise out of these two verses: Now let us come to the
observations that arise therein.

Observations out of these verses.
The words being interpreted, and diverse questions answered, let us see what
points offer themselves fitly to be deserved. First, he begins with a
thanksgiving, to teach that it is meet and necessary to give thanks to God for
benefits received at his hands, according to the Doctrine of the Apostles 1
These. 5, 18
In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus. We
are ready to forget such mercies as we have received, and thereby make our
selves unworthy of further favor. Secondly, consider to whom he gives
thanks, to God: not to any Saint or Angel, or any Creatu^, to guide us in the
performance of this duty. Thirdly, mark the person, for whom, for Philemon: so
that we are not only bound to give thanks for our selves, but for other,
especially when we see Gods word to bring forth fruit in the hearts of Men.
Thus does Paul in this place, rejoice for the godliness of Philemon, and
every where in his Epistles shows himself exceeding glad for the conversion
of Nations and people to the Faith. Thus the Church of the Jews Gal. 1, 23.
are said to glorify God, when they heard of Paul's conversion. This is the
duty of all Christians, specially of the Ministers, to pray continually for
the Flock committed unto them, and to praise the name of God for their increase
in godliness.

Fourthly, observe that first he mentions his thanksgiving; then his prayers
for him, so that he joins the one with the other. Whereby we see, that
prayers conceived for our selves or others, are not to be severed from giving
of thanks. For no man is so perfect in this life, but be has need of daily
increase in grace: and therefore we must so give thanks for our Brethren to
God, in regard of the graces of his spirit which they have received, that we
also pray incessantly for their growth in those graces. Besides, no man
stands so firmly rooted and grounded in grace, but he may fall, and by his
fall have his gifts lessened and diminished, unless he be strengthened and
stayed up by the means and helps that God has appointed: among the which are
Prayers, both our own and others.

Fifthly, he says his Faith and love were heard off, and spread abroad far
and near: so that we see Gods graces bestowed upon us, will not be hidden and
concealed. We are set as upon a Theater to be seen, all men's eyes are fixed
upon us, all Men's mouths will be opened to speak of us, Romans 1, 8. 1 Kin. 18,
13.
and all men's ears will listen what they can hear of us, even then when they
are absent from us. On the otherside, what evil soever we commit, we cannot
conceal and cover, we have many eyes upon us we shall have a thousand ears to
hearken, and ten thousand mouths to prattle against us, so that we must so
walk as we saw many with us, and many saw us how we walk. Sixthly, we see
here a notable difference between unfeigned praise, and fained flattery. The
Apostle without any faining and fawning, rehearses in this place the
commendation of Philemon, 1 These 1, ^. and 2, 13, 5, 6.
as he does in other places of the whole Churches, thereby to encourage them in
well doing, and to stir them up, to continue fast and faithful to the death,
and to hasten to the end of the race set before them. But such as flatter and
use colorable words are wholly at the beck of others, extolling and admiring
whatsoever they do or speak, whether it deserve praise or dispraise. It
stands us upon to consider whom we praise, and wherefore we praise them, that
it be for such good things as appear to be in them.

[ I give thanks to my God, etc.] The Apostle finding and hearing of the
excellent and worthy graces of God that were in Philemon, was moved with great
joy, and thereby stirred up to bless and praise the Lord God. Doct. 1. Men
ought to take cause of great joy, to see others grow and proceed in good things.
We learn from hence, that al Christians (especially Teachers) are greatly to
rejoice and praise God when they see, or know, or hear, that professors
prosper and grow forward in heavenly graces. It is a matter of great joy and
comfort to see men grow in graces as they do in years, and to increase in
heavenly things as they multiply their days. When the Prophet David saw the
forwardness of the people in offering willingly unto the Lord, with a perfect
heart for the building of the Temple; 1 Chronicles. 29, 10.
He rejoiced exceedingly, and blessed the Lord before all the Congregation. And
Psalm. 122. I rejoiced Psalm. 122, 1.
when they said unto me, Come, let us go into the house of the Lord. The
Apostle writing to the Romans, gives thanks through Jesus Christ for them
all, Romans 1, 8.
Because their Faith was published throughout the whole world. When the
Churches of Judea heard that Paul a Persecuter was converted to the Faith, and
made a Preacher of the Faith, which before he destroyed, Gal. 1, 22, 23
They glorified God for him. The Apostle John, writing to an elect Lady whom he
loved in the truth, says; 2 John 4, and 3 John 3, 4.
I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy Children walking in truth, as we have
received a Commandment of the Father. And writing to Gaius, he says, I
rejoiced greatly when the Brethren came and testified of the truth that is in
thee, how thou walk in the truth: I have no greater joy then these, to hear
that my Sons walk in verity. By these several places alleged, as by so
many witnesses produced, we see that it is our duty greatly to rejoice when we
behold the Gospel flourish, and the professors of the Gospel grow forward in
good things.

Reason. 1.
And there are many reasons to warrant and confirm this Doctrine. First, it
serves exceedingly to advance the glory of God that men grow in godliness,
which ought to be an effectual reason to move us to rejoice: for what is
there, that should more cheer and rejoice us, then when Gods Name is
magnified, and his truth extolled among the Sons of Men. In all things that
we do, if we do them aright, we should aim at Gods glory. Now, as the Name
of GOD is blasphemed by careless and wicked professors, (the Apostle Romans 2,
24.
charging the Jews, that through their evil life, the Doctrine of God was
slandered:) so on the other side, God is greatly honored, when our deeds
accompany our words, and a godly life adorneth and garnisheth a good
profession, according to ihe commandment of Christ; Math. 5, 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your goodworkes, and
glory your Father which is in heaven.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the forwardness of one, is a notable means to draw forward
another. For as one wicked man makes another, and he that is seduced, is an
Instrument to seduce another: so he that is truly converted, will not rest in
the quiet fruit and inward comfort of his own conversion, but labor to
convert others, and so make them partakers of that comfort which they have
found. The Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, says of them; 1 These 1, 6, 7
Ye became followers of us and of the Lord, and received the word in much
affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost, so that ye were as ensamples to all
that believe in Macedonia and in Achaia. They that are gained to the faith,
will be means to gain others, so that the winning of one is the gaining of
another. This we see in the conversion of the Apostles. When Andrew was brought
to Christ, John 1, 41, 43, 45.
He found his Brother Simon first, and said unto him, We have found that
Messiah; which is by interpretation, that Christ. So when Christ called
Phillip, and said unto him, Follow me: Phillip found Nathaniell, and said unto
him, We have found him of whom Moses did write in the Law, and the Prophets,
Jesus that Son of Joseph, that was of Nazareth. The like we see in the Woman
of Samaria, when Christ had preached salvation unto her, and offered unto her
the Water of life, that she should thirst no more; John 4, 28.
she left her Water-pot, and went into the City, and said to the men; Come
see a man which has told me all things that ever I did, is not he that
Christ? Being moved her self, she moved others: being drawn, she drew others
to Christ.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, it is a great comfort to the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, when
such as are taught, do grow in grace, and prosper by those means that are
brought and offered unto them. The Apostle calls the Phillippians his
Brethren beloved and longed for, his joy and his Crown: wherein he
accounts their growth, his honor: their increasing, his rejoicing: their
faith, his hope: their flourishing, his felicity: so when he had praised God
for the zeal of the Thessalonians, in receiving the word, in following other
Churches, and in suffering affliction for the Gospels sake, he adds this
reason; 1 These. 2, 19 20.
For what is our hope, or joy, or Crown of rejoicing? Are not even you it, in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? Yes, ye are our glory and
joy. He does not make the matter of his glorying, and the occasion of his
rejoicing to be his calling, so much as the fruit of his calling: he does not
comfort himself so much in his Apostleship, as in the effect of his
Apostleship; that is, the conversion and salvation of the Thessalonians. If a
man have never so high and eminent a calling in the Church or Commonwealth, he
cannot comfort himself so much therein, as when he sees the blessing of God
upon his labors, when he remembers he has kept a good conscience therein, 2
Cor. 1, 15.
and considers he is to God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish. It is a great comfort to the Husbandman after
his toiling and tilling, after his planting and ploughing, to see the fruits of
his labors, and to behold the increase of the earth, that yields usury,
advantage, and increase when it is sowed. So it fares with the spiritual
Husbandman, whose labor is greater and oftener, enduring all the year long,
whose patience is greater in waiting for the early and latter rain, whose
gain and profit is less in tilling a dry and barren soil, that yields
little or no increase, but a crop of cares, a bundle of Briars and Bushes, and
an Harvest of Thorns and Thistles, that are reserved for the fire.

Reason 4.
Lastly, the graces of God, and the growing in these graces, are fruits of
their election, and seals of their salvation, so that the Angels in Heaven
rejoice at the conversion of a Sinner. Every grace of GOD adds assurance: the
greater graces, the greater assurance: the more graces, the more assurance: the
growth of graces, is the growing of our assurance. For if these things be
found and abound in us, 2 Pet. 1, 8, 10.
they will make us neither to be idle nor unfruitful in the acknowledging of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, but give us a comfortable assurance of our eternal
election and effectual calling. So the Apostle gives thanks for all the
Thessalonians, making mention of them in his prayers, and remembering the
efficacy of their Faith, the diligence of their love, and the patience of their
hope: 1 These. 1, 3, 4.
by all which he gathers assuredly, as building upon certain knowledge,
that they are elect of God. Now then, to lay these reasons together, and to
gather them as upon an heap: seeing nothing brings greater glory to God
among men, nothing serves better to draw on others, nothing ministers greater
joy to the Teachers, nothing seals up more surely their salvation, then the
increase of his Kingdom, the growth of the Saints, and the enlarging of the
bounds of the Church; it follows, that all Gods Children must show their joy
and gladness, when they see any to increase in the obedience of the Gospel,
to grow in grace, and to proceed constantly in the truth of God,

Use 1.
The Uses remain to be considered and learned of us. First, we see that the
principal and cheifest thing which the Minister should seek and search after,
is the profiting of his people, and the building up of the Kingdom of God
among them. For his joy in their growth, and his comfort in their conversion,
will cause him above all things to labor after it. There is no comfort in the
Minister like to this comfort, when he sees the fruits of godliness, as it were
the marks of Gods Spirit to shine forth brightly in his people. What comfort
has the Husbandman, more in his husbandry, then to see the fruits of the
earth; not to be blasted, but to be blessed; not to wither, but to grow; what
joy has the Shepherd like to this, when he sees the flock not to be
infected, but to flourish: not to be rotten and scabbed, but to be sound and
whole: not to decrease and decay, but to increase and to bring forth thousands
and ten thousands in our streets. What greater delight has the Nurse, then to
see her child live in health, grow up in strength and stature and prosper in
the world? So there is no comfort like to this comfort, no joy like to this
joy, no delight like to this delight, to behold the harvest of the Lord, the
sheep of Christ, the Children of God, to flourish and to increase more and
more to grow from faith to faith, and from grace to grace, Ephe. 4. 13.
until they all meet together unto a perfect man; and unto the measure of the
age of the fulness of Christ. Hence it is, that after the Apostle had testified
his joy and thanks to God for the faith and love of the Colossians he adds:
Col. 19. 10.
for this cause we also, since the day we heard of it, cease not to pray for
you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with knowledge of his will, in
all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthy of the
Lord, and please him in all things, being fruitful in all good works, and
increasing in the knowledge of God, and let us by this example comfort our
selves in such as increase in good things, and pray for such as are coming
forward. We live in a decaying and declining time, wherein many have forgotten
their first love: we see the cold season and Winter of all Godliness, wherein
men are frozen in the dregs of Sin. We may behold with our eyes (if we be
not stark blind) a general wasting, languishing, and consumption of the
heat and heart of Religion. If then in this common pining of the vital parts,
we may discern any reviving and refreshing to appear, or any flourishing of
Godliness (which seemed dead at the root) to spring up, let it be a comfort unto
us, and teach us to give God the glory, who makes light to come out of
darkness, and life to arise out of death. This serves to reprove those that
never desire the profiring of their people, nor regard what their estate, and
how their standing is in heavenly things: they never consider whether they go
forward or backward: whether they grow upward or downe-ward, to Heaven or to
Hell, to God or to the Devil, to Salvation or to damnation. These are they
that feed themselves to the full, but regard not to feed the flock over which
the holy Ghost has made them overseers. These are they that live of the Alter,
but care not to minister at the Alter: they will be sure to reap carnal
things but they have no conscience to sow spiritual things. They live of the
Gospel, but they will not preach the Gospel. The Apostle testifying his
longing and thirsting after the salvation of the Church, said, I seek not
yours but you. But these men, if they would speak the truth from their hearts,
might say: we seek not you, but yours, we care not what become of you, so that
we may find the sweetness of that which is yours. How far are these from the
zealous affection of the same Apostle, who became all things to all men if by
any means he might save some: he teaches that a necessity lay upon him to
preach the Gospel, and denounces a woe upon himself if he preach not the
Gospel. Let us all in our places follow his example, and pray unto God to give
the grace of conversion to turn the hearts of men to the saving knowledge of
the Gospel: and where he has granted this mercy let us pray him to increase
it more and more, and to continue it unto the day of Jesus Christ.

Use 2.
Secondly, as the growing in good things is matter of joy, so on the other
side, it is caused of great sorrow and grief of heart, when the professors of
the says, and hearers of the word, and such as seemed lovers of the truth, do
not profit, but revolt: do not go forward, but go backward, do not grow
better and better, but become worse and worse. It must not seem strange, that
great sorrow arises unto the servants of God, when men do not profit in good
things. We see what worldly sorrow is found in worldly men that causes death:
the least occasion of loss, the least feeling of trouble, the least crossing
of their humors can draw from them abundance of tears. But such as are led by
the spirit of God, are spiritually minded, 2. Cor. 7. 10.
they have godly sorrow that causes repentance unto salvation not to be
repented of. This was in the Prophet David, when he saw a decay in Godliness,
and a growing in wickedness, Psalm. 119. 136.
mine eyes gush out with Rivers of water, because they keep not thy law. This
was in the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 9. 1. and 4. 19.
O that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that
I might weep day and night for the slain of the Daughter of my people. This
was in Christ our Savior when he came near to Jerusalem, he beheld the City
and wept for it, Luke. 19. 41. 42.
O if thou had even known at the least in this day those things which
belong unto thy peace, but now are hid from thine eyes. This was in the Apostle
Paul when he saw the reuolting and backsliding of the Galathians, Gal. 4. 19.
and 5. 7.
O my little Children, of whom I travail in Birth again, until Christ be
formed in you: I am in fear of you, least I have bestowed on you labor in
vain: ye did run well, who did let you that ye did not obey the truth? This
is a special note to discern and distinguish true Pastors from hirelings, and
faithful shepherds from Wolves: for the true Ministers of Christ are inwardly
touched and grievously pained to behold the present sins of the people, and
the future judgments of God hanging over their heads. This is a great grief of
heart and goes near them, to see so little growth of Godliness, so little
fruit of their labors, so great increase of all ungodliness. This reproves
those that make a mock of sin, and can laugh as heartily at the committing
of iniquity, as at the best jest and the greatest sport. If we begin once to
laugh at sin, we will not make any conscience to commit it. When once we do
not stick to jest at it, we will quickly come to it in good earnest. When we
can make a play of it, there is but a short step to put it in practice. The
very Heathen Plutar. in Solone Valor. Maxim lib. 2. Cap. 6.
saw thus much that had but half an eye, that if they suffered evil to be
committed merrily and in sport, they should find it practiced in their earnest
contracts and common affairs. And many of the heathen by other Heathen are
commended, Tacit. in his description of Germany.
among whom vices were never laughed at. But how many are there among us that
would be counted and are indeed called Christians, who come far behind the
blind Infidels, who are open ieasters at evil, and deriders of good. This
laughing is the beginning of evil, when ieastes turn to good earnest, and
words into deeds. These men are far from the practice of those whom we heard
before commended out of the word of God, and from the Godly affection of David
and Jeremy, of Paul and Christ himself, who mourned in soul to behold the
sins that reigned and were commonly practiced in their days. This is a
notable sign and assurance to our own hearts that we hate them indeed when
they do draw out of us buckets of water and rivers of tears. This grief of
heart was in the Apostle writing to the Phillippians, when he saw the loose
behavior of of many that professed Christ in word, but denied him in deed, of
whom he says, Phil. 3. 18.
Many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they
are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is
their belly, whose glory is to their shame, which mind earthly things. Now it
cannot be but the hearts of the faithful Ministers and godly brethren, will
be greatly grieved and vexed, when they see God dishonored by our careless
walking, and standing still idle all the day long withou a laboring in his
Vineyard: We must daily increase and grow strong in faith, or else we decrease
and grow weak in says. If we wax not every day better, we fall to be worse
and worse. We never stand at one stay. If we walk not forward, we run
backward, like the water of the Sea, that if it do not flow, it ebbeth: or
like unto the life of man, if strength increases not, it decays. So then, if
any would come to man's full and perfect stature, he must grow up by little and
little, from one measure to another: So if any would Ephe. 4. 15. 16.
become a perfect man in Christ, he must follow the truth in Love, and in all
things grow up into him, which is the head; that is, Christ, by whom all the
body being coupled and knit together by every joint, receives increase of the
body, unto the edifying of it self in love. Let us therefore take heed to our
selves, that we grieve not the hearts of the faithful, and by our sins,
quench their affections toward us, as it were by pouring Water upon them. Let
us seek to grow up in knowledge and in obedience, that we be not as Dwarfes or
Vrchins, never coming to any growth, nor profiting any whit in the School of
Christ; nor be as idle Drones, that never labor, but live unprofitably to
themselves and others.

Use 3.
Thirdly, it is the duty of all Gods people, by striving to go forward in
good things, to delight the hearts of their Teachers, and the rest of the
Brethren. So long as we increase and proceed unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, that we be henceforth no more
Children, wavering and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the
deceit of men, and with craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive, we
make Christ glad, we rejoice the Spirit of God, we make glad the Angels, we
comfort and cheer up the hearts of the godly, and we bring that peace to our
own hearts, which passes all understanding. On the other side, if we grow
backward, and decline by little and little from the holy profession of the
truth, which we have received, we crucify Christ, we quench the Spirit, we
grieve the Angels, we offend the faithful, and we wound our own Souls.
This duty urged from this Doctrine, reprooueth sundry sorts of people, that
do not desire to delight the hearts of those that have instructed them, and to
comfort them that have labored in the word and Doctrine among them.

First, such as have continued long in the Church, and grow in years, but not
in knowledge. What comfort can these men bring to their Teachers and
Instructers, when no increase is seen, or can be marked in them? It is a
common, but a most fearful sin, not to profit and proceed in the ways of
godliness: and yet it is to be feared, that not one of an hundred comes
with any desire of instruction, with any care of sanctification, with any
purpose of reformation, with any hunger after salvation. If men go to the the
Market to buy their provision, and to supply the necessities of the body, we
see what they bring home, we see they return not empty, we see they come back
laden. But when they go to the House of God, and frequent the exercises of his
word, how often do they return with empty hands; nay, with empty hearts,
nay, with hard hearts, and so worse then they came unto them? This is it which
the Apostle Heb. 6, 7, 8.
teaches. Hebr. 6. The earth which drinks in the Rain that comes often upon
it, and brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing of God: but that which bears Thorns and Briars, is reproved, and
is near unto curssing, whose end is to be burned. Secondly, hereby is
condemned the want of the fruits of kindness toward the Pastors, whereby they
may be encouraged, and made cheerful and comfortable in their calling. Some
there are, whom we may well account of the better, or (at least) none of the
worser sort, who abstain from hurting, wronging, and molesting their
Ministers, but they withal, abstain from showing succor, help, or
countenance toward them: they will indeed do them no evil, but likewise they
will do them no good, contemning them in their heart: they will not be open
enemies, professing hatred toward them, but withal, they are not their
friends to give them any comfort, they use them strangely and uncivilly, as
base abiects in their sight, when as their calling is as much honored and
magnified in the word, by the mouth of God, as any calling under Heaven.

This was the sin of the Corinthians for a time, who wanted love and kindness
in supporting the Apostle under the weight of his calling, so that he was
constrained to stand upon the commending of himself, and the extolling of his
Ministry, 2 Cor. 12, 11
I was a fool to boast my self, ye have compelled me: for I ought to have
been commended of you, for in nothing was I inferior unto the very chief
Apostles, though I be nothing. This also the same Apostle complains of in
another place, 2 Timothy 4, 16
At my first answearing, no man assisted me, but all forsook me, I pray God
that it may not be laid unto their charge.

These men did not dispraise him, but they would not commend him: They would
not renounce him, yet they would not defend him: as they would not disclaim
him, so likewise they would not assist him. Of this sort are many that live
among us, who think they have discharged a worthy duty toward the Minister, if
they do him no harm, if they offer him no wrong, if they abstain from injury
toward him. It was far otherwise with the Galathians, who loved Paul so
dearly and entirely, that they accounted nothing to be too precious for him,
Gal. 4, 14, 15
The trial of me which was in my flesh, ye despised not, neither abhorred; but
ye received me as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus: what was then your
felicity? For I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have
plucked out your own eyes, and have given them unto me. But in these days
wherein we live, it were well, or not much amiss for the faithful Ministers
of the Gospel, if such as should support them, would not subvert them; if such
as should help them, would not hinder them; if such as should raise them up,
were not ready to cast them down; and if such as should refresh them, were not
rather given to revile them, and disgrace them. Here then is condemned all
hard and bitter dealing toward them (whereby their calling which is an
honorable office, is made an irksome burden unto them to bear) against such
as taunt and scorn them, that jest and mock at the work of their ministry,
which is the wisdom of God, and the power of God, against those that delight
to vex the servants of God, to mingle their bread with gravel, their drink
with gall, and their life with reproach. This made the Prophets and Apostles
cry out continually, to see themselves abused, their Ministry contemned, the
word of God himself refused, and all Religion profaned. When Eliah saw that
the children of Israel had forsaken the Covenant of God, cast down his
Altars, and slain his Prophets, he desired God to kill him, 1 King. 19, 4
It is now enough, O Lord, take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers.
The prophet Esaias 65, 2. and 53, 1. and 49, 4.
Esaias says, I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious people,
which walked in away that was not good, even after their own imaginations.
Lord, who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, and for
nothing, but my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. The Lord
says to Ezekiell, Ezekiel. 33, 31, 32.
The Children of thy people talk of thee by the walls, and in the doors of
houses, they sit before thee and hear thy words, but they will not do them,
for with their mouths they make jests, and thou art unto them, as a jesting
song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can sing well, for they hear thy
words, but they do them not: and when this comes to pass (for lo it will
come) then shall they know, that a prophet has been among them. So when Paul
came to Athens, Acts 17 18.
and saw the City full of Idols, he preached unto them the knowledge of God,
and the resurrection of the dead, but they said, What will this babbler say? And
others, worse then those that scorn and scoff at the word of life (which they
should hear with fear and reverence) are fallen into this horrible depth of
sin, that thorough malice to the word it self, do come unto them to hear
them, not to learn, but to trap and entangle them; not to edify themselves,
but to misreport and accuse them; not to receive profit, but to find occasion
to persecute them, as the Jews did with Christ and his Apostles, who came not
to hear them, but to tempt them; not to believe them, but to belie them. Many
such Jews and Iudasses we meet withal in our days, who are so far from
rejoicing the hearts of their Ministers, that they may do the work of their
calling will ingly, not grudgingly; cheerfully, not heavily; Heb. 13, 17.
with joy, not with greefel; that they think it a great duty done unto them,
if they do not disgrace them, or molest them: It is a great sin not to help
them, not to countenance them, not to stand with them in good causes, but to
suffer every base companion, and beastly liver, to insult upon them as their
footstool: but it is more grievous to scorn them, and deride them, to make
them their Table-talke, and their Tauern-talke, to declaime against them from
the Tribunal of their Ale-bench: but it is most fearful of all, to come to
them, to catch them, and entrap them; to hunt after words and Syllables, and to
wrest them against the mind and meaning of the speaker. Let us beware of these
sins, let us not be in the number of such as are set down in the seat of
scorners, and false accusers. If they shall not escape that do no good, if they
shall not be excused that do not rejoice them; surely, they shall be guilty of
a sorer and seuerer punnishment that malice them, that mock them, that
misinforme others of them, and every way misuse them, and contemn them.

Use 4.
Lastly, seeing we are all bound to rejoice in the proceeding of the faithful,
it follows from hence necessarily, that we are not to envy and repine at
the growth of the Church, or of any member of the Church. This is a great fault
and folly in many, when they see any parts of the Church flourish, and behold
greater increase in others then in themselves, by and by they grudge and repine
at it, and have their own eye evil, because the Lords eye is good. These are
like to those Laborers, that were hired into the Vineyard, who when they saw
such as were hired about the eleauenth hour to receive their penny, and to be
made equal with them, who had borne the brunt and burden of the day, 1 Mat.
28, 20, 11.
and had endured the heat and sweat of the work, they envied at the Servants,
and murmured against the Master of the house. We must envy no man's good, we
must repine at no man's Salvation. The calling and conversion of the Gentiles,
Acts 11, 3. and 15, 1.
was such a stumbling-blocke in the way, and n Mote; nay, a Beam in the eyes
of the Jews, that they had rather renounce the Gospel, and depart from
Christ, then to receive them into a fellowshippe of the same Faith, and make
them partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven. So did the Scribes and Pharisees
Math. 9, 11. Luke 7, 39.
take it grievously, that the grace of God, and Remission of sins, and the
Mysteries of Salvation, should be preached and published to Publicans and
Sinners. There is no gift or benefit bestowed upon any, but it is given for
the good and comfort of the whole Church, so that we should rejoice therein,
not repine thereat, forasmuch as we have our portion and profit in it.
Nevertheless, what is more common and usual, then to make the blessings of
God upon others, a great eyesore unto our selves? Such as are dull and
backe-ward themselves, cannot abide those that are forward: They that are
ignorant, think all others to have too much knowledge: They that are cold and
slothful in the matters of God, do carpe and cavil at the zeal which they
see in others, and think them to be too hasty, too earnest, too praecise.
Hence it is, that oftentimes the Husband checketh the Wife; the Father
controuleth the Son; and one Friend tebuketh another, as running too fast,
and shooting beyond the mark. Howsoever this is not greatly to be feared in
our days, wherein few run at all, and many stand still, wherein few shoot
at the mark; yet if it were so, it is better to be a little too forward, then
to be too backward; to have a little too much zeal, then to be stark cold, as
many; or lukewarm as the most are. We see this in the state of a man's body,
it is easier to work an euacuation of that which is too much, then to procure
a restitution of that which is too little. It is an easier cure to purge our
gross and superfluous humors when they abound, then to repair and restore
Nature when it is decaying and consuming. It is much easier to take away the
sharpness of an edge tool, then to set a sharp edge on that which is blunt and
dulled. It is easier to pull down a part of the building which is overmuch,
then to lay a new foundation. If there be one among us that seeks to be too
just, and aymeth at a righteousness above the Law, there are a thousand that
come too short, and fail in that which is required of them. It is a most
blessed thing to keep the Golden mean between too much and too little. It is
easier to bring him that is in the excess to the mean, then to reduce him to
the mean, that is in the defect. When a man lies dead in sins and
trespasses, and has no spark of the life of God in him, to bring such an one
to true godliness, is, as it were, to raise him from the dead. When a man
lies languishing and consuming by little and little, and all good things begin
to decay in him, so that he is grown stark cold; nothing is harder then to
restore such a one; it is as much as to work a wonder and miracle. But when
our zeal is grown to be a little too hot, and our edge made somewhat too
sharp, it requires no great labor, it asks no great pains to reduce us
back again, and to make us return home the way by which we went. There is no
cause therefore, that we should so rashly and out-ragiously bear our selves
toward those that climb up a step too high, and bear themselves a little too
forward: let us rather examine our selves, and consider whether we do not our
selves many ways fail of our duties; so that we may say, and say truly, we
are unprofitable servants. Let us never envy or grudge at the good of others,
remembering always, that what grace soever is granted to one member, is given
to the whole body, and to every particular member of the body; As he that
does good to the eye, does good to the whole body, and the benefit redowndeth
to the hand and foot. Thus it is in the mystical body of Christ, Romans 12, 5.
We being many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one another Members.
We see in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 11, 18.
when the Disciples had heard, that Peter was called and warned by an Heavenly
Vision, to preach to Cornelius, and other Gentiles, they held their peace, and
glorified God, saying; Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance
unto life. Thus much of the Joy and Thanksgiving of the Apostle; Now let us
see to whom he gave thanks, set down in the next words.

[ I give thanks to my God.] Here is the first illustration of the Apostles
Thanksgiving, declaring to whom it is made, to wit; to God. The Apostle
giving Thanks, and praising God, he calls him, his God. He says not
simply, I give thanks to God, but particularly; I give thanks to my God. He
calls him his God, and applies the promises of the gospel made to all that
believe peculiarly and especially to himself. Doctrine 2. It is the nature of
faith, to apply the promises and mercies of God to our own selves
Whereby we see for our instruction, that the nature and property of a true and
lively faith, is, to aprehend and apply God and his promises particularly to
our selves. It is a duty required of us, to labor for that faith which may be
as an hand to lay hold on the mercies of God, and to appropriate them unto our
selves. This we see in the vow of Jacob, Genesis 28, 21.
If God will be with me, and will keep me in this iourny which I go, and will give
me Bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so that I come again unto my Fathers
house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God. This special application we see
oftentimes in David, Psalm. 22. 1. and 104, 1.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And again, O Lord my God thou art
exceeding great. The same appears in Thomas, one of the twelve; when Christ
(who will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax) had
respect to the weakness of his Faith, and bad him see the print of the Nails
in his hands, and put his Finger into his side, he cried out, John 20, 28.
Thou art my Lord and my God. This Christ practices himself, and teaches
others, when he said to Mary, John 20, 17.
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my Brethren,
and say unto them; I ascend unto my Father, and to your Father; and unto my
God, and to your God. The Apostle Paul, speaking of Christ, and the benefits
which he reapeth by him, says, Gal. 2, 20.
I am crucified with Christ, but I live, yet not I any more, but Christ lives
in me: and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the son of
God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. And in another place, 1 Timothy
1, 12.
I thank him which has made me strong, that is, Christ our Lord, for he
counted me faithful, and put me in his service. All these consents of the holy
Scriptures, serves to confirm us in this truth, that true Faith stands in a
particular applying of the general promises of the Gospel.

Reason 1.
The Reasons will make this yet more manifest unto us. For first, every one
that shall be saved, must have a particular Faith of his own, and not
satisfy himself with the Faith of another. No man can be saved by another
man's believing, no more then be nourished by another man's feeding. The Prophet
Habbakuk teaches this point evidently, saying; Hab. 2, 4.
The just shall live by his own Faith. Faith is the work of the Spirit in the
heart of man, so that if it must be in the hearts of every one of us, it
follows that it must be special.

Reason 2.
Secondly, true Faith gives sound comfort, and works peace with God; this is
the property of that Faith which we must have in us. But comfort comes unto
us, by hearing of a promise made to others, not belonging to our selves. What
consolation of heart can this work in us, to know that others shall be saved?
This the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 6. God willing more abundantly He. 6, 17, 18
to show unto the heirs of promise, the stablenesse of his counsel, bound
himself by an Oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible
that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, which have our refuge to
lay hold upon that hope that is set before us. No man receives comfort by the
riches of another, himself being poor: or by the honor of another, himself
living in disgrace: can so no man can feel any comfort by the Faith of
another, so long as he wants Faith himself, to apply Christ unto himself.
Seeing then, that every man must attain to salvation by his own faith, which
is able to minister comfort unto him in the time of need, we see that Faith
consists in applying the mercies of God unto our own selves.

Use 1.
The Uses of this Doctrine are now to be considered and stood upon, that so
we may understand how to apply this applying of Faith unto our selves. First,
this confirms the form and manner of speech, used in the Articles of Faith,
wherein every one is taught to say; I believe in God; Not, We believe in God.
For howsoever we are to pray for others as well as for our selves, and are
taught to say; Our Father which art in Heaven; yet, when the question is of our
Faith, we must say, not [ We beleeue] but [ I believe.] We pray for others,
but we believe for our selves. The like is to be said of every principle of
Faith, every man must hold them all, and believe them all. This overthrows
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which teaches a general and implicit
Faith to be sufficient for us, to Justification and Salvation. For they teach,
if a man can say, I believe as the Church believes, though he know not how or
what the Church believes, though he understand nothing, though he be able to
apply nothing unto himself, he has a good faith, and by that faith may be
saved.

Answereable to this Divinity, Bellar. de iustif. lib. 1. cap. 7.
are the Jesuits and Schoole-mens damnable and devilish positions, which
maintain; that the people are not bound to know what the matters of Faith be;
that ignorance is better then the knowledge of them; that they need not
enquire after them; and that Faith is better defined by ignorance, then by
knowledge. Hence it is, that they commend the Colliars Faith, Apol. translated
by Staplet. part 1. page 53
who (as the tale is told) being at the point of death, and tempted of the
Devil what his Faith was? Aunsweared, I believe and die in the faith of
Christ's Church; but being again demanded, what the faith of Christ's Church
was, that faith (said he) that I believe in: and thus the devil getting no
other answer, was overcome and put to flight. This fable has been so long
told and related among them, that now themselves begin to believe it to be a
truth; as a liar by often telling an untruth, begins to think it may be a
true tale. This Colliars faith is the popish Creed, which being founded in
ignorance, is too weak a shield to quench the fiery Darts of the Devil, and
to resist his tentations. Thus true faith is suppressed, and ignorance is set
on foot by these ignorant Teachers, who as they are blind themselves, so
they would put out the eyes of others. They require no knowledge of the things
we pray for, Rhem. annot. on 1 Cor. 14. and on Luke 12, 11.
but prefer ignorance: they require no ability to profess the particular
points of our faith, but in gross and general. This ignorance is plentifully
condemned in the Scriptures. We are taught, Col. 3. 16. 1 Pet. 3, 15.
that the word must dwell plentifully in us, and that we must be able to give
an account of the hope that is in us, to them that shall require an answer of
us. We are taught Math. 22, 29 Romans 15, 4 Hebr. 5, 11. John 5, 39.
that ignorance is the Mother of all evil, the root of all error, the cause
of all unbelief, and that whatsoever things are written before hand, were
written for our learning, that we might have comfort and believe.

Thus do these enemies of God and his people, take from them their sword when
they should go to fight, and strip them of their Armor when they should enter
the battle; like Thieves, that put out the Candle which serves to discover
them. To conclude, let us know that an ignorant faith is no faith, for where
there is no knowledge, there can be no faith. But such as live in the Church
of Rome, being blindly led of blind Teachers, do know nothing to their
comfort, they have the key of Knowledge taken from them, they are nuzled and
encouraged in ignorance, they hear it magnified and extolled unto the skies.
Some of them pretend the reading of the Scriptures in the mother tongue, and in
the translation that all may understand, to be a principal cause of heresy.
Another shameth not to avouch, that it was the invention of the Devil, to
permit the people to read the Bible. Another blusheth not to write, that he
knew certain men possessed of a Devil, because being but Husbandmen, they
were able to discourse of the Scriptures. They teach, that it is Heresy for a
Layman to dispute in a point of faith. These men speak not by the spirit of
God, but utter the Devils language, and instruct the people in the Colliars
Creed. It is written of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3, 15.
that he was trained up of a child in the knowledge of the Mysteries of
Religion. It is written, Deuteronomy. 29, 29
that the things revealed, belong to us and to our children. In former times,
the Doctrines of godliness, and several points of religion, were known of
all, and the lowest of the people reasoned of them, Chryso. hom. 3 in Lazarum.
Aug. tract. 21. in Ioh.
and their Bishops exhorted the^ thereunto; asking why they are uttered, if
they may not be known? Why they have sounded, if they may not be heard? And
wherefore are they heard, but that we should understand them?

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing it is the very form of faith to receive and apply: this
teaches, that it is not enough for men to have an hystorical faith to believe
those things to be true which the word teaches, touching God, Christ, Faith,
Eternal life, and such like; but we must apply them to our own hearts, and
have a particular faith of them: otherwise, we may be sent to School to learn
faith of the Devils, who go so far. And howsoever some may think it to be a
very gross and homely comparison, to compare men to the Devils, yet if we
examine the faith and practice of wicked and carnal men, we shall easily
perceive, not only that the Devils are equal unto them, but do go many
degrees before them. For first, the Devils understand the Law and the Gospel:
They know the end of the one, and the use of the other: They give assent to the
Covenant of Grace that it is true, they know that it is certain and sure, and
that God will give remission of sins, and the glory of immortality to the
members of his Church. They know the Person, the Natures, the Offices of
Christ. They know that all things spoken in the Scripture shall be performed.
This appears in the confession which they make in many places of the Gospel
concerning Christ, Mark 1, 24. and 3. 11 Luke 4, 41.
I know thee what thou art, even that holy one of God; thou art the son of
God, thou art that Christ. And the Apostle James, speaking of such as gloried
in a false faith, but wants the true Faith, says; Thou beleeuest that there
is one God, thou dooest well: James 2, 19.
the Devils also believe it, and tremble. He sets down a chief point of
Religion which the Devils believe, concerning the unity of the Godhead; and
this faith of the Devil, is not to be restrained to this one principal point,
but it stretches to the whole Doctrine of faith: so that he sets down
expressly this one ground and foundation, instead of the whole body of
Christianity. For the Devils do not only believe that there is one God, who
has created all things, and governs all things, and shall judge all the
world; but that there is one Christ, one Savior, one Redeemer. And this is a
sure reason that they know this great Mystery of godliness, God manifest in
the flesh, because they seek to overthrow, destroy, and deface it by contrary
errors. But how many are there among the sons of men, that take themselves
to be great Christians, and think they are better then the Devils that know
not these things? Are there not many that are among us, and live in the bosom
of the Church, who would defy them that should charge them to come behind the
Devils, and yet know not the Doctrine of the Trinity, the person of Christ, the
union of his Natures, the end of the Law, the Sacraments of the Church, the
Covenant of the Gospel, the Nature of Faith, the Justification of a Sinner,
and the way of salvation?

Again, the Apostle teaches, not only that the Devils believe the things that
are written in the scripture, but likewise that they tremble at the Judgments
of God contained in the scripture. They know the promise of the Gospel, they
hear of remission of sins, they believe there is in eternal life which the
blessed of the Father shall inherit, but they feel no joy in it, they receive
no comfort by it, they are never a whit delighted with it, because they know
themselves separated from it, and to be reserved for the wrath to com; as we
find it uttered of the Devils through the mouth of the possessed, Math. 8, 29.
Why art thou come to torment us before our time? Whereby they acknowledge,
that they looked for ^he accomplishment of threatenings, and the feeling of
torments, but they would have the time prolonged and put off so long a^ they
could: And we see that they believe all matters of Faith to be true, but ^y
are not persuaded, nor cannot believe, that they pertain any thing at all unto
them: They have no hope of mercy, they have no assurance of pardon, they have
no expectation of salvation. Now, as they believe that the promises of God do
not concern them, so they know that the threatenings of God shall certainly come
upon them, and that eternal torments are prepared for them, which is the cause
of their fear and trembling. But how many wicked men are there that live in
sensuality, and are drowned in security. They are resolved to lie still in sin,
and yet consider not what hangs over their heads. Tell the Devils of their
estate wherein they stand, and they tremble; Tell the ungodly of their
condition, they are careless. The Devils in remembrance of Judgments,
despair; the ungodly presume. The Devils are constrained to confess that God
is just, the ungodly wash it away and say; tush God is merciful. Thus does
Satan besot and bewitch the Reprobate, and teaches them a lesson which he
could never learn himself; namely, that Gods word is not all true, and that
the threatenings there pronounced, shall not fall upon them, and therefore we
see, such as are taught and reproved by the Ministry of the word, either to be
as senseless blocks not moved at all with them, or as open blasphemers,
reuiling and railing at the word. These are notable and forward Scholars, and
have profited deeply in the Devils School, they are grown to be more cunning
then their Master, and have out-gone him in their profession, and therefore
they must be as near condemnation as he. This faith then to believe that part
of Gods word, which consists in believing Gods vengeance and threatenings is
hardly to be found among the ungodly, and therefore the faith of the Devils is
more perfect; which should teach us to labor that our faith may exceed and go
beyond the Devils, and that we may seek to apply the merciful promises of
God to our selves, and so to find comfort in them, which the Devils want. We
must not only say, Christ gave himself, but he gave himself for me; It is not
enough to say he loves man, but he loves me; he is a Savior, but he is my
Savior; he is a Redeemer, but he is my Redeemer; he forgiueth sins, but he
forgiueth me my sins. It is not enough to say, he saved others; but we must
say, he saves me: he is not only the God of others, but he is my God, and my
Lord. This was the comfort that David felt, when he says; Psalm. 18, 2.
The Lord is my Rock and my Fortress, my God, and my strength, my shield,
the horn of my salvation, and my refuge. It is the tenor of the Covenant that
God made with Abraham, and all believers, Genesis 17. 7.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. If then God have promised this
mercy, and spoken peace unto our Consciences, saying to every faithful
person, I will be thy God; why should not every believer take hold of this,
and say; The Lord shall be my God, as I am one of his people? This is not to
offer injury to other men, or to make him peculiar to our selves, but to leave
him the same to others, that he is to us, as every man enjoys the light of
the Sun, without excluding others from the use thereof.

Use 3.
Lastly, we learn that it is no Doctrine of pride and presumption, to teach
assurance, confidence, and certainty of Faith, that every one should believe
that God is his God, that Christ is his Savior, that the Holy Ghost is his
sanctifier, that forgiveness of sins, and eternal life, shall be given
unto him. If we believe not this, we believe nothing; if we deny this, or doubt
of this, all our Faith is in vain. For, as we pray for the forgiveness of
our own sins, so we must believe the forgiveness of our own sins. The
promises of the Gospel are general, these we are to know do belong to us,
and therefore must take them as spoken to us. It is promised Josh. 1 5.
to Joshua imediately after the death of Moses, that God would not leave him,
nor forsake him. This the Apostle applies and makes it common to all the
faithful, whom he charge to have their conversation without covetousness,
Heb. 13, 5.
seeing it is written, That God will not leave them nor forsake them. God
commands us to call upon him with promise to hear us, Psalm. 50, 15, and 4, 3.
Call upon me, and I will hear thee. This was the comfort of David, and the
assurance that he had; When I call upon the Lord, he will hear him. Christ
our Savior gives us encouragement to prayer, because John 14. 13 1 John 5, 14
Whatsoever we ask in his name, that will he do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. Hence it is that John says; This is the assurance
that we have of him, that whatsoever we ask according to his will, he hears
us; And if we know that he hears us, we know we have the petitions which we
ask of him. When Christ said to the poor distressed man in the Gospel: If
thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes. He answered,
Mark 9, 24
Lord I believe, help mine unbelief. So says the Prophet, Psalm. 116, 16 and
119, 125.
Behold Lord, I am thy servant; I am thy servant, o give me understanding that
I may keep thy Commandments, etc. The Lord says generally, John 3. 15. Math.
28.
Whosoever believes shall be saved. Hence the Apostle infers this
particular to the Iailor, Acts 16, 32.
Believe thou, and thou shall be saved. When God says, Psalm. 27. 8.
Seek ye my face; the voice of the faithful does return and rebound this
back again; Thy face Lord I will seek. God by his new Covenant binds
himself to the heirs of promise, saying; Ier. 31, 33. Esaias 25, 9.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people; whereupon they are emboldned
to say; Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us, we
will rejoice and be joyful in his salvation. God says unto us, I am thy
salvation; our heart again with unspeakable comfort inwardly ministered,
answeareth; Thou art my God. So then, when we say aright we believe in God the
Father, it is as much as to say; I believe that God is my God, and I have
assurance and trust in him for my salvation. And to believe that God is my God,
is to believe that he is my life, my peace, my deliverance, my salvation; not
only that he is these things in himself, and in his own nature; not only
that he is these things to other men, that trust in him, and depend upon him,
but that he is indeed the same to me, that his mercy does compass me, his
power defend me, his providence watch over me, and his favor keep and preserve
me to himself in life and death. For there are many degrees of faith, Credere
deum: Credere Deo: credere in Deu^.
one step is to believe that God is; the second step, is to believe God, that
is, to give credit to him, that al his words which he has spoken, and the
promises which he has made, are true; the third step, is to believe in God,
which requires trust in God, according to his word and promise, being firmly
resolved, that he will do whatsoever he has said. Thus it is required of us to
do in every Article of Faith, in every promise of Mercy, in every word of
grace offered unto us: we must by a special faith receive it, and apply it.
Objection.
If such a faith be required, the question may be asked, how Infants can be
saved, that cannot have this faith of their own, and therefore it seems they
must be saved by their Parents faith? Answer.
I answer, that the faith of Parents does bring the Infants to have a Title
and interrest in the Covenant of grace, and in all the benefits of Christ; but
it cannot apply the merits of Christ's death, his obedience, his righteousness
unto the Infant. For this the Believer and faithful Parent does only to
himself, and to no other; but the merrites and satisfaction of Christ, and
ingrafting into his body, are wrought by some special and secret working of
the Holy Ghost unto us unknown, but effectual to the Infant, and comfortable
to the Parent, albeit it be not done by his faith: and therefore this, that men
are justified by a special faith, holds to be true in men of years and
discretion, not in Infants and children, who are justified and saved by an
extraordinary woorking of Gods spirit, John 3, 8.
Like the wind which blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whether it goes: so is
every man that is borne of the Spirit.

Objection.
Again, sometimes the dear children of God fail in this special faith, and
want this particular application; they are not able to say, God is my God;
Christ is my Savior. Answer.
I answer, this falls out indeed sometimes in the tentations of Satan, and
in the infirmities of the flesh, so that they have not a feeling of Gods mercy
toward them, but even then they cease not to believe. We must live by faith,
not by feeling. A man may have life in him, though the sick man in extremity
do not know it, or feel it: so may faith be in us, in some great tentation,
albeit we feel it not present. David lost and wanted this feeling, Psalm. 151.
when he prayed God to create in him a clean heart, and to renew a right
spirit within him. But was it utterly lost? No, for he says; Take not away thy
Spirit from me. In this case, it shall be good for us, to remember the former
mercies of God toward us, and consider how he has dealt with us; and thereby
assure our hearts, that howsoever God for a season withholds the light of his
countenance from us, yet he will restore us to the joy of his salvation, as we
see in the example of the Prophet; he could not in his trouble receive any true
comfort, Psa. 77, 5, 11
for howsoever he did think upon the Lord, he was still troubled, and though
he prayed unto him, yet his spirit was full of anguish; the help then which
he found in his present distress, was this; Then I considered the days of
old, and the years of ancient time: I called to remembrance my song in the
night, I remembered the works of the Lord, certainly I remembered thy wonders of
old. So when we feel not that comfort and delight in praying that we felt,
we must not wax faint and give over, we must continue in the Prayer of faith,
though not of feeling.

[ Making mention always of thee in my Prayers.] This is the second
circumstance whereby the Thanksgiving of the Apostle is amplified, wherein he
witnesses, that he usually prayed for Philemon, and others. Doctrine 3. It is
the duty of the faithful to pray one for another.
In this practice of the Apostle we learn, that the faithful are to pray one
for another. It is a duty required for all of us, not only to pray for our
selves, but to pray for others, especially for those whose piety is known unto
them. This we see plentifully proved and confirmed in the example of Abraham:
he prayed for the Sodomites that they might be spared; he prayed for Abimilech,
that he might be healed. When the people desired Samuel to pray for them, he
said, 1 Samuel 12, 23
God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for you.
This Paul performed for the Romans, To. 1, 9, 10.
God is my witness (whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of his Son)
that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my Prayers, beseeching
that by some means one time or other, I might have a prosperous iourny by the
will of God to come to you. Heerunto we are directed by that form of Prayer
which Christ taught his Disciples, and left unto his Church, directing us to
say, Our Father, give us, forgive us; lead us not, deliver us: Not My Father,
give me, forgive me, lead me not, deliver me. So the Apostle shutting up what
Armor a Christian must use against his spiritual enemies, he says; Ephesians.
6, 18.
Pray always with all manner Prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watch
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints; and for me,
that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly to publish
the secret of the Gospel. So he Colos. 1, 3. and 4. 3.
prayed for the Colossians, always since he heard of their faith in Christ,
and of their love toward all Saints: and he required the Prayers of the
Colossians again for himself, that God might open to him the door of
utterance, to speak the Mystery of Christ, for which he was in bonds. Thus the
Apostle James does teach us to deal one toward another; James 5, 14.
Is any sick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray for him, and anoint him with Oil in the name of the Lord, and the
Prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. All
which examples and Commandments, serve to guide us to the performaunce of
this special duty that we are charged and commanded to pray one for another,
and to be mindful one of another, in our best thoughts and most serious
Meditations.

Reason 1.
The Reasons hereof being rightly waighed, will easily gain our affections to
yield to this truth. For first, the Communion and fellowship that is among the
Saints, requires our Prayers one for another. We believe, that there is one
body, one head, one company, one inheritance, one Brotherhood, Ephesians. 4, 3.
as we see Ephesians. 4. Endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace; there is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of
your vocation; there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all. Now what Communion
were this among the members of Christ, unless we were straightly tied to pray
one for another, and to perform this mutual duty one for another? So that the
want of it, is a plain argument, that we are not members of the same body,
seeing we desire not the good of them.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is a most forcible weapon put into our hands, whereby we are made
able to help our selves, and the rest of our Brethren which are
fellow soldiers with us, all of us fighting under the same Captain, Jesus
Christ. Their fighting is our fighting; their retyring is our retyring; their
victory is our victory; their loosing of the field, is our loosing of the
field. For every one is not a Soldier by himself, but we are all
ioynt-souldiers together, we overcome together, and we are put to the foil
together. For even as soldiers do not only stand upon their several guards,
but unite their forces together, whereby it comes to pass, that they who
being severed assunder, and scattered abroad, might easily be overcome, having
joined their forces, are unconquerable and irresistable: so if we do not only
look to our selves, and our own footing, but join in Prayer with other, they
for us, and we for them, our spiritual enemies shall not be able to confront
us, or confound us, but we shall make them turn their backs to us, and their
faces from us. The Apostle Ephesians. 6, 18.
naming the Armor which we must all put on to defend our selves and our
Brethren, and to offend our enemy, does set down Prayer as a chief means to
obtain Gods assistance for our selves and others.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, Prayer is a Medicine to heal all maladies, and a Plaster to cure
all sores. What Physician is it that has such a receite? What Surgeon that
has such a salve? The Masters of that Art have several remedies for
sicknesses and diseases that come of contrary causes; but this Medicine will
take away all our spiritual greefes and infirmities; yea, albeit they proceed
of contrary causes. So then, it must needs be a sovereign Salve that serves
to such several purposes. This is it which the Apostle James points out unto
us, James 5, 16.
Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may
be healed: for the Prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent.
Seeing therefore we are as a body standing of many members, and seeing prayer
is a weapon to defend us, and a medicine to heal us: it follows, that we
must use it, one to help and succor another.

Use 1.
Now let us see what are the Uses. First, we learn, that the use of prayer,
both public and private, for our selves and others, is most necessary. It is
a special gift of the spirit, which is common to all, for all have not the
grace of Prayer. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2, 1.
I exhort that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men. The neglect of this is a note of a rank
Atheist, Psalm 53, 4.
who is described not to call upon God. Christ Jesus did oftentimes pray, he
was fervent and continual in it; he spent whole nights in Prayer. When he was
in his Agony, he prayed once, and again, and the third time. This condemns
those that are careless and negligent in the practice of this duty, that are
so covetous for themselves, that they can crave nothing for their Brethren. If
one member of the body should scrape all to it self, what would become of the
rest? Such are unnatural members, as take care only for themselves. These can
say the Lords Prayer, and rehearse the words, but their hearts are far from
the meaning and right understanding. They say, Lord give us our daily Bread,
that is, to me, and to my brethren; not to me alone; nor to them alone, but to
me, and to them; to these my Brethren, as well as to my self. These men are
liberal in words, bur covetous in mind; their mouths are opened and enlarged,
but their hearts are restrained and instraightned; they think they never have
enough, and that their Brethren have too much. They are far from giving
thanks unto God for them, who repine at every morsel that they eat, and at
every blessing that they enjoy.

Use 2.
Secondly, we learn that the weakest and meanest in the Church are not to be
despised and contemned, inasmuch as they may by their prayers and other means
help the strongest and the greatest. The Apostle teaches, that God has so
framed the members of the body, 1 Cor. 12, 21, 22.
That the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head
again to the feet, I have no need of you; yea, much rather those members of
the body, which seem to be feeble, are necessary. The strongest stand in need
of the help of the weakest; the greatest, of the meanest; the highest, of the
lowest; the richest, of the poorest; the Prince, of the people. All mankind are
so created, as that they are not perfect of themselves, but every one wants
the aid of another. One Nation stands in need of another, no Country
yields all commodities. No man has all the gifts of Nature, but some one,
some have others. We see it even among the brute beasts, such as are excellent
in craft, and mighty in strength, yet have their wants together with their
wiles, and their maimes joined with their great might. The Fox is subtle to
keep himself from snares, yet he is weak to guard himself from Wolves: on
the other side, the Lion is strong enough to guard himself from Wolves, but he
is not subtle enough to keep himself from nets. We have not all things
requisite and necessary for us, we have not all properties to be commended: we
run into many dangers, from whence the meanest may help to deliver the
mightiest. So then, seeing we are enjoined to pray one for another, and thereby
may help one another, let us know, that we must despise no man, reproach no
man, hate no man, but consider that at one time or other, we may want the help
and hand of him. This does the Wiseman point unto, Eccl. 9, 14, 15.
when he mentions a little City, and few men in it, and a great King came
against it, compassed it about, and builded forts against it: and there was
found therein a poor and Wiseman, and he delivered the City by his wisdom.
And we have a notable example hereof, in the siedge of Abell by Ioab, a wise
woman cried out of the City, and moved him to return from the assault. We
see how forcible the prayers of Abraham were to move the Lord to spare the
Genesis 18.
Sodomites, if ten righteous persons had been found in the City. Thus God
testifyeth, that he was restrained by the Prayers of Moses, and (as it were)
Exodus 32, 10
tied with bands, that he was not able to destroy the people. Let us therefore
make much one of another, and let no man hate his Brother in his heart, but
know, that his prayers avail with God for him. We see the Prayers of the
Church profited Peter much, though he were an Apostle, Acts 12.
for thereby he was delivered out of prison, and from the danger of death, by
the Ministry of an Angel. So they profit us, if they be faithful and seruent.

Use 3.
Lastly, it is our duty to entreat the mutual Prayers one of another. We heard
before, how all the people prayed Samuel to pray for them: So did the people
come to Moses, and entreat this duty of him, Number. 21, 7.
that they might be delivered from the fiery Serpents. The Apostle is
oftentimes earnest in requiring this at the Churches hands, Romans 15, 30
Brethren, I beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the spirit, that ye would strive with me by prayers to God for me. When we are
poor, and can do our Brethren no other good, yet may we benefit them by our
Prayers. When we see our Brethren in necessity, in danger, in affliction, in
persecution, in sickness, and in great misery; when we have no hand to help
them, no power to deliver them, no means to succor them, no favor to speak
for them; yet, we have hearts to lift up for them to God, the Father of all
mercies, and the God of all consolation, and by praying unto him for them, we
shall do them much good, give them much comfort, minister unto them much help,
and procure unto them speedy deliverance. This shall be more available and
profitable unto them, then all other means of help and succor, used for
their safety without this. Let such as are of the greatest gifts earnestly
crave and call for the prayers of those that have lesser and smaller gifts.
This reproves such as never regard them, nor require them, that think they
have no need of them, nor know the necessity of them. It is all one to these
men, whether they be prayed for, or not; whom God no doubt does oftentimes
cross in the works of their hands, that they do not prosper, because they make
no account of the Churches Prayers. It reprooueth such also, as regard not the
public assemblies of the faithful, and the meeting of the Congregation of
Christ in one place, where Prayers are made for the Church, where praises are
sung, and thanks are rendered for the blessings of God; yea, heaven and earth
are made to ring and rebound with sounding out his glory, as it were with the
voice of one man. All our Churches for the most part on the Lords day, assemble
at one hour, we come together at one time, a blessed hour, a blessed time;
the best hour, the best time in the whole Week. O, how should we love it;
how should we desire it, how should we delight in it? Then do we pray for the
Church, then the Church prays for us: then are we mindful of our Brethren,
then are our Brethren likewise mindful of us, then is God mindful of us all.
Then we call upon God for his Saints, then do the Saints upon the earth call
upon God for us, then does GOD hear us all, both them and us; them for us,
and us for them. This is a sweet Harmony and pleasant agreement, when we do
thus with one mind, and with one mouth glorify God, and with a feeling of
Gods mercy, can cry out, Psalm. 84, 1, 2
O Lord of Hoasts, how amiable are thy Tabernacles? My soul longs, yea, and
faints for the Courts of the Lord, for mine heart, and my flesh rejoice in
the living God. On the other side, great is their wickedness and profaneness,
that do not affect such times of public Prayers: they show themselves to be
beastly minded, and led^ with the wicked Spirit of the Devil into all
abominations: neither may such look to find any benefit, or feel any
comfort by the Prayers and supplications in those places, and at such holy
times powered out. It is a great privilege belonging only to the faithful, to
have right and interrest in the Churches Prayers. It is not so with the wicked,
so long as they abhor such meetings, which are the most fruitful seasons,
when God with a gracious dew does rain upon his inheritance, they are as
barren trees, and as withered branches that are reserved for the fire of Gods
vengeance, and heavy indignation. This is it which the Prophet says, Psalm.
129, 8.
They which go by shall not say, the blessing of the Lord be upon you, or, We
bless you in the name of the Lord. So long therefore, as they remain in this
contempt of God, and of his Religion, the prayers of the Church shall not
avail them. 3.
Lastly, it reproves such as neglect this duty, and whereas they should pray
for others, do curse and ban them, and wish all evil to come upon them. The
Prophet Jeremy complains, that he had neither bought nor sold among that
contentious people, Ier. 15, 10.
and yet every one did curse him. These men love cursing, and therefore it shall
come upon themselves, and enter into their souls: and as they love not
blessing, so it shall be far from them. We are commanded Math. 5, 44,
to love in stead of hating, to do good instead of hurting, to pray instead of
persecuting, and to bless insteade of Curssing. But of this Doctrine, we have
spoken more at large Upon the exposition of Numb. 21.
elsewhere, and therefore will I here pass it over, and proceed unto that
which follows.

Verse 5. [ When I hear of thy love and Faith which thou have toward the
Lord Jesus, and toward all Saints.] In these words, the former Thanksgiving
is amplified by another circumstaunce, containing the cause wherefore the
Apostle gave thanks to his God for him, and did make mention of him in his
Prayers, because he had heard by the report of the Brethren, how great Faith
and Love were in him. Herein we have these particulars to be considered;
First, he reduces the principal points of salvation to two heads, Faith,
and Love. In these stands the happiness of the godly: by these, a Christian
man is perfected, for they are the chief graces of the Holy Ghost. Secondly,
he begins with [ Love,] and places it before [ Faith.] Faith, indeed is
more precious, but it is inward and hidden in the heart, and in Nature and
order goes before Love: but he first names [ Loue] because it is better
known to us, better seen of us, and is as the Touchstone to try our Faith.
For though the cause be more worthy then the effect, yet the effect is more
perspicuous and manifest: so Faith being the cause of works, is more excellent,
but Love as an effect is more evident. Thirdly, we see, that albeit Faith be
set in the last place, for the reason rendered before, yet Faith is first
defined, and so the order somewhat inuerted. Now, it is described and declared
by his Object, that it respects Christ Jesus. Last of all, he defines love,
which he aplieth to the Saints, albeit it extend to Infidels, to reprobrates,
to profane enemies, whom also we are to love, yet a special manner of love is
due to the Saints, which are members of the same body with us. For even as God
loves all mankind, and all the works of his hand, who as he created them, so
he preserves them, feeds them, gives them fruitful seasons, fills their
hearts with joy and gladness, and makes his Sun to shine upon them, and the
rain to fall upon them, to make them without excuse: but he loves his Church
with a special love, not only giving them temporal blessings, but such as do
accompany salvation; the one, he loves as his creatures; the other, both as
his creatures, and his Children: so are we to love all mankind as our own
flesh, but not in an equal degree with the faithful, who are tied together in
a straighter band, because there is not mutual love between the godly and
ungodly, neither do they grow up into one body. But the godly are charged to
love one anoth^* and they are made the members of Christ, and heirs with us of
eternal life; and therefore, love is especially and principally to be showed
to the Saints, that is, unto the Elect, which ought to be above all the
creatures in the world dear unto us, Why the elect are called Saints.
who are called Saints for two causes; First, because they are purged and
cleansed from their sins by the blood of Christ; Secondly, because they are
framed and fashioned by the spirit of God to an holy life, and godly profession
and conversation. Thus much touching the order and interpretation of the words.
Now let us see what doctrines arise from hence for our instruction and
edification.

[ When I heard of thy Love and Faith.] The Apostle does not say here that he
saw and beheld, or was an eyewitness of the Faith and fruits of the faith of
Philemon, but that he heard of them by the report of the Brethren. Paul at
this time (as we have showed) lived at Rome, and Philemon dwelled at Colosse
(many Miles distant the one from the other) yet his faith was published, and
his love manifested throughout the whole world, which necessarily infers,
that he openly professed them, and made it known what religion he was of. For
if Philemon had not showed boldly his faith, and witnessed a good confession
before many witnesses, it had been impossible, that Paul being so far from
him, should have heard of it. Doctrine 4. True religion must be openly
confessed and professed.
Hereby we learn, that faith and the fruits thereof must be openly
professed. True Religion, must not only be inwardly believed, and in the
heart acknowledged, but must outwardly be confessed and professed in the world
before men. We see this in Daniell, and the three Children, he was cast into
the Lions den, they into the hot fiery furnace, because they thought it not
sufficient to worship God closely and secretly in their hearts, but publicly
declared what God they served, and what religion they embraced. The Apostle
writing to the Hebrews, calls Christ Jesus Heb. 3, 1. and 10, 23. and 13, 15.
the High Priest of our profession, that is, of the truth which we profess
and believe. And afterward he says, Let us keep the profession of our faith
without wuuering. And again, Let us by him offer the sacrifice of praise
always to God, that is, the fruit of the lips which confess his name. This
duty of acknowledging and confessing the truth, have all the servants of God
practiced and made conscience of from the beginning, giving witness to God and
his truth. When the Apostles were conuented before the counsel, they did not
hide their faith, but said, Acts 4, 8. 19 20. and 5, 30.
Ye Rulers of the people, and elders of Israel, forasmuch as we this day are
examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, to wit, by what means he
is made whole; be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that
by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye have crucified, whom God
raised again from the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you
whole. And when they were charged to ho de their peace, and to speak or teach
no more in the Name of Jesus, they aunsweared; Whether it be right in the
sight of GOD, to obey you rather then GOD, judge ye; for we cannot but speak
the things which we have seen and heard. The Apostle Paul uses this
boldness of speech before Felix, Acts 24, 14, 15.
I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I
the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law, and
in the Prophets, etc. And as the Apostle himself practiced this duty, so
Timothy is commended and praised by him for the same, 1 Timothy 6, 12 13.
Fight the good fight of Faith, lay hold of eternal life, whereunto thou art
also called, and have professed a good profession before many witnesses,
wherein also he followed the steps and example of Jesus Christ, which under
Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession. All these, as a clowd of witnesses,
serve to confirm us in the assured truth of this doctrine, that God requires
this duty of us to confess his word boldly, to manifest our faith openly, to
show our Religion publickely, that so we may confess before the Lord his
loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men.

Reason 1.
And howsoever these Testimonies may serve and suffice for the strengthening
thereof, yet it shall appear more plain and evident unto us, if we weigh the
Reasons. First, the profession of our faith has a great promise of a rich
reward joined with it, and added unto it; and the starting back from it as a
deceitful bow, has a sore threatening of a grievous curse following after it.
It is that which our Savior teaches his Disciples, whom he sent out as Sheep
among Wolves, and foretells them of afflictions and persecutions that should
be raised against them, Math. 10, 32 23. Mark 8, 38. Luke 9, 26. and 12, 8.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father which is in Heaven; and whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. It is an hard matter to stand
when the storm falls, and to confess Christ in time of danger, when
persecuters arise, and enemies show themselves; but the earnest consideration
of this, that Christ will confess us in the glory of his Father, and before
the Angels of God, will be a forcible means and motive, to put life and
courage into us, to enable us and persuade us to this practice. For what can be
more right and reasonable, and stand better with the Law of equity, then that
the servant should not fear to profess what Master he serves, who will
know him and confess him, when he is entered into his glory? If a Prince should
come to a man among a great company, and single him out by name; if he should
acknowledge him among a thousand others, and speak kindly unto him, it would
encourage him to live and die in his quarrel; even so, seeing Christ Jesus the
son of God, and the heir of al^ things, will at the last day do us this
honor, to confess us to be his own children, and give unto us the Crown of
glory; how should we be stirred up in love to him again, and strengthened in
the inward man to wax bold in the faith, and fervent in spirit, to give out a
clear Testimony before all the world, whose Servants we are, and in all
troubles to cleave unto him with full purpose of heart? On the other side, we
must be terrifyed from denying him, least he be ashamed of us, and deny us
before his Father which is in Heaven.

Reason 2.
Secondly, confession is a necessary fruit, and consequent of faith; where true
Faith is in the heart, there will follow confession with the mouth. This is it
which the Prophet speaks in his own experience, Psalm. 116, 10.
I believed, therefore did I speak, for I was sore troubled. This is made a
note of Faith, what it believes it speaks, albeit the confession of the
truth be accompanied with danger. And least any should imagine this to be
peculiar to the Prophet, and not common to others, the Apostle draws it
likewise unto himself, 2 Cor. 4, 13.
Because we have the same spirit of faith, according as it is written; I
believed, and therefore have I spoken: We also believe, and therefore speak.
He that is afraid to confess Christ, has no true faith; but he that believes
in him will not be ashamed of him and his Gospel.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the Faith of Christ's true Religion, is a most glorious thing,
containing in it the great praise and glory of Gods wisdom, power, mercy,
and righteousness, and it delivers the matter of man's salvation, and
eternal happiness. This was it that moved the Apostle to preach the Gospel
freely and boldly, Romans 1, 16.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes; to the Jew first, and also to the
Grecian. Seeing therefore, Christ has promised to confess us before his
Father; seeing faith is manifested and showed by confession; and lastly, seeing
the Gospel of Christ is the instrument of Gods power, to work in us
salvation; it follows, that the Religion of God, and the gospel of Christ,
must not only be believed in heart, and embraced in Judgments, but also be
confessed by the mouth, and professed in the practice of an holy life.

Objections answered.
Against this truth, somewhat may be objected. First, if true Religion must
openly be confessed, then such as are dumb and cannot speak, can have no
Religion: if Confession be a fruit of faith, then they must of necessity want
Faith, that want the use of the tongue. Answer.
I answer, the Doctrine must be understood of such, as have the use of the
tongue given them to glorify God. If God have given unto us the freedom of
speech, he requires this duty at our hands. If he have given us no more
then a sanctified and faithful heart, let us honor him with the holy
Meditations thereof, he will exact no more of us, then he has given unto us.
Hence it is, that the Prophet David says, or rather the Lord himself by the
Prophet. Psalm 81. Psalm. 81, 10.
Open thy Mouth wide, and I will fill it. In like manner it is said, Romans 10,
17
That Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the word of God, yet can God
extraordinarily give faith to those that are deaf, and have not their hearing,
who is not bound to the outward senses, nor tieth his graces to the outward
ears, but supplieth those wants by the working of his holy spirit, to the
endless comfort of such as have those infirmities.

Objection. 2
Again, the Apostle says, Romans 14, 22. Have thou Faith? Have it with thy
self before God. Where we see, he seems to say, that it is sufficient if we
have Faith inwardly in the heart, albeit no confession follow outwardly with
the mouth. Answer.
I answer, the Apostle in this place speaks of another thing; to wit, of a
persuasion touching Christian liberty in things indifferent: as if he should
say, Art thou strongly persuaded and assured, that all Meats are lawful to
Christians? Be it so; yet use it between God and thine own Conscience, and
hurt not thy Neighbor with it, nor offend thy weak Brother by it. This
serves nothing at all, to maintain a dumb Religion without open Confession,
which some would willingly bring in, considering (as one Tertullian.
says) that he which does dissemble faith, does deny it.

Objection. 3.
Lastly, it is Objected, that Religion is better to be concealed, that we may
give no offense unto others, and avoid the troubles that arises by
Confession. Answer.
I answer, that is no offense given to men, but a grievous sin committed
against God, who requires the profession of his truth. And the Apostle Paul
was ready to suffer bands, and imprisonment; yea, even death it self, for
the profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Thus much breefely shall
suffice, in answer of the Objections that are made.

Use 1.
Now, let us see and mark the Uses that arise from hence. First, we learn,
who are to be accounted true Christians, and true Believers, to wit; such as
show soorth their Faith by their Confession. It is not left to our own choice,
whether we will make a solemn and sound profession of the Faith, or not, no
more then it is at our liberty, whether we will believe or not, or whether
we will be saved or not. It is required of all, that belong to God, to
confess his name, and maintain his Religion. All men must confess, that
would be confessed before the Father. Christ Jesus will never bear and endure
that servant, which is ashamed of his service. The Prophet prophesying of the
Kingdom of Christ, and showing how they should grow and multiply as the grass
of the field, makes this as a fruit of their conversion to the Faith, Esaias
44, 5.
One shall say, I am the Lords: another shall be called by the name of Jacob:
and another, shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and name himself by
the name of Israel. This the Apostle To. 10, 9, 10
also teaches, Romans 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou
shall be saved: for with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth man confesses to salvation. So our Savior does not make it proper
to his disciples, but common to all, to confess him and his words before men.
And he does not say, whosoever shall confess me in heart, but with his
tongue; not inwardly, but outwardly; not secretly, but openly. For albeit, the
Faith of the heart be the principal thing, and cheefely required of us; yet
the confession of the mouth must not be separated from it. This reprooueth
such as account this open confession of the truth to be of no absolute
necessity, but a mere thing indifferent, left to our liberty to be practiced,
or not to be practiced. These are those Libertines, that would live as they
list, and make it no matter of what Religion they be. For, if it be indifferent
whether we profess Religion, or not, it is indifferent whether we believe or
have faith; and let them hold it indifferent also unto them, whether the Lord
Jesus do profess to know them or not.

Again, we see, that it is not enough for us not to deny Christ, but there is
required of us a farther duty, even to confess him before men. It is required
of a dutiful son, to confess his Father with a sound and upright heart, but
yet he must not deny his father before men, if he would have his Father
confess him. So is it the part of a true Christian, to believe to
righteousness, and to confess to salvation. Every one would seem willing and
desirous to be saved, but if we look to be partakers thereof, Christ must know
us for his servants: and he will not acknowledge us in his kingdom, unless
here we make confession of him. If we will not here know him, he will say to
us hereafter, I know you not, depart from me, 2 Timothy 2, 12.
If we deny him, he will deny us; If we be ashamed of him, take heed least he
also be ashamed of us. The Thief that was upon the Cross, made open
confession of his faith, reproved the blasphemy of his Companion, and called
upon Christ for salvation, Luke 23. he rebuked his fellow, saying; Luke 23, 40
42, 43.
Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? We are indeed
righteously here, for we receive things worthy of that we have done, but this
man has done nothing amiss: And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when
thou come into thy Kingdom. And albeit he were a Thief and a Malefactor,
for which he suffered death, yet is not Christ ashamed of him, he does not
stop his ears and refuse to hear him, but to show himself true in his
word, and faithful in his promise, he does acknowledge him as his own,
because he confessed him before that sinful and wicked generation, saying
unto him; Verily, I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

The Apostle John living, when the Deity of our Savior began to be doubted
of, and called into question, says, 1 Ioh. 4, 2, 3.
Every Spirit which confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God; and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is not of God. If therefore we look to be confessed of Christ, and to
have our souls saved in the day of the Lord, let us boldly bear and behave
our selves under the Cross, and not shrink in the wetting like deceitful
cloth; let us know that confession and salvation must go together, if we
wait for the one, we must express the other; if confession go before, we may
build surely, and ground our selves strongly upon the promise of Christ, that
the salvation of our souls shall follow after, and no man shall take it from
us. This made the Apostle say, 2 Timothy 1, 12.
For this cause I suffer these things, but I am not ashamed, for I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing our Faith and Religion must be confessed, it is a duty that
lies upon us to seek to know the truth, and labor to express the power of
godliness; otherwise it is impossible that ever we should make profession of
it. For profession of the faith presupposes a knowledge of the faith; for how
can we confess that which we kno not, or manifest that to other whereof we are
ignorant our selves? This controlleth and condemns those that live in the
Church, hear the word, and have the Gospel sounding a long time in their
ears, yet know not what faith is, nor how to believe; so that whereas in
regard of their continuance in the Church, in regard of the means offered to
them, and in regard of their age wherewith God has blessed them, Heb. 5, 12.
they might have been teachers of others, they have need to be taught the
beginnings of faith, the grounds of religion, and the principles of the word of
God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. Alas,
who can consider without great grief of heart, and anguish of spirit, in what
state the greatest number of our people stand, and remember that after al our
planting, watering, sowing, and laboring, they are apt and fit to receive any
religion, because they are blind and ignorant, and know not God aright, or any
part of his truth, to their souls health. They are like the potters Clay,
which is ready to take any form, and receive any impression; or like the
earth, which alters and changes as the wind or weather, as the Spring or
Winter shall work upon it. If they were taught to believe and receive the
Cabala of the Jews, the Alcoran of the Turks, the Revelations of the
Anabaptists, the Traditions of the Papists, or such like rotten trash of man's
devises: and if they were countenanced by authority of Princes, and Laws of
men, they were as easy to be wrought upon, as wax that is ready to receive
any stamp and impression. A lamentable case, that we should be still as
Babes and children, not knowing the right hand from the left, carried about
with every wave of Doctrine, and receiving the darkness of error for the
light of the truth. But we have not so learned Christ, and the Christian
Religion. When we have once given entertainment unto the truth, and embraced it
soundly in our hearts, we must not deny the faith whatsoever befall us,
whatsoever trouble come unto us; whether prosperity fawn and flatter upon us,
or whether adversity pinch us, and pain us; whether the Sun of peace shine
upon us, or whether the clouds of affliction ouer-shaddow us, we must always
be the same, and our standing in the faith should not be wavering or wandering,
to give over at every assault, and to shrink back for every brunt, and to deny
our Lord and Master by every tentation. This serves to reprove those that
know nothing, and therefore can profess nothing; and as they know nothing, so
they will know nothing, of whom we may say as the Apostle does, 2 Pet. 3, 5.
This they wittingly know not, and so are wilfully ignorant, and shut their
eyes, because they would not see, and because the light should not shine into
their hearts. For seeing God has commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
we may truly say, 2 cor. 4, 3, 4, 6
If our Gospel be then hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God
of this world has blinded the minds; that is, of the Infidels, that the light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ (which is the Image of God) should not shine
unto them. Thus does God send them strong delusion, that they should believe
lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 11, 12.
That all they might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness. Let us therefore seek after knowledge, as for great
Treasures. Let us search the Scriptures, that in them we may find eternal
life: let us have the word of God dwell plentifully in us, which is able to
make us wise unto Salvation. Let us use all good means to increase knowledge
in us, to begin in Faith, to hold out a good confession, and to maintain the
truth against all the adversaries that rise against us.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing it is a duty to open our mouths, and lose our tongues, to
confess to his name that has called us to his truth, it stands us upon
continually, and constantly to pray for the Spirit of strength, or
corroboration, that we may be made able to stand in the time of danger. It is
not in all that know and acknowledge the truth, to avouch it, and to maintain
it, to confess it, and to stand to it: but only of such as have received the
strengthening power of Christ. Hence it is that the Apostle says of himself,
Phil 4, 13.
I am able to do all things, through the help of Christ which strengthens
me. So he prays for the Colossians, That they might be strengthened with the
glorious power of Christ. When a man has once received to believe, he wants
a new grace to be given unto him, that the grain of Faith which lies hidden
in the heart, and covered in the Ashes of man's frailty, may grow up openly, and
bring forth in us the confession of the mouth. This appears by the words of
the Apostle John, who testifies; John 12, 42, 43.
That even among the chief Rulers, many believed in him: nevertheless,
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, least they should be cast
out of the Sinagogue: for they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of
God. He speaks in this place of such as were true believers, as appears
both by the phrase of speaking, and the opposition, made between these, and
those that believed not Verse 37.
mentioned before. Verse 37. where it is said, That though he did many miracles
before them, yet they believed not on him. The Evangelist notes two lets and
impediments that hindered them from the open manifestation of their Faith; to
wit, the shame of the Cross, and the glory of the world.

Thus we see, that sometimes the dear Servants of God are for a time afraid to
confess him, and to bewray themselves what they hold, and how they believe.
When Peter was come into the Highpriests Hall, and saw himself in danger of
death, he was so far from confessing, that he fell to open denying of his
Master; he believed in him (no doubt) in his heart, but he gave not glory unto
him (as he ought) with his mouth. This we have heard to be in some of the
blessed Martyrs, who gave their lives to the death, they have sometimes
staggered, and felt the weakness of the flesh, before they have been
thoroughly strengthened in the Inner man. Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews, and a
Master in Israel, and bearing a love unto Christ, John 3, 2. and 7, 50. and
19, 38
came unto him by night, and closely as it were by stealth. So Joseph of
Aramathia, was first a Disciple of Christ secretly, for fear of the Jews: yet
afterward being stirred up with those things that they saw at the death and
passion of Christ, both of them showed themselves more boldly and confidently
in his cause, and in the end forsook all, to follow him, and resolved to
cleave unto him with the loss of all things that might be precious and dear
unto them. Such then as our Faith is, such is our confession. A weak Faith, a
weak confession: a strong Faith, a strong confession: no Faith, no confession:
a staggering Faith, a wavering confession. Wherefore it belongs unto us, to
call upon God to give us his Spirit, which is called Esaias 11, 2.
The spirit of strength, whereby we shall be enabled to bear the Cross
patiently, and to confess the Faith constantly. For when once we are
sustained and supported by the Spirit of Christ, no Cross shall daunt us, no
tentation shall ouerwhelme us, but we shall endure all things with a contented
mind, and persevere unto the end.

Use 4.
Lastly, we must show our selves ready and resolute to give a reckoning of our
faith and hope, of our profession and Religion, when we shall be required. This
is greatly to the honor of God, when his Servants prepare themselves to set
forth his truth, and are not afraid of the threatenings of their enemies. This
is it which the Apostle Peter teaches us, 1 Pet. 3, 15.
Sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness
and reverence. This constant and Christian resolution was in Paul, when he was
brought before rulers for Christ's sake, though when he came to his answer no
man assisted him, but some fled from him, and others were ashamed of him, yet
he quit himself like a man, and showed himself a faithful witness of that
truth which he believed. This use meets with many corruptions, and
reprooueth sundry practices that reign among us. The first reproof.
First, it conuinceth such as think they are not to be blamed, but excused; not
to be controlled, but defended; albeit, they deny the truth of God, for fear
of men, in time of persecution; so that they cleave to it in heart, and embrace
it in their souls, so that they inwardly believe it, like of it, and hold it
to themselves. Yet we heard before, that it is not enough for us, not to deny
the faith, but it is required of us to confess it. It is not enough for us to
abstain from that which is evil, unless we be careful to do that which is
good. The Apostle John teaches. Revel. 21, 8
That all the fearful and unbelieving, the abominable and murderers, the
Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, the Idolaters and liars, shall have their part in
the Lake which burns with fire and Brimstone, which is the second death.
Here we see, that among these wicked persons which he names, he names in
the first place fearful persons, which fear men more then God; these are
ouercom by Satan, and led to hell and destruction. Hence it is, that the
Apostle charge us (as we heard before) not only to keep our faith, Heb. 10,
23.
but to keep the profession of our faith. And Paul, when he came to his first
answearing, does not reprove the Brethren, because they openly denied the
Faith, but because they secretly forsook him, 2 Timothy 4, 16
and did not assist him, and he prays God that this sin may not be laid to
their charge. So the Angel of the Church of Pergamus is commended, who dwelt
where Satan's throne was set up, Revel. 2, 13.
because he kept the name of Christ, and denied not his Faith, even in those
days when Antipas his faithful Martyr was slain, among them where Satan
dwells. It is not enough therefore not to deny the faith, or not to abjure
the Doctrine of Christ, we must give an account of a farther duty, and know;
that God requires of us the confession of his truth, if we would have him
confess us in the resurrection of the just.

The second reproof.
Secondly, it reprooueth such as keep their Faith and Conscience to themselves,
and will not bewray it to others. A man shall live many years among them, and
yet not know what Religion they are of. These are they that hide their
Religion, and bury their Talent in the earth, and thereby make themselves ready
for every change and alteration; like the Weather-cocke which turns with
every blast of wind. These are they, that think themselves wise and wary men,
by keeping themselves close and private to themselves: and yet every simple
man, nay every child may plainly perceive, that they are indeed of no
Religion. For that faith which always is kept secret, is no faith at all. It
is required, not only that every knee should bow, but that every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father, Phil. 2, 10, 11. Such as never profess any thing, do plainly make it
manifest, and as it were light a Candle to others, to discover the secrets of
their hearts. Sometimes they will be Gospellers, sometimes they will be
Papists, sometimes they will be Newters, such (it is to be feared) at all
times are Atheists, or at least in the right way and broad path, that leads
unto Atheism. Let not such therefore flatter themselves, and deceive their
own souls; let them show their religion, if they have any: or else they show
themselves to be men of no religion.

The third reproof.
Thirdly, it reprooueth such as censure and condemn others, as too pure and
precise, by reason of their profession. These men that are cold themselves,
and care not whether Religion go sorward or backward, cannot abide that any
should be more zealous and earnest then themselves; and because they will not
run with them into all excess of riot, therefore they rail at them, and
speak all manner of evil against them. They have borrowed many opprobrious
terms, and drawn many reuiling tauntes from the enemies of the Gospel, and
grace of God, and apply them whete they ought not to be bestowed. When the
Lord had restored the Gospel unto us, being brought out of Superstition and
Idolatry, that the Romanists gnashed their teeth for anger, disgorged their
malice with rage, and were like to break in pieces, through envy of the work
of the Lord set up among us, they devised against us and our religion, most
bitter reproaches: then was our profession called Puritanisme, and our
professors branded with the names of Puritans, Praecisians, and unspotted
Brethren: which contumelies are now taken out of the mouths of enemies, and
one Brother does spit them in the face of another. What a shame and indignity
is this, that we professing one faith, living under one Gospel, embracing one
Religion, and enduring the same enemies, should borrow such venomous speeches
from the scornful and despightfull Papists, and cast them as Dung in the
faces of our Brethren? Let us therefore leave these railing and reuiling
speeches, and send them back to Rome (the Mother of cruelty, and of all biting
and bitterness) from whence they come. Let us vpbraid no man with his zeal,
nor hit no man in the teeth with his profession. Let us rather be moved in
love to follow their example, and be provoked in a godly aemulation to walk
in their steps. And let us all know, that we must not be like the Laodiceans,
Revel. 3, 15.
which were neither hot nor cold: for if we scorn all zeal and forwardness
in the ways of godliness; if we be lukewarm professors, and neither hot nor
cold, it shall come to pass, that the Lord will spew us out of his mouth.

The fourth reproof.
Fourthly, it reprooueth such as think they may be present at the Sacrifice
of the Mass, and hear and see their Idolatry, so they keep their conscience
to God and themselves; yea, some go farther, and think they may not only be
present at Idolatry, in the Idols Temple, but bow down to the Idolles, offer
unto them, creep unto them, and serve them with their bodies, so that they
abhor such worship in their minds, and serve God in their hearts. But these
excuses cannot serve to justify such manner of serving of God. When God would
assure Eliah, that he had his people in those ruins of the Church, and that he
was not left alone, he said, 1 Kin. 19, 18
He had left seven thousand in Israel, even all knees that have not bowed unto
Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him. He does not say, he had
reserved such as did not believe in Baal, but keep their heart to God; but
they are noted by this mark to be the Lords, that they gave not to Baal the
bending of the knee, nor any outward subjection unto him. In the tentations
offered to Christ our Savior, when the Devil only required of him to fall
down and worship him, Math. 4, 10
he answered; Avoid Satan, for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord, and
him only shall thou serve. Nebucadnezzar required nothing of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, the three Servants of God, but to bow the knee, and to fall down
Dan. 3, 19.
to the golden Image that he should set up; and yet they did choose rather to
be cast alive into the hot fiery furnace, and to endure the extremity of the
flame. It is not therefore enough to worship God in heart and soul. True it
is, he commands us to John 4, 24.
worship him in spirit and truth, but not only in spirit and truth. God
requires of us the body, as well as the spirit; the outward man, as well as
the inward; the knee, as well as the heart. He challenges every part and
member of our body to be employed to his worship. He that has an ear to
hear, Revel. 2, 7.
Must hear what the spirit says unto the Churches: He that has a 1 Pet. 4,
11.
Tongue to speak, must speak as the words of Gad. He that has hands to
lift up, 1 Timothy 2. 8
Must lift up pure hands, without wrath, and without contention. He that has
a knee to bow, Ephesians. 3, 14.
Must bow it to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. He that has a mouth to
open, Romans 10, 10,
Must make confession with it to salvation. He that has feet must say, Psalm.
122, 2.
Our feet shall stand in thy gate, O Jerusalem. The cause why God claims and
challenges the whole body, is because the body is his, as well as the soul.
It is his by creation, because he made it, Psalm. 100, 3.
and not we our selves; we are his people, and the Sheep of his pasture. The
Clay was his whereof we were formed, so that we are his by the Law of Creation.
He feeds and finds us of his own costs and charges; he cloatheth us with
his own wool, Psalm. 50, 10
For all the Beasts of the field are his, and the Beasts on a thousand
mountains. If then we live at his expenses, we are his by another right, even
the Book of his providence. We are made his, by the freeing of us from the
thraldom of sin, from the tyranny of Satan, from the bondage of corruption,
by paying a price, a great price; by giving for us a ransom, a great ransom,
not of Silver and Gold, but by shedding his blood, his precious blood for us;
the Spear pierced his heart, the Nails pierced his hands and his feet, the
Thorns pierced his head. Seeing therefore, he suffered so much in his body,
for our bodies; we are wholly his, by the work of our redemption, who before
were not his. The Holy Ghost likewise sanctifies our bodies as well as our
souls, and makes them a Temple to dwell in: and lastly, we look for salvation
and glorification, not only in soul, but in body, 1 Cor. 6, 19, 20.
and therefore we must glorify God both in our bodies, and in our souls: we
must offer up our bodies an holy Sacrifice unto him, and not commit Sacrilege
against him, by plucking and withdrawing away any part of our bodies from him.

The fifth reproof.
Lastly, it reproves such as keep company with open enemies to God and his
Religion, where they cannot but hear God dishonored, his truth blasphemed,
his servants slandred and reviled, and yet make as though they heard nothing,
or saw nothing, or could speak nothing; for they stop their ears, and close
their eyes, and shut their mouths to the discountenancing of Religion, and the
encouraging of evil persons. How many are there that make the true professors
of the word, and the faithful Servants of God a common byword, and their
Table-talke at their bankets and meetinges? We are at such times ashamed of
Christ, of our faith, of our religion, of any matter that may tend to the
edification of our souls, but we are not ashamed of the works of the Devil,
and of the fruits of darkness. We are not ashamed to fill our tables, what
shall I say? with spewing; nay, worse then spewing, with open blasphemy, and
swearing, with slandering and reuiling of our brethren. Such were the enemies
that David had experience of; they reioysed and assembled themselves against
him, Ps. 35 15, 16 and 69, 12, 13
the very abiects tare him, and ceased not with the false scoffers at bankets,
gnashing their teeth against him, When he prayed daily unto God, and the zeal
of his house did even eat him up, he became a Proverb unto them; they that
sat in the gate spoke of him, and the drunkards sang songs of him. When we
see godly men thus handled, and their profession in our meetings taunted, let
us open our mouths in the cause of the dumb, let us give glory to God in the
midst of our assemblies, and not suffer the faithful to be so foulely traduced,
and Religion it self through their sides to be nipped and despighted. Let us
follow the counsel of the Wise man, Prou. 31, 8 9, and 24, 10, 11
Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all the children of destruction:
Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and judge the afflicted and the poor. We
are willed according to our places and power by all lawful means to help the
afflicted, and to succor the distressed. We must not be faint-hearted and
afraid to speak for them. This is it which the Prophet teaches, Psalm. 22, 22.
I will declare thy name unto my Brethren, in the midst of the Congregation
will I praise thee. This is a duty to be practiced of us, so often as we see
our Brethren reviled, their profession taunted, and Religion it self slandered.

[ I hear of thy love and faith.] We have heard before the commendation of
Philemons profession, so that Paul being far removed from him, yet had
notice of it. Now, we are to consider wherein his profession stood, and
wherefore he is commended. The things for which he is praised are these two,
Faith, and Love. He might have named many other graces and gifts of God, his
knowledge, his temperance, his patience, his meekness, his gentleness, his
goodness, his long-suffering; but these are the chief and principal, these
perfect a Christians man's salvation. For our happiness stands and consists
in two things, partly in our Communion with Christ our head, and partly in our
conjunction and fellowshippe with the members of Christ. Faith is that which
unites us with Christ our head: love joins us together one with another,
which are the members of his body. Doctrine 5. Faith and love do commend a man
to God and his Church.
From hence we learn, that the chief things that commend a man to God and
his Church, are faith in Christ, and love to the Saints of God. Among all the
gifts of God which bring unto us a good report, the principal are to be a
believer in Christ, and to show forth the fruits of mercy. This appears in
all the examples of the Fathers, and Patriarchs of elder times, that lived both
before the flood, and since the flood, even unto the coming of Christ: for by
it Heb. 11, 2.
our Elders were well reported of. By Faith, Abell offered unto God a greater
Sacrifice then Caine, by the which he obtained witness that he was righteous,
God testifying of his gifts: by the which faith also he being dead, yet
speaks. By faith was Enoch Heb. 11. 5. 39
translated, that he should not see death: neither was he found, for God has
translated him, for before he was translated, he was reported of, that he had
pleased God. It is said of Abraham, that above hope, he believed Romans 4, 18,
22. and 1, 8, and 16, 4.
under hope, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. The Apostle speaking
of the Romans says, Colos. 4, 1.
I thank my God through Jesus Christ, for you all, because your Faith is
published throughout the whole world. And afterward he greeteth Aquila and
Priscilla his fellow-helpers in Christ Jesus, who for his life were ready to
lay down their own necks, to whom not only he gave thanks, but also all
the Churches of the Gentiles. So he gives thanks to God, 1 These. 1, 3.
when he heard of the faith of the Colossians, which they had in Christ Jesus,
and of their love toward all Saints: he praises God without ceasing,
remembering the effectual Faith and diligent love which were found in the
Church of the Thessalonians. All these examples teach us this truth, that it is
faith and love, and such like graces of Gods spirit, whereby we receive a good
report, as that wherewithal we are accepted of God, and become renowned in the
Church.

Reason 1.
The Reasons follow to confirm this Doctrine. First, they give us good
acceptaunce and approbation with God and man, because they are evident marks,
and notable Testimonies of our election and perseverance. They are as two
eare-markes, to know and discern whose Sheep we are. Hence it is, that the
Apostle making mention of the Thessalonians in his Prayers, who had showed the
effectual faith and diligent love, and the patience of their hope in our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the sight of God even our Father, he adds, 1 These, 1, 4
Knowing (beloved Brethren) that ye are elect of God. So the same Apostle
writing to the Phillippians, Phil. 1, 6.
says, That because of the fellowship which they had in the Gospel, he was
persuaded of this same thing, that God which had begun this good work in them,
would perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. For howsoever the faithful
have a new name given unto them, and written in them, Revel. 12, 17
which no man knows saving he that receives it: yet do the godly after a
sort know and understand the election of others, the calling of others, the
justification of others. True it is, they are assured of their own election to
eternal life, more certainly by the inward Testimony of the spirit:
nevertheless we have some knowledge of the election of our Brethren, by
outward signs and tokens. Now, there are two things to be considered, the
knowledge and judgment whereof, is hard and hidden; the one of that which is
past; the other of that which is to come. That which is past, is our election
from everlasting, before the foundation of the world was laid; that which is
to come, is our perseverance and persistance unto the end of our days; yet we
see the Apostle professes some knowledge, nay persuasion of them both, which
is grounded upon the graces of God, bestowed upon those that are his. The more
excellent these graces are in quality, the more they are in number, the greater
they are in quantity, the better Testimony they give unto men, and the surer
judgment arises from them, unto such as have them.

Reason 2.
Secondly, God has given praise and glory as an inseparable companion of
godliness and goodness; and on the other side, he has appointed and allotted
shame to follow sin. He has joined these together, to wit, glory with
piety, and shame with iniquity. These draw together, as it were, in one yoke,
so that one cannot be without the other. The Apostle speaking of the ungodly
says, Phil. 3.
Their glory shall be to their shame. Seeing therefore, the graces of Gods
spirit are Testimonies of election, and Companions of praise and glory, we
must from hence conclude, that the good gifts of God that are found in us,
make us accepted of God and man.

Use 1.
The Uses follow to be considered and learned of us. First, seeing faith in
Christ, and love toward the Saints give us a good report in the Church, and lay
up a good foundation for us in heaven, we see that only godly men have a good
name, and evil men shall leave an evil name behind them. This is one
difference between the godly and ungodly: the godly, as he leads a godly
and sanctified life, so he leaves behind him a good report, whereby he
smells sweetly in the Nostrils of God and man. But the ungodly, as they
dishonor God in their lives, so he will dishonor them in their persons and
names, and reward them with confusion of faces. This is it which the Prophet
Es. 65, 14, 15
threatens in the name of God, Behold, my servant shall sing for joy of
heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of
mind: and ye shall leave your name as a curse unto my chosen, for the Lord God
shall slay you, and call his servants by another name. There is a praise and
commendation, which turns to shame and infamy, to woe and misery: and again,
there is a shame and reproach, that brings glory and praise with it. This our
Savior teaches, Luk 6, 26, 22
Woe be to you, when all men speak well of you, for so did their fathers to
the false Prophets: but blessed are you when men hate you, and when they
separate you, and revile you, and put out your name as evil for the son of
man's sake. It seems to many that look with an eye of flesh, and judge with
corrupt judgment, that the righteous are forgotten, and their names buried as
in the grave of silence, they seem above all other wretched and miserable,
because no man reuengeth the wrongs and injuries that are offered unto the^: yet
God in the end will maintain their cause, and give them good estimation with
all good men. On the other side, howsoever the ungodly flourish for a season,
and are famous in the world, howsoever they are praised of others, and praise
themselves with their own mouths, yet their names shall be filthy and
abominable, according to that which Solomon says, Prou. 10, 7.
The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot. This overthrows three sorts of men that offend, and esteem not of men
according to their faith and profession.

The first reproof.
First, such as slander the godly, and bring up an evil report of the faithful
people of God, such as revile them, and seek to take away their good name from
them, which is a Jewel more precious then Silver and Gold. But we shall less
esteem what they speak, if we consider who they are that spoke. For the
witness of an enemy is by no Law to be taken, but always to be suspected.
The second reproof.
Secondly, such as magnify and advance the ungodly, give them the praise and
applause of the world, speak well of them, as of the only honest men that
deserve to be commended. But so long as they live in sin, their own
wickedness does testify to their faces, and their ungodly hearts proclaim
their own shame, and shall bring upon them utter confusion. Let this be
written and engraven in our minds, that ungodliness will bring a blot and leave
a reproach behind it. The third reproof.
Lastly, it conuinceth such as are Civil men, that can say they are not
Drunkardes, they are not adulterers, they are not Thieves, they lead an honest
life, they pay all men their own, they are ready to pleasure their friends,
they deal justly with their Neighbors: these men have a good liking of
themselves, and are accounted the only men among others. For this civil
honest man is reputed the only honest man. But a man may do all this, and be a
Pharisie, yea no better in the sight of God, then a Turk and infidel. He may
carry the countenance and have the report of such a liver, and yet smell
strongly and savor rankely in the Nostrils of God, of ignorance, of unbelief,
of pride, and of self-love. If we would deserve true praise indeed, we must
not rest in these outward practices and in this moral ciuility, we must plant
Religion in our hearts, we must have a sound Faith in Christ, we must know the
Doctrine of the Gospel, we must worship God aright. This the Apostle sets
down as a rule to direct us in our praising of men, Romans 2. 28. 29.
He is not a Jew which is one outward, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the Flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one within, and the
Circumcision is of the heart; in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is
not of men, but of God. It is the commendation of David, that he was a man
after Gods own heart. It is the commendation of Job, Job. 1. 1. and 2 3.
that he was an upright and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil.
It is the commendation of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke. 1. 6.
that they were both just before God, and walked in all the commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord without reproof. If a man be void and destitute of this
piety, he can receive no comfort by his ciuility, and albeit he have the
estimation of an honest man, it shall avail him nothing, unless withal he be
a Religious man: and if our praise be never so great for our external dealing
toward men, it shall minister no profit unto us, except we show inward devotion
toward God.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing Faith and Love give us a good commendation and report, let us
by these and such like graces of Gods spirit seek after a good name, let us
not hunt after the praise of men, but that which is of God: the other is a
blast of wind, this is certain and never fades. This made the Apostle say, 1.
These. 2. 5. 6. 4.
We did not use flattering words, as ye know, nor colored coueteousnesse, God
is record: neither sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor of others, when
we might have been chargeable as the Apostles of Christ, we speak not as
they that please men, but God, which approoueth our hearts. This use and
conclusion being well pondred and considered in our hearts, it will discover
the great vanity and folly of earthly minded men, who seek rather a great name
then a good and godly name. Thus did they that builded the Tower of Babel, they
sought a great name by their great exploits, Genesis 11. 4.
for they would build them a Tower that should reach to heaven, (that is,
exceeding high) to get them a name. Thus did Absalom seek a name by 2. Sam.
15. 5.
adulation and flattery, by stealing away the hearts of the people, by creeping
and crouching to every one. Thus do hypocrites seek a name, by a vizard of
holiness, and putting on a show of Religion, Revel. 3. 1.
who indeed have a name, that they are alive but they are dead. Thus do rich
men hope to become famous and to leave a name behind them, by getting goods,
and raising up their Children, Psalm. 49. 11. 12.
who think that their houses and their posterities shall continue from
generation to generation, and call their Lands and Livings by their names. Thus
did Nebucadnezzer seek a name, when in the pride of his heart he said, Dan. 4.
27.
Is not this great Babell, that I have built for the house of the Kingdom by
the might of my power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? Thus did Herod by his
smooth words and eloquent speech, procure the applause of the people, that
cried out, It is the voice of God, and not of man. All these were ignorant
what a good Name is, and therefore they and their Names could not continue in
honor, but perished like Beasts that die of the rot and murraine. Wherefore,
we must labor to get a good name by faith in Christ, by favor to the Saints,
by love to the Gospel, which we shall obtain, if we be careful to avoid all
kind of sins, both gross sins, and light sins, and all occasions and
enticements that may draw us unto them. It is impossible that we should have
Faith to please God, and to have praise of God, if we never repented of
Dead-workes, if we live in open sins against knowledge, and against
Conscience. And howsoever we account some sins small and slender (as the
Church of Rome hold some Venial) yet Eccl. 10, 1.
As dead Flies cause to stink and putrify the Ointment of the Apothecarie, so
does a little folly him, that is in estimation for Wisdom and for glory. On
the other side, we must strive to be rich in Faith, and in Good-Workes, for
such as endeavor themselves to honor God in these, shall receive Honor from
God. And if by any weakness or infirmity we be fallen to the loss of a good
Name, we must have a care, with all speed to repair it: we must be humbled
by unfeigned Repentance; We must seek to be reconciled unto God, to be
washed in the blood of Christ, to be purged in out Consciences, and to build
up the ruins of our decayed life. For, the care to repair this good Name
being lost, must be no less then to obtain it at the first. This we see in
David, in Manasses, in Peter, who turned unto God with all their hearts, who by
their rising again from sin to Righteousness, builded that which before
they destroyed, repaired that which before they impaired, and increased that
which before they had diminished.

Use 3.
Lastly, it is a great comfort and consolation to the faithful and godly, to
keep Faith and a good Conscience, they are assured, that howsoever the Wicked
shall undermine and nibble at our good Names, and cast some blemish upon them
to defile them, yet God undertakes the protection and preservation of our good
Names, and it rests not in the power of any creature to spoil us of them.
There are 3. enemies to a good name.
True it is, our good Name is in danger of three great enemies, which are as
three Catterpillers, that wast the fruits of the earth, or as so many Locusts,
that eat up the grass of the field, or as three Canker-Wormes, that eat the
barks of the Trees. Some are Authors and Inuenters of Slanders, and false
Tales; Others, are Walkers and Talkers of them, spreading them abroad to the
hurt of others: A third sort, are Hosts and receivers of the two former,
believing such Ware to be good, as these Merchants and Brokers bring unto
them. But howsoever, the Children of God are subject to the venomous tongues of
ungodly men, whereby they are maligned and slaundered; yet they must rejoice
and comfort themselves in this, that their approbation is in Heaven, and their
reward with their God, thorough whose abundant Mercy, they shall be had in
perpetual remembrance.

This the Apostle puts us in mind of, when he says, Phil. 4, 8
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are Honest, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are worthy love, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any Virtue, or if there be any praise, think of these
things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me.
For what should it avail a man, to be praised and commended in the World;
for Strength, for Nobility, for Gentry, for Riches, for Beauty, for
Greatness, which cannot make us blessed? Nothing can give us true and
everlasting Honor, and cause us to be approved of God and Men, but Faith and
the fruits thereof, that accompany salvation. Hence it is, that the Apostle
speaking of the Fathers that lived in faith, and died in faith, which followed
them even to their Graves, Heb. 11. 39.
says, that all of them through Faith obtained a good report. Let us therefore
above all things seeeke to please God by faith, that so we may find that
favor which never shall have end.

[ Faith and Loue] We have showed before wherein the praise of Philemon
stands; to wit, in faith and Love: which offers unto us an other profitable
consideration, in that he joins and annexeth these two virtues together. He
names not faith alone, nor Love alone, but he knitteth faith and Love as it
were in one band together. So then we see, that these two graces given by one
and the same spirit, are remembered, to take up their seat and lodging in one
man's heart. Doct. 6. Faith and Love do always go together.
We learn hereby, that faith and Love are allwaies coupled together, faith is
not without Love, nor Love without faith, but faith and Love go together in
all the servants of God, and can never be separated and put asunder. When Paul
prayed for the Thessalonians, he remembered these two 1. These. 1. 3.
to be in them, their effectual faith, and their diligent love. It is said of
the Church gathered together after the assention of Christ Acts. 2 44.
that all they which believed were in one place, and had all things common.
Such as were true believers, were also commoners together, such as had Faith in
Christ, had Love toward the Saints.

This Luke shows more plainly afterward, Act. 4. 32.
The multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul,
neither any of them said that any thing of that which he possessed was his
own, but they had all things common. Here we see Faith, and the
manifestation of Faith, by the fruits of Charity joined together. To this
purpose the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 6.
In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by Love. Here also he coupleth Faith
with Love in one Yoke, declaring that Faith is effectual in the duties of
Love. So the Apostle John teaches, that faith in Christ, and Love one toward
another, are things ever joined together. John, 3. 23.
This is then his Commandment, that we believe in the Name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another as he gave Commandment. And the Apostle James
speaking of the effectual faith of Abraham whereby he believed and was
justified, declares that Iam. 2. 22.
the Faith wrought with his works, and through the works was the Faith made
perfect. All these Texts and Testimonies of Scripture serve to teach us, that
our faith must be accompanied with Love, and the one not divided from the other.

Reason 1.
The truth hereof will better appear to every one of us, If we consider the
Reasons. For first, they are as the Tree and the Fruit, as the Root and the
Branch, as the Fountain and the Stream, as the cause and the effect. Faith is
the Tree, the Root, the Fountain, the cause: Love is the Fruit, the Branch,
the Stream, the effect. The cause and the effect are Relatiues, and have
relation and reference either to other^: so that the cause cannot be without
his effect; nor the effect without his cause: and therefore both these must go
together. The Prophet describes the blessed man Psalm. 1. 3.
to be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Waters, that will bring forth her
friute in due season, whose Leaf shall not fade: so whatsoever he shall do,
shall prosper.

Reason 2.
Secondly, faith separated from Love, or Love separated from faith, is a false
faith and a false Love. Faith without Love, or separated from the fruits of
Love, is dead and without life; a naked name without the thing, an empty
shadow without substance, a dead carcass without breath. It is nothing worth
without Love. The Apostle says, If a man had all faith, so that he could
remove Mountains 1. Cor. 13. 1. 2.
and had not Love, it were nothing, he should be as sounding Brass, or a
tinkeling Cymball. So we read in the Epistle of James, James 2, 20.
That the Faith which is without works is dead, it is a Bastard Faith, a
counterfeit Faith, an idle Faith, which is no true Faith indeed, but only in
Name. For, as a painted hand is no hand, so a seeming Faith is no Faith.
Again, Love without Faith, is without his right order, yea without his life
and soul, his true cause and form, and so not good, but evil; not approved,
but rejected of God, Heb. 11, 6. Romans 14, 23.
For without Faith, it is impossible to please God, and whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin. All works of Justice, Mercy, Righteousness, to relieve the
poor, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, without Faith are nothing
worth; nay all these beautiful shows are beautiful sins, except they be
seasoned with Faith. Again, to afflict thy soul, to humble thy self, to
hear the word, to receive the Sacraments without Love, that is, to do the
duties of the first Table, and to neglect them of the second Table, is but
Hypocrisy, and makes us abominable in the sight of God. Seeing then, Faith
and Love are as the cause and the effect that live together, and seeing they
loose their Names and Natures, being disioyned and divided one from another;
we see it evidently and strongly to appear, that Faith in Christ, and Love to
the Brethren, as Mother and Daughter, are joined together in every true
Christian.

Use 1.
The Uses are now to be considered. First, seeing these two guiftes are coupled
together one with another, it follows, that they must never be separated in a
Christian man. He that is joined with the head, must also be joined with the
members; and he that has his part in the Communion of Saints, has his
fellowship also with Christ. If it be a general rule delivered by Christ,
Math. 19, 6.
that the things which God has coupled together, no man must separate; it
holds in this particular, that Faith and Love are not to be disioyned and
dismembered, forasmuch as God has lodged them as two ghests in one house, and
locked them up as two Pearls and Jewels in one Closset. It is a rule published
by the Cicer. de offic. lib. 2.
Heathen, that all Virtues are knit together in one Chain, so that he which
has one, has all of them; he that wants one of them, wants all: so is it
with this worthy pair of Heavenly graces, we must not have a Faith without
Works, nor Works without Faith, but our Faith must be fruitful to bring
forth Works, and our Works must be thankful to confess them, to be
received from Faith: Our Faith works by Love, our Love lives by Faith: our
Faith respects Christ, our Love respects the Saints.

Thus must these two be found in every one of us, for they meet together in
all such as shall be saved. This Titus 3, 8.
made the Apostle say in his Epistle to Titus, Chap. 3. This is a true saying,
and these things I will thou should affirm; that they which have believed
God, might be careful to show forth Good-Workes; These things are good and
profitable unto men. Let us examine our own hearts, whether we find these two
graces in us, which must be as two twins that rejoice and take delight to be
together, or two Sisters that accompany one with another, like Martha and
Marie in one house, so must these be two Virtues in one heart. Hence it is,
that the Apostle John says in his first Epistle, 1 John 4, 20 21.
If any man say, I Love God, and hate his Brother, he is a Liar: for how can
he that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen; Love God whom he has
not seen? And this Commandment have we of him, that he that loves God,
should Love his Brother also. Where he teaches, that the love of God, and the
love of our Brethren, are knit together with such a fast knot, as can never
be loosed and dissolved, the Works of the first Table cannot be pulled
assunder from the Works of the second Table. The Apostle Peter moving the
dispersed Jews, to give diligence to make their Election sure, and their
calling certain, that so they might never fall away, 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6, 7.
exhorts them, To join Virtue with their Faith; and with Faith, Knowledge;
and with Knowledge, Temperance; and with Temperance, Patience; and with
Patience, Godliness; and with Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and with
Brotherly kindness, Love. These Christian graces of Gods Spirit, he would have
in them, and not only to be found in them, but to abound in them; and not
only some of them, but they must endeavor to get them all, and to join one of
them to another, that so we may be fruitful in all good Works. It is not
therefore enough for us to have one gift alone, and then think we are well.
Let us not flatter our selves, and boast of our Religion, to say we have
Faith, or Knowledge, or Temperance, or Love. He that has but one of them,
has indeed none of them. We must have many, or else we cannot assure our
selves, that we have any at all. For, as he that is reformed in one sin, is
reformed in all known sins, and he that truly repents of one, truly
repents of all: so he that has obtained one gift, has gotten many. One
sin commonly goes not alone, so one Virtue goes not alone. When Faith
comes, there comes a Train with it, it is as a Royal Queen, that never
trauaileth abroad without her train. Faith lays hold upon Christ, in whom
Col. 1, 19. and 2, 3.
all Treasures of Knowledge and Wisdom are hidden: Whosoever possesses him,
and has him dwelling in his heart, he possesses all things. If then we, by
attending on the ordinance of God, have gotten Faith, Romans 20, 17.
which comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word; so soon as Faith is
entered, a great multitude and mighty Army of Gods Graces stand about us, and
throng at the door of our hearts, as it were striving and thrusting, which of
them should enter first, and they never give over, until they be all come
in, and have taken up their lodging there, never after to be dislodged and
dispossessed of that place.

Let us not therefore be so sparing and niggardly, to think one grace of God
sufficient for us; we serve a liberal Lord and bountiful Master, that
offers to make us partakers of all his Treasures, and to bestow upon us all
the riches of his house. We may put our hands into his Coffers, and store our
selves with plenty and abundance. We see how they that cover their houses,
Plaut. in Trinum. Benefacta benefactis, alijs pertegito, ne perpluant.
do lay Tile upon Tile, or Stone upon Stone, or Straw upon Straw, so thick,
that it may not rain through, and that they may be defended from wind and
weather; so should it be with us that are setting up a Christian building,
when we have laid a good foundation, we must cover our houses with a strong
covering, we must lay Grace upon Grace, and join Virtue to Virtue, that
though the storms of tentations beat upon us, yet they may not prevail
against us; though the Rain of afflictions fall upon us, yet it may not enter
into us; and although the Winds of wickedness do oftentimes blow upon us,
yet they may not ouer-turne and overthrow us.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing Faith and Love go together, and dwell together, we are put in
mind of a notable duty, and are thereby directed to prove our Faith by our
Love, and our Love by our Faith, and to make one of them serve to assure the
other. The cause will prove the effect, and the effect will manifest the cause.
We may prove fire by the heat, and the heat by the fire; a good tree by his
fruit, and the fruit by his tree. Many will seem faithful and religious, they
will glorify that they believe, and boast of their piety and godliness; yet
come to their lives, and you shall find therein no fruits of mercy, no works of
charity, no tokens and testimonies of their love appearing in them. This man's
religion is in vain, his faith is in vain, his show of godliness is in
vain: for pure Iam. 1, 27, and 2, 16.
Religion and undefiled before God the Father, is this, to visit the fatherles
and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world.
And the same Apostle in the next chapter teaches; That it shall not profit any
man to say he has Faith, when his Faith brings forth no Good-workes. Again,
many will show some fruits of Love to their Brethren, in Alms, in liberality,
in giving unto the poor, in dealing justly and uprightly; and yet have no
faith, they do them as natural men, moved by a natural affection, or
stirred up by vain glory, or hunting after the praise of men, or constrained
by the laws of Princes, or fearing the reproach of the world, or seeking the
merit of their own salvation. All such have their reward according to their
work, but not according to their hope. They have their reward already, they
must look for no other; they have it among men, they shall loose it with God;
they have the applause of the world, but they must pass another doom in the
life to come. Such faith (before spoken of) without love, is but a shadow of
faith; and such love without faith is but a shadow of love, both are naught and
nothing worth if they be assunder. The root joined to the Tree are both good,
and make the branches fruitful, but separate the one from the other, pull the
root from the Tree, and you destroy them both, you kill them both. This is that
use James 2, 18.
which S. James urges, chap. 2. Some man might say, Thou have the Faith, and I
have works: show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will show thee my faith
by my works. Whereby we are taught to try the truth of our faith, and the
sincerity of our love, that we be not deceived in the one, or in the other. But
how shall this trial be made? Surely, by making one the Touchstone to the
other, laying one to the other, and waighing one in the balance with the
other. For the Apostle wills the vain Christian, who has nothing but the
name of faith, to glory in (like a poor Beggar that boasts of great riches)
to show the goodness of his Faith by the fruits of Good-workes, or else his
faith will appear to be no faith, and his claim to be a false usurpation. So
then, if thou will prove thy self a true Christian, and to be just before God
through faith in Christ, it is not enough to take unto thee the Title of faith,
and to boast of such a belief as the Devils have, and every reprobate may
have; but thou must be content to have thy inward faith examined and tried by
thy outward works, whether it be the true faith or not. For a true Faith is
always joined with love, and brings forth Good-workes, as necessarily as a
good Tree brings forth good fruits. An evil Tree brings forth evil
fruits, but a good Tree has good fruit coming from it. From this conjunction
of these two superior virtues, to wit, Faith and Love; the Rhemists in their
translation, and other Romanists in their disputations, do debate and conclude
against a fundamental point of Christian Religion, on this manner: If Faith be
not alone, but joined with Love, Then Faith alone does not justify: But Faith
is not alone, but joined with Love, Therefore Faith alone does not justify.


To this Objection I answer, they make an equivocation in these words, [ Faith
alone.] If they mean by Faith alone, a dead faith (as James does) which is
void of works, then they speak nothing to the purpose: for we never allowed
of such a faith, we never taught justification by such a faith. But if they
mean, as they should if they reason against us, that in the act of
Justification, there is required hope and charity, or any more then the hand
of faith, which is the only instrument to take hold of Christ: if they join
unto this, any of their works, we deny their assertion, and cannot admit of
such justification. For, we believe and hold it as a sound foundation of our
religion, that faith without any works does iustifye, forasmuch as it does
alone apprehend the mercies of God, and apply the merits of Christ, whereby we
are justified: so, that if the question be, what we must oppose between the
Justice of God and our sins, why he does not execute the curse of the Law
against us, wherefore he is reconciled toward sinners, and receives them into
favor, and how they stand as just before his Throne. Here works have no
place, which are imperfect, which are stained and defiled, so that both we and
our works must be accepted for another; namely, for Christ's sake, whom faith
receives, and so puts him and his benefits into our souls. True it is,
Faith and Love are always joined in one Christian, they are required to
perfect him, and to bring him to salvation. Thus Faith is necessary, Hope is
necessary, Charity is necessary; they must all concur in one subject, and
meet together in the same person, so that no believer must be without any of
them. Thus we confess they are never alone, he that is without Hope and
Charity is also without Faith; and whosoever has a lively Faith, has
likewise an effectual Hope, and a fruitful Love. Nevertheless, howsoever
they be joined, and must be joined in the practice of a Christian life, yet
they are not joined, nor cannot be joined in the act and Article of
Justification. The eye in the head alone sees, not the ear, not the mouth,
not the tongue, and yet it is never alone in the head, but joined with others.
The hand in the body alone serves to handle and to take the meat whereby we
are fed and norished, yet it is not without the arm, without the foot,
without the eye, without the head. Every part and member of the body in his
place is necessary, and all serve to perfect the body, without which it were
maimed and imperfect, but every member has his several office and function: so
is it with the gifts and graces of God, all are and ought to be joined
together, to make up a perfect Christian, and he must be furnished with them to
make him complete and absolute to every good work; but every gift has his
several object and Office. The property of the eye is to see, of the hand to
handle, of the foot to walk; so the Office of Faith is to make us just, the
office of Hope is to make us wait, the office of Love is to make us merciful.
We do not separate Faith and Good-workes from the exercise of a Christian man's
life, but in the office of Justification, and acquitting of us in the presence
of God. Faith in her Office is alone, as Love likewise is in hers; but in our
practice and in our persons they must be joined. A Prince, albeit in her estate
and Throne she be alone, yet she goes not without her train, and Maids of
Honor, waiting about her, and attending upon her. Faith, when she lays hold
on Christ, and receives the promise, is as it were upon her Throne of estate,
and in her proper calling joining us to God. Neither do we ascribe our
Justification to faith for it self, or as it is a work and quality in us, as
if it were any part of our Justice or righteousness, as if we were justified
partly by the merits of Christ, and partly by the worthiness of our own faith,
for that were to seek Justification in our selus, which is the Doctrine of the
church of Rome: but we are justified no otherwise by our faith, then we are
fed by our hand. Now how does the hand nourish the body? Not because it is meat
to feed the die, but because it receives and applies unto it the meat whereby
it is sustained. Even so, Faith iustifyeth and gives life, not because it is
our Justification either in whole or in part, but because it receives Christ
to be our righteousness and life, in whom Acts 26, 18
We have remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified
and reserved to eternal life. So then, we ascribe Justification to our faith,
no otherwise then as it is the means or Instrument to apprehend and receive
the mercies of God, the merits of Christ, and the promises of the gospel.

Thus we teach, that faith is the Aug. tract. 50 in Johan.
hand which we stretch to heaven, to take hold of Christ, and to embrace him
sitting at the right hand of his father. It is the mouth, whereby we eat and
drink Christ, August. tract. 26. in Johan.
because to believe in him is to eat him. It is the stomach whereby we digest
him, Tertull. de resurr. carnis.
because he is to be digested by Faith. It is the foot whereby we enter the
possession of all the benefits of Christ, and so far Bernard. Ser. 32. in
Cantio
we possess them as we walk toward them. By Faith it is, that we touch
Christ, and so receive Christ, Cypria. Epist. 2. lib. 2.
for look how much Faith we bring to receive, so much we draw of the abundant
graces of God. To conclude therefore, we see how Faith is alone, and how it is
not alone: how it goes with Love, and when it goes not with Love. It is alone
in our Justification, it is not alone in our godly conversation: It is alone in
receiving Christ, it is not alone in furnishing a Christian man's life, nor
sufficient to adorn him with such graces as God requires to be in his person,
for all other virtues must be in him.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing Faith and Love are always linked together in one man, this
overthrows another Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which teaches that Faith
may be without Charity, and separate from good works. For the true and
justifying Faith of Gods elect can be no more without works then the fire
without heat, the water without moisture, the sand without heaviness, the Sun
without brightness, the soul without life, or the good tree without good fruit.
Neither let them pretend the Iam 2. 17
Apostle James to color this their fancy, as though it proved that a man may
have Faith without Charity. For he speaks in that place of a dead Faith, not
a lively Faith: of a false Faith, not of a true Faith: of the Faith of the
Devils, not of the Faith of Gods elect: of Faith in outward profession, not in
the inward affection. He shows that verse 17.
Faith if it have no works is dead, and again, verse 20. 26.
Faith without works is dead: he likeneth such a Faith to the Faith of the
Devils, and therefore it cannot be a justifying Faith: unless they will make
the Devils good Catholics, and partakers of salvation. He resembles this
Faith to the good words of him that wishes well to a poor man, but does
nothing at all for him; he speaks him fair, but he does not succor him. And
as the body that breaths not is dead, so Faith that brings not forth good
works is dead. Now a dead Faith, is no Faith: it is Faith in name, but not in
Nature. The Philosophers Arist. polit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
teach that when the body is dead, there shall be neither foot nor hand, but
only a likeness of name, as a man terms a hand of wood or stone, a hand: so
in like sort is a dead hand called an hand, or a dead man, a man: because
howsoever they are not the same, yet they retain the show and shadow of the
name: but al true parts of the body are defined by their Office and faculty.
Thus does the Apostle call a dead faith by the name of faith, whereas indeed it
is no more true faith then a dead man is a living man. Hence it is, that some
of the Popish writers teach, that James by the name of Iam. 2. 26.
spirit, understands not the soul, but the breath, and that he fitly
compares works to breath, and faith to the body: Caietan com. on. Iam. 2. 26.
because as the body of a living creature if it breath not is dead, so faith if
it bring forth no works is dead: for breathing is an effect of a living body,
and working is the proper effect of a living faith: we say therefore, that
there is a faith which may be without Charity, and there is a faith that cannot
be without Charity. There is a general faith which believes that there is one
God, and gives assent that the Scriptures be true, which goes no farther;
this we confess may be, and oftentimes is without good works. But there is a
faith that works by Love, which can never be separated from Charity and good
works, but wheresoever it is, there is infallibly and inseparably joined unto
it the Love of God and man, Phil. 1. 11.
bringing forth the fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the
glory and praise of God. If we have this true faith Act. 15. 9.
which purifieth the heart, it will be rich and plentiful in all good works,
and teach us to show the fruits of Love to our Brethren. There has been a
long contention and much ado in the Church, how to reconcile Paul and James
together, the one advancing faith, and the other good works, Paul says Romans
3. 28.
we are justified by faith and not by the works of the Law. James says, we
are justified by Iam 2. 24.
works and not by faith only. These sayings by faith, and not by faith: by
works, and not by works; seem one directly opposite and contrary to the
other. This difference is only in the letter, not in the matter; in show, not
in substance: in words, not in meaning: and the Doctrine which now we have in
hand, will help easily to accord them, nay there cannot be a better
reconciliation, then when we join them together in the practice of our lives
and conuersations. Let us join the lively Faith of Paul with the Good-workes
of James, let us bring them both into action, and so we shall be justified by
S. Paul's faith before God, and by S. James Works before men. Thus the places
will easily be made one, which seem different the one from the other. For,
although Paul do commend Faith, yet he does not condemn Works: and albeit
James do commend Works, yet he does not condemn Faith; and therefore as they
teach both, so we must practice both, we must be void of neither of them.
Seeing they preach both, we must know that both are required of us. This
overthrows two sorts of men; first, Papists; and then Libertines. The first
reproof.
First the Church of Rome do us great wrong and injury, both in falsely
slandering us, and in filling the ears of the simple and ignorant people with
lies, that our Doctrine is a Doctrine of liberty and licentiousness, that we
teach men, (or at least open a gap to men) to live loosely and lewdly, and that
we are enemies to Good-workes, whereas in very deed, we do the clean
contrary, as this Doctrine among a thousand others may bear witness, which
now we deal withal, teaching us that Faith must always go with Works, that
Faith purifieth the heart, and gives victory over the world. We teach, that
Christ is not only our Justification, but also our Sanctification. We charge
men to beware, that they use not the liberty of the Gospel, as a cloak of
maliciousness. We teach them to serve the Lord with fear, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their life. We will men to let their light so
shine before men, that they seeing their Good-Workes may glorify their father
which is in heaven. This is no Doctrine of liberty, nor opens a window to all
wickedness, and yet this is our Doctrine, which is so plain and evident a
truth, Stapl. de Iustif. page 334.
that some of our hottest adversaries are driven to acknowledge it. But who are
they, that have this leisure, to pry and search into the lives of others
abroad, and are ignorant of themselves, and their own Doctrine at home. Fot it
is their Religion that is a broaching of lies, and of all liberty to do evil,
as all men by the light of Nature, not blinded with the love of error might
soon espy. Behold therefore some kinds of their Catholic Faith taught by
their holy Mother the Church. They teach the lawfulness of deposing Princes,
and discharging their Subjects of their allegiance and obedience toward them:
This Doctrine fills Kingdoms and Countries with Treasons and Rebellions,
and allows Traitors, and Assassinates, and Murderers of them at the Popes
pleasure. They do teach and allow the worship of Images, and bowing down to
Stocks and Stones, whereby the people are drawn away from the living God, to
palpable Idolatry, as common experience has declared, Polid. Virg. de invent.
rer. lib. 6 cap. 13.
and some of themselves have confessed. They publish at large the benefit of
Pardons, which may easily be procured for money, which open wide the
Floodgates of al ungodliness. For who will spare to commit sin, that is
able to redeem it with his purse? Yea, this emboldned certain Chemni. exam
conc. Trident de poenit.
men, to rob the Popes pardoner, who before hand had given them a pardon to
commit the next sin, though it should be a great sin. They teach, touching
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that a Dog or Mouse, or Swine, or any
Beast, eating a consecrated host, eats the very flesh and body of our
Savior, Treatise of the Sacram. in the conclusion.
as I have showed elsewhere. They maintain the filthy Dunghill of Stews and
Brothell-houses, which gives allowance unto open whoredom and uncleanness;
yea, they say it is good for a Hard. against the Apology.
Commonwealth, and the Pope tollerateth the Curtezans in Rome, and in other
places, upon a yearly rent, to practice and profess Bawdry. Unto this
rablement of their Catholic conclusions, See White of the way to the true
Church.
we might add many others, which suffice to discover what the holiness of the
Romish Religion is, and to direct us to come out of it betimes, least partaking
with the same sins, we also partake in the punishments. The second reproof.
Secondly, this conjunction of these two Virtues, overthrows the carnal
looseness of all Libertines, such as are Hypocrites and vain boasters of
Faith, which think it sufficient to speak of Faith, and to boast that they
believe. These men does the Apostle James plainly reprove in his Epistle,
teaching, that where there is want of works, 1 Timothy 1, 5.
there is also want of Faith; of a true Faith, which is the right Faith. We
must therefore examine our Faith by the fruits, and prove our believing by our
working. We have many such in our days, that glory of their Faith, and boast
that they are of a right belief, and yet lay them to the trial, and examine
their lives what they are, and we shall find them to be liars against the
truth, and deceiving their own souls. Know therefore, that our faith is, as
our lives are: A good life, a good Faith; a dead life, a dead Faith; an
unfruitful life, an idle Faith. And thus much of Faith and Love joined
together: Now let us speak of them severally, as they are described; first,
touching Faith; and afterward, touching Love.

[ Faith in Christ.] The first Virtue which is here commended to be in
Philemon, is Faith, which is said to respect Christ. This Faith is a gift of
God, whereby we apprehend Christ and his benefits, believing the remission of
our sins, and our reconciliation with God. Mark therefore, that the faith
here set forth, is said to be toward Christ, and Christ who is the proper
object of Faith, does also point us unto the Father, who wills and ordains
our Salvation, Redemption, Reconciliation, and Salvation; and to the
Holy Ghost, who applies and appropriateth to the elect, these benefits which
are willed by the Father, and merrited by Christ. Doctrine 7. Christ is the
object of our Faith.
So then, when the Apostle says of Philemon, that his faith was in Christ, he
teaches that true faith looks unto Christ, depends upon him, trusts and
rests in him for salvation, and not upon any creature in heaven or earth. Our
faith must direct us to Christ to believe in him, to have recourse to him, and
to look for salvation from him, as the Israelites did health from the Brazen
serpent. This is proved unto us by many consents of the word of God. The
Apostle John in his Gospel John 1, 12. and 3, 16, and 17, 20 and 6, 29. and 3,
14, 15, and 12 44, 46. and 14 12.
offers plentiful Testimonies of the truth, as Chap. 1, 12. As many as
received him, to them he gave prerogative to be the sons of God, even to them
that believe in his name. And Chap. 3. God so loved the world, that he has
given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. And again, Chap. 17. I pray not for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe in me through their word. So
before in the third Chapter, As Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness,
so must the son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have eternal life. Thus he speaks in another place, This is the
work of God, that ye believe in him* whom he has sent. When Phillip said to
the Eunuch, If thou beleeuest with all thine heart, thou may be baptized: He
answered, Acts 8, 37. and 16, 31.
I believe that Jesus Christ is that son of God. So Paul and Silas willed
the Keeper of the prison to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and he should he
saved. And the Apostle, Gal. 2. teaches, That a man is not justified by the
Works of the Law, Gal. 2, 16.
but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we, I say, have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ. All these places of
Scripture plainly instruct us in this principle of our holy religion, that
Faith must be in Christ, in whom it finds a sure ground to rest upon.

Reason 1.
The Reasons are to be marked and considered, which confirm this Doctrine.
First, because the work of salvation is wholly and only wrought by him, and
no part thereof is reserved to any creature, in whole or in part. To be called
Jesus, is as it were the proper name of Christ, who is a perfect and absolute
Sauiout, beginning, continuing, and finishing our salvation. This is it Acts 4,
12.
which Peter preaches: Among men, there is no other name given under heaven,
whereby we may be saved, but by the Name of Jesus. And the author to the
Hebrews says, that he Heb. 7, 25.
is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Thus we see, Christ is made the Author
and finisher of our salvation.

Reason 2.
Secondly, to put a difference between the Creator and the Creatute, between
the things pertaining to God, and the things pertaining to men. No creature is
to be believed in, nor any blessing that we receive from Christ. We believe the
Church, not in the Church; the Communion of Saints, not in the Communion of
Saints; the forgiveness of sins, not in the forgiveness of sins, as we
shall see afterward. Seeing therefore, we have Justification and salvation from
no other then from Christ, and seeing we must make a difference and distinction
between him and all other creatures, it follows; that we must believe in him,
and fasten our Faith as a sure Anchor of our soul upon him.

Use 1.
Let us see what are the Uses of this Doctrine, and how we may profitably
apply it to our instruction and edification. First, seeing it is our duty to
believe in Christ, we learn that Christ Jesus is true and eternal God, equal
with his Father, to be worshipped and glorified together with the Father, and
the blessed spirit. This serves to convince the Heresy of the Arrians, Jews,
Turks, Persians, and sundry other Infidels, who deny the Deity of the son of
God, and cast him down into the row and rank of mere creatures, who
notwithstanding Phil. 2, 6, 10.
being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, at
whose Name every knee must bow, both of things in Heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth. Therefore, we saw before, that the Apostle
in his salutation, wishes Grace and Peace to come upon them, to whom he
writes this Epistle, as well from Jesus Christ, as from God the Father. If
Grace and Peace come not only from the Father, but from the Son, it
follows that he is God equal with the other. Hence it is, that he says in
the Gospel, John 14, 1. 11, and 12, 44. and 10, 30 and 14, 11. and 9, 38
Ye believe in God, believe also in me, let not your heart be troubled. And
again, He that believes in me, believes not in me (to wit, an ordinary man,
as they falsely imagined) but in him that sent me. And in another place, Believe
me, that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me: I and my Father are one.
So when Christ had restored sight on the Sabbath day to him that was borne
blind, he said; Lord I believe, and worshipped him. Whereby we see, that
whosoever is without the Son, is also without the Father: he that believes
not in the Son, believes not in the Father: He that worshippeth not the
Son, Worshippeth not the Father. So then, this is a certain and invincible
Argument of the Deity of Christ, that we are to believe in him, forasmuch as
Faith is a Worship due only unto God.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing it is a principle necessary to be holden of al men, that we
must believe in the Son, we must put a difference between these sayings; to
believe God, and to believe in God. For, albeit he that believes in God,
believes God, yet it is not so on the contrary, every one that believes God,
does not by and by believe in God. The Devils themselves (as we showed before)
do believe God, they believe Christ, they confess him to be the son of the
Father, they know him to be the Judge of the World, the Savior of mankind,
the holy one of God; and yet they do not believe in him, they put no
confidence in him, they look not for life and salvation from him, but are
assured they are reserved to destruction. This makes them cry out in Math. 8,
29.
the Gospel, Why art thou come to torment us before the time. And the apostle
James says, James 2, 19.
The Devils believe and tremble. They believe God touching his Nature and
attributes; they believe Christ touching his Person, and Natures, and Offices:
They believe the Holy Ghost touching his Person and Gifts: They believe there
is a Church and singular prerogatives imparted to it, and bestowed upon it. And
albeit our Faith must go beyond the faith of the Devils, yet they go farther
then many professors of the Gospel among us, that have no knowledge of these
things. So then, it is required of us, not only to believe that there is a
Savior of the world, but we must believe that he is our Savior; beginning
our salvation in this life, and perfecting it in the life to come.

This confuteth the Popish opinion, that holds, that we may believe in the
creatures, as well as in the Creator: in the Saints, as well as in Christ: in
mortal men, as well as in the eternal God. They teach that we may believe,
not only the Church, but in the Church; not only Moses, Rhem. Test. upon Romans
10.
but in Moses; not only the Prophets, but in the Prophets. We are charged to
believe in the blessed Trinity, in God the Father, in God the son, and in God
the Holy Ghost: but Ruffin. in Symbol.
when the speech is not of the Godhead, but of the Creatures and Mysteries, we
are not taught to believe in them; and therefore we are no more to believe in
the Church, then to believe in baptism, in the resurrection of the body, the
Communion of Saints, and in the participation of glory. We are indeed to
believe Exodus 14, 31 2 Chro. 20, 20
Moses and the Prophets, that they spoke not of themselves, that their word is
not the word of man, that they ran not before they were sent; but we are not
to believe in them. We are indeed to believe Peter and Paul, Angast. tract.
2^. in Johan.
but not in Peter and Paul. We are to believe the Scriptuers, but not in the
Scriptures; Eusebius. Emissen. de Symb. hom. 2.
for that were to bestow upon the servant the honor of the Lord, and to give
to man that which is proper to the divine Majesty. We must believe in Christ
Jesus our only savior; as for those that believe in any other, or seek
salvation in any other then in Christ, whether in Saints, or in Angels, or in
themselves, they believe not in Christ as in their only Savior. For Cyprian.
de duplic. martyr.
he believes not in God, who does not place in him alone the trust of his
whole felicity, who does not put his affiance in him, who does not depend upon
him, who is not assured of his good will and favor, looking for salvation from
him, and for deliverance from all evils.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing it is necessary for us to have faith in Christ, it is our duty
to use all means to attain to this Faith. Many there are, which are deceived
in thinking they have it, who indeed have it not. These suppose they are full
of Faith, who are as empty vessels, and never tasted the sweetness of it, as
may appear, by examining the common practice of our common professors, by
these six notes. First, true Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
preached, as the Apostle shows, Romans 10. How shall they call upon him in whom
they do not believe, Romans 10, 14
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard, how shall they
hear without a Preacher, and how shall they preach except they be sent? This
place is not unfitly called a Ladder that reaches to Heaven, whereby as by
certain steps we climb up to heaven. God sends, the Minister preaches,
the people believes. The same Apostle asks the Galathians, Gal. 3, 2. John
17, 20.
Whether they received the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing
of Faith? But the Faith which many talk and boast of, is conceived and
conceited without the preaching of the word, for they cannot abide it, they
will not attend unto it, they regard not to hear it. True it is, if they be
asked whether they have Faith or not, they will think it a strange question,
and marvel that we should make doubt thereof, they suppose themselves to have a
sound Faith in Christ; but how come they by this faith? They say they believe
in Jesus Christ for their salvation, and yet they live in a perpetual neglect,
and continual contempt of the public Ministry of the word. Such is their
believing, as is their hearing; and their Faith is aunswerable to their
attending. It is a great foolishness, and worse then madness, for any man to
imagine to attain to Faith by any other means then God has ordained. When
God has said, that the ordinary way to obtain Faith, is by the preaching of
the word: will thou in the high pride of thy ignorant heart say, I can have
Faith without preaching? This is to cross the ordinance of God, and to think
thy self wiser then God. For, although all have not Faith that ordinarily
hear; yet ordinarily none have faith that do not hear. If then we would have
Faith, we must seek it as God has appointed, where it is to be found; and
when it is to be found, let us be diligent hearers, attentive hearers, constant
hearers, and then we shall see the blessing of God upon us, that we shall be
saving hearers.

Secondly, true Faith is also joined with Prayer to God, and with repentance
from dead works: for how shall they call upon him in whom they do not
believe? And the Apostle Acts 15 9.
Peter teaches, that Faith purifieth the heart. Paul exhorting the Elders of
Ephesus says, Acts 20, 21
That he witnessed both to the Jews and to the Grecians, the Repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. It was the substance of Christ's
Sermons, which he preached when he came into Galile, Mark 1, 15
The Kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe the Gospel. But there are
many amongst us that profess Faith, which have a Faith of another kind and
Nature, it is not joined with invocation of Gods name, they make no Conscience
to call upon him, they have not the Spirit of Prayer, that cries in their
hearts, Abba Father: it works not in them conversion of heart, a turning of
the mind, a change of life: they boast of Faith, but they remain the same
men they were before, a dead life, a dead Faith; a profane life, a false
Faith, that will in the end deceive them.

Thirdly, true Faith works in us an holy contentation in our estate, and
teaches us to depend upon Gods providence, touching Food, Raiment, and all
things necessary for this present life. This Christ our Savior teaches us
from the example of the Fowls of the Heaven, of the stature of our body, of
the Lillies of the field, from the grass of the earth: what do pensive
thoughts, distracting and distrustful cares avail to sustain us, or preserve
our life? Wherefore, seeing the Birds are nourished, our stature is increased,
the Lillies are beautified, the Grass is clothed by the power and providence
of God, Math. 6, 30. and 8, 20.
Shall he not do the same much more to you, O ye of little Faith? Faith
therefore makes us rest upon God, want of Faith takes away all trust in him.
But many among us, that will needs boast of Faith in Christ, want this Faith
in his providence: for they dare not trust GOD with their life, they do not
depend upon him for their living, they are afraid he will leave them, and
forsake them, they do not believe he will be a merciful and gracious God unto
them, they have not that affiance and confidence reposed him, that natural
children have in their Parents. A Child does not weary himself with matters
of the World, he does not forecast for many years, he is not entangled
and choked with earthly Cogitations, all his care is cast upon his Father,
he trusts upon him, he knows he will provide for him, and so passes
his days without distrust or despair. And shall we not be ashamed, to be
sent to School to learn of little Children, that depend upon their Father,
whereas we have not learned to lift up our eyes unto our Father that dwells
in the Heavens, but use unlawful means and ungodly shifts to help our
selves. A plain argument, that we have not that Faith, which we falsely
imagine, and vainly imagine our selves to have.

Fourthly, true Faith is the Mother of love, and makes us live in peace one
with another; the Apostle Gala. 5, 6.
Paul teaches, That Faith works by love. And John in his first Epistle
says, 1 John 3, 23
This is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ,
and love one another. But many that will seem to have faith in Christ, show no
fruits of love toward their Brethren, they are not careful (if it be possible)
and so far as lies in them, to have peace with all men, they do not seek
after peace, and ensue it, but live in hatred and contention, in malice and
envy, and least of all do affect the children of God. An envious Faith, is no
Faith; and therefore, let such men look unto it. Fifthly true faith is mingled
with doubting and unbelief, with wavering and fear, and oftentimes strongly
shaken and assailed as with a mighty Tempest. This we see in the Father of him
that was possessed with an unclean spirit, he was ready to rest upon Christ,
but he felt the fruit of his own corruption, the spirit was willing, but the
flesh was weak, he found a fight within himself, between Faith and
Infidelity. When he considered the infinite power of Christ, that was able to
cast out Satan, and to bind the strong man he was moved to believe. On the
other side, when he saw the strangeness, the continuance, the incureablenesse
of his sons disease, when he marked that the Devil took him, tare him, cast
him into the fire to burn him, threw him into the water to drown him, and at
all times sought to destroy him, when he beheld with the eyes of a Father that
his child fomed at the mouth; gnashed with his teeth, pined away in his body,
and was bruised in his bones, he was tempted with unbelief, and this made him
cry out with tears, Mark 9, 24
Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief. This is it wherein the Lord forewarned
and fore-armed Peter, Luke 22, 32.
Behold, Satan has desired you to winnow you as Wheat, but I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not. He prayed not that their Faith should not be
tried, but that it should not be destroyed, forasmuch as they must on every
side be assailed. But the Faith of many is such, that they say they perfectly
believe, and they thank God they never doubted in all their life. This Fath is
no Faith, it is an idle conceit, a vain persuasion, a foolish presumption.
Lastly, the true Faith increases by degrees, it is like unto a grain of
mustard seed, which at the first is the least of all seeds, Math. 13, 31
which afterward grows unto a Tree, that the Birds of the Air come and
build their Nestes in it: and therefore, we must Romans 1, 17.
proceed from Faith to Faith. But many amongst us, that will needs be in the
number of the faithful, never feel these Degrees of Faith, they see not any
increasing or decreasing, any shining or ecclipsing of their Faith; Nay, they
never examine themselves whether they be in the Faith or not. They never
consider whether they go forward or backward in the ways of Godliness: they
can cast up their accounts every Week with the world, but they can suffer
whole months and years to pass over their heads, and never once offer to
make level with the Lord. If we will assure our own hearts, that we have
this true and perfect Faith in Christ, let us observe the manner and measure of
it, the steps and degrees of it, how we walk by it, and labor by all holy
means to increase it in us. Thus much touching the Object of Faith: Now, let
us consider the Object of Love.

[ Love toward the Saints.] The meaning of these words, is first to be
observed, and then the Doctrines are to be gathred, which the Spirit of God
offers in this place to our considerations. By love, we are to understand the
fruits of love: mercy, consolation, compassion, brotherly kindness, relief,
pity, and whatsoever fruits of charity we see them want and stand in need of.
It stands in the affection of the mind, in the words of the mouth, and in the
works of the hand. By Saints, we do not understand such as are dead and
deceased, but those that are living; not such as are of the Church Triumphant,
but in the Church Militant; not such as are crowned with glory in heaven, but
those that dwell upon the earth; not such as are enrolled in the Popes
Register, and stand in read Letters in the Popish Calendar; but the faithful,
whose Names are Written in the Book of life, which are the true members of
Jesus Christ. Thus much touching the true Interpretation of the Words. We see
here that Love is described by the Object thereof, to wit; the Saints. For,
as Christ is not the Object of our Charity, Psalm. 16 2.
for our wel-dooing extends not unto him: so the Saints are not the Object of
our Faith, but as Faith has respect and relation to Christ, so has love
reference to the Saints. Now, we have showed already, that Philemons love is
commended toward the Saints, because he had a principal and special care of
them. True it is, he neglected not others, but he was most of all mindful of
the godly, poor, and distressed Brethren. Doct. 8. The works of mercy are
especially to be showed to the poor that are godly.
We learn hereby, that the works of mercy are especially to be showed to the
poor among us that are faithful, which may be accounted of the fellowship
and Communion of the Saints. Howsoever all such as are poor, are in their
poverty to be regarded, inasmuch as Christ has taught us that the poor we
shall have always with us, yet the Godly poor, that have piety joined with
their poverty, are before others, and above others, to be respected and
relieved.

In the performance of this duty, we see the practice of the Prophet David
going before us, psalm. 16, 2, 3.
and leading us the way. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my
Lord, my well-dooing extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the
earth, and to the excellent: all my delight is in them. In like manner also,
our Savior Christ describing the manner of the last Judgment, when he shall
give to every one according to his Works, Math. 25, 40
declares, that the fruits of mercy bestowed upon the members of Christ,
being sick, imprisoned, hungry, thirsty, naked, and in necessity, are
allowed as notable fruits of a justifying Faith, and of a true love, and
accepted as done to Christ himself. So the Evangelist Luke testifies in the
Acts, that Acts 4, 32.
the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one mind, they
had all things common, no man accounted any thing he possessed his own, but
to serve the necessary use of the Saints. The Apostle having proved in the
Epistle to the Romans, that we are justified freely by the grace of God,
without the works of the Law, whereby we are at peace with God, comes to set
down the fruits of Faith, Chap. 12. Rejoicing in hope, continuing in Prayer,
Romans 12, 13
distributing unto the necessities of the Saints, giving your selves to
Hospitality. Heereunto come diverse Laws which God ordained among his people,
Deuteronomy. 15, 17
If one of thy Brethren with thee be poor within any of thy gates in thy Land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut
thine hand from thy poor brother: but thou shall open thine hand unto him, and
shall lend him sufficient for his need. All these testimonies of Scripture do
prove, that the poor which are godly are most of all to be succored and
sustained, as they, that for the most part stand in greatest need to be helped.

Reason 1.
The Reasons hereof are to be considered. First, it is a fruit of our
election, which we ought to assure to our selves more and more. The Apostle
John testifies this, 1 John 3, 14.
We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
Brethren: he that loves not his Brother, abides in death. We ought daily to
gather arguments to persuade our hearts of Gods love toward us, which we
shall see by our love toward our brethren. The election of God is hidden in
himself, the cause of it is not in our selves; but we shall not need to
climb up to Heaven to know it, God has left us a better, a more easy and
certain way then to search into the secrets of God, that he has kept to
himself, if we enter into our selves, and see the effects and signs of it,
we shall not doubt thereof, but rest assured with unspeakable comfort that we
belong to him. For as the Lord knows who are his, so we shall know that we
are the Lords, if we find the fruits of election graven in our hearts, among
the which this is one of the principal, our unfeigned love to the Brethren,
the forgiving of our enemies, our delight in the Saints, our doing good to
them that are of the household of Faith.

Reason 2.
Secondly, such poor as be faithful belong unto Christ, and what comfort
soever is ministered, what relief soever is showed to them, is ministered and
showed to Christ, as christ himself witnesses with his own mouth, who is truth
it self, that they should the more readily embrace it as the truth. For he
tells us, that it shall be said to us in the last day, that have helped the
Saints, and refreshed their bowels, Math. 25, 40
Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it to me. This is a notable motive and
encouragement to move us to this duty, to consider that our love is showed not
to men upon the earth, but to Christ sitting in heaven, at the right hand of
his Father. Heereunto comes the wise saying of Solomon, Prou. 19, 17.
He that has mercy upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. Yea, he is so rich a rewarder, and a
bountiful recompencer of that which is done to those of his household, Math.
10, 42
that if a cup of cold water be given to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple,
to a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, he shall not loose his
reward. When one lends to an honest man that stands upon his credit, he
seareth no loss, he knows he will perform what he has promised, and
accounts his word as good as a band and Obligation: how much more ought we to
be assured of right good payment, when we have done any good thing unto the
poor, forasmuch as we have not done it to man, but unto God. He has given his
word to see us paid, will we not take his word? he offreth to enter into bands,
and to be bound in a statute, is not statute law good with us? Albeit he be
indebted to none, but all in debt to him, yet he offers himself as a
pledge, and becomes surety for the money, who is so good a pay-maister, that
he will not only restore the principal, but pay the hire and profit to him
that has lent it, both in this life, and abundantly in the life to come.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, we are bound to follow the example of our heavenly father, to love as
he loves; to love most where he loves most of all; and least, where he
loves least of all. Now, he loves all his creatures, which are the works of
his hands, Genesis 1, 31.
He saw them all when they were made, and lo they were all exceeding good:
but he especially loves mankind, Whom Genesis 1, 26.
he created in his own Image, according to his likeness: and yet most
especially he loves the faithful, upon whom he bestows the riches of his
love, and hides not the secrets of his kingdom from them; yea, he has given
them his own son to be their Wisdom, Justification, Sanctification, and
Redemption unto them, how should he not with him give them al things else?
This the Apostle teaches, 1 Timothy 4, 10
warning us to Trust in the living God, which is the Savior of al men,
especially of those that believe. Here is a pattern and president for us to
follow, that we may be like our Heavenly Father; we must love all mankind,
but we must most entirely and dearly respect the godly: we must love all the
poor, but the poor that are faithful we must love most of all. If we must
bestow labor upon barren ground, we must not leave the fruitful untilled:
and if we must cast our Bread upon the Waters where it may seem to be lost,
we must not deny it to the living members of Christ's body, which are our
Brethren.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, we cannot by our well-dooing benefit God at all; our goodness can
do him no good, our love cannot profit or pleasure him. For, as our
wickedness can do him no harm, so our kindness can procure him no good. This
he says, and thus he speaks in the Prophet, Psalm. 50, 9, 10, 11, 12.
I will take no Bullock out of thine house, nor Goats out of thy Foldes, for
all the Beasts of the Forest are mine, and the Beasts on a thousand
Mountains: I know all the Beasts on the Mountains, and the Wild Beasts of
the field are mine: If I be hungry, I will not tell thee, for the World is
mine, and all that therein is. We receive all good from him, we can return
nothing back to him again, to do him good. This is the reason which the
Prophet David teaches, which moved him to join himself unto the people of
God, and to profit them, because he saw he could not pleasure God, his
well-doing could not extend to him. Seeing therefore the duty of love showed
to the Brethren, are seals of our election, and are accepted as done to
Christ himself, seeing we must follow the example of our heavenly Father, and
that we cannot by all our goods help him; it follows, that we must begin our
works of mercy at the faithful, and cast a pitiful eye, and open a liberal
hand especially toward the^.

Use 1.
Let us now come to the Uses of this doctrine. First, this teaches, that there
ought to be among all the faithful a communion of Saints, they are as a family
or household among themselves. They have a near fellowship, they are near
brethren, they are fellow members of one body, they are knit together by one
spirit, they are called under one hope, they are made Christ's by one faith,
they are made one by one baptism, they have one bread to feed upon, they have
one cup to drink of, they have one table to meet at, they have one God that
they worship, they have one salvation that they aim at. This the Apostle
expresses at large. Ephe. 4. Support one another through love, Ephe. 4, 2, 3.
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; There is one
body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your vocation:
There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, which
is above all, and through all, and in you all. We are charged to have a care of
all mankind, but as it is fit and convenient, that they which are of the same
family, should be helpful and beneficial one to another, rather then to such
as are of another family, which are not so nearly joined unto them; so we must
have a care to do good to all the sons of men, but it is requisite, that those
which are members of the same body, nay which are Sons and Daughters;
Brethren, and Sisters, having the same God for their Father, the same Church
for their Mother, the same Christ for their elder Brother, which are begotten
of the same immortal seed, nourished with the same Milk, and gathered
together in one hope, should be beneficial and bountiful one to another,
rather then to those that are forraigners and Strangers, not linked to them by
the bond of Faith, nor joined with them in the body of Christ. Wherefore, the
Apostle says to the Phillippians, Phil. 2, 1, 2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any Compassion and Mercy, fulfill my joy, that
ye be like minded having the same Love, being of one accord, and of one
judgment. He teaches us to have one mind and heart, he admonishes us to
cleave together, and to hold together. We see how those of the Kingdom of
darkness and destruction, do couple and combine themselves together against
the Church and chosen Children of God; for doubtless Acts 4 27.
we may say as the Apostle did, Against thy Son Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentles and the people of
Israel, gathered themselves together. And* as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 83,
5, 6.
They have consulted together in heart, and have made a league against thee,
the Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismaelites, Moa^, and the Agarims; Gebal, and
Amalech, the Philistims, and the inhabitants of Tyrus, etc. So is it in these
days, the ungodly rabble of profane persons have joined together, and make as
it were a Conspiracy against the godly: the profane and Atheistes, the
Papists and Libertines set themse^es against the faithful of the Land, and
open their mouths against heaven, they devise all horrible and detastable
slanders to work their confusion. We find hard entertainment in the World,
because we are chosen out of the World. We are hated of them, because we are
not Companions with them in evil. We are reviled and slaundered of them,
because we will ^ot follow all excess of riot, to the slander of our
profession, and to the d^shonour of God. Wherefore, the Children of light
should company and consort together, being the Sons of God, heirs of his
Kingdom, members of Christ, Temples of the Holy Ghost. The unreasonable
Creat^res may condemn us. We see Cattle heard together, Sheep flock
togeth^r, Fishes shole together, and Birds of a Feather will fly together: O
what a some is it then for us, to make a rent and division in the body of
Christ, by seperating our selves one from another in affection of heart, and
practice of life! A true Christian man or woman is like a Candle, that
consumes it self to give light to others. So must Gods people spend those
gifts which God has given them for the benefit of their Brethren. This Wherein
the communion of Saints stands.
Communion which we are to yield to the Saints, stands in two things; not to
speak of the Communion that we have with Christ our head, but one toward
another. Fitst, in affection; Secondly, in gifts. In mind and affections we
must be of one heart, to mourn with them that do lament, and to rejoice with
those that God does comfort. We see this to be in the natural members of our
body, if one member do suffer, the rest are pained; if one rejoice, the other
are comforted. This duty the Apostle remembers unto us, Romans 12, 15, 16.
Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep: be of like
affection one toward another. So the writer to the Hebrews moves us Heb. 13,
3.
to Remember them that are in bonds, as though we were bound with them: and
them that are in affliction, as if we were also afflicted in the body. If our
selves were in prison, we would have a sensible feeling of our imprisonment,
and we would be ready to complain of the want of the fruits of love in
others toward us, if we were not visited and comforted. Let us therefore
practice that toward others, which we would have practiced toward our selves.
This must all true Christians have in mind, that they must have tender hearts
and compassionate affections, putting on the bowels of mercy and
commisseration* in regard of the miseries that befall the Church in general,
or our Brethren in particular. Christ Jesus is touched with a feeling of their
miseries, and accounts them as done to himself, as appears when he said,
Acts 9, 4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? This reprooueth those that weep when
the Church rejoices, or rejoice when the Church weepeth. The Prophet Amos
complains of this deadness of heart in his days, Amos 6, 6.
The people drank wine in bowls, they anointed themselves with the chief
ointments, they stretched themselves upon Beds of Iuory, but no man was sorry
for the affliction of Joseph. If we be not touched with a sight and sense of
the Churches miseries, it is a plain argument that we are dead members, not
living; rotten members, not sound; senseless members, not feeling. The second
part of the Communion of the Saints, stands in the communication of gifts.
The gifts of God to be imparted to our Brethren, are of two sorts. For, as we
consist of two parts, the soul and the body, so the gifts are of two kinds,
Spiritual graces, and temporal Blessings. We must bestow upon them
spiritual gifts, procuring their good, by example, exhortation, comfort,
prayer, reproof. We are Heb. 3, 13. Gal. 6, 1.
willed to exhort one another, while it is called to day: we are admonished,
when any man is fallen by occasion into any fault, as spiritual men to restore
such a one with meekness, considering out selves, least we also be tempted.
Touching temporal blessings, we must be ready and content to bestow such goods
as God has bestowed upon us, for the good of our fellow members. If we have
this worlds good, we must not hide our compassion from them, for then we
cannot assure our selves that the love of God dwells in us.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing we are charged to provide for the goodly poor, and not to
see them want, it teaches that we are all the Lords Stewards, to dispense and
dispose his blessings to others. We hold all that we have of him, and we hold
all at his will, and during his pleasure: he may thrust us out of our houses
when he lists. For properly we are not Lords, but Tenants* not Owners, but
Stewards; not Possessors, but Borrowers; and whatsoever we enjoy, it is not
ours only, but ours, and the poores; they have their share and portion with
us. A Christian man, though he be the freest man upon the earth, yet he is a
Servant to all, especially to the Church of God. A Christian man, is only a
Freeman; for he has Christian liberty belonging ^o him, John 8. 36.
And he whom Christ makes free, he is free indeed. He is freed Romans 8, 1. Col.
2, 16, 20. Romans 6, 14.
from ^he curse of the Law, from the bond of perfect righteousness, from the
burden of Ceremonies, from the bondage of sin. He has a freedom in the
voluntary Luke 1, 74.
worship and service of God, in the Tit 1, 15.
free use of all the Creatures of God, to come to the throne of grace, Rom 5, 2.
Ephe 3, 12.
with assurance to be heard for Christ's sake, and to enter into the Kingdom of
glory after this life. On the other side, a wicked man is the greatest slave
and bondsman that can be. He is in bondage under sin. He is subject to all
punishments temporal and eternal. He is in bondage under the Devil, 2. Tim
2, 26.
who keeps all impenitent sinners in his snares to do his his will. He is in
bondage under the wrath of God. But to let this pass, howsoever the faithful
are free men, yet they are not only the servants of God, but the servants of
men, especially of the poor, but most especially of the godly. We are not to
seek our own things, but to refer the labors of our calling, and the
blessing of God upon our labors to the common good of the Church whereof we
are members.

This condemns two sorts of men. First such as seek for nothing but to
settle themselves and maintain their own estates, to enrich themselves that
they may live in ease and wealth, like the rich man mentioned in the Gospel:
these make no conscience of swearing, forswearing, lying, dissembling,
oppressing, and such like unfruitful works of the flesh. Th^se men may
allege and plead for themselves what they will, but in truth they never yet
knew what the Communion of Saints means. The Apostle gives this precept to
all the Church, Phil 2. 4. Gal. 6. 2.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
other men. And in another place, Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill
the Law of Christ. So the Apostle James teaches Iam. 4. 3.
that we often ask, and receive not, because we ask amiss, that we might
consume the same upon our pleasures. Secondly, it reproves such as wast and
consume the good creatures of God in riotousnes, in drunkenness, and in all
excess, and when they are in brotherly love and Christian compassion
admonished, do by and by answer, what have you to do with my spending? I spend
nothing but mine own, I spend none of yours. Yes, thou spendest that which is
thy wives, thy Childrens, thy families, even that which is Gods, for which thou
shall give an account at the great and dreadful day of judgment. For when
Christ shall come with thousands of his Angels to make an end of all things,
and say unto thee, Luke. 16, 2
Come, give an account of thy Stewardship for thou may be no longer Steward:
will thou answer to the Judge of all the world, and to Christ that shall sit
upon the Throne, thou have wasted none of his goods, and abused none of his
Creatures? Thine own heart, and thine own conscience, as a thousand
witnesses, will give in evidence against thee, that thou have taught thy tongue
to lie. They have forgotten they are the Lords Stewards, and shall give an
account to him as certainly of the bestowing of their substance, as themselves
take an account of their servants, of that portion of their goods which they
have committed unto them.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing we are debtors to all men, but specially to the faithful, it
reproves such as show the chiefest fruit of their love and charity upon the
ungodly and profane, whom it were many times more charity to see punished then
relieved, and corrected then maintained. Many there are among us that have no
care or compassion of the poor Saints, though they see their wants and
necessities, yet they can shut their eyes and pass by them Luke. 10. 31. 32.
as the Priest and Leuite did, by him that was robbed by Thieves and lay half
dead of his wounds. But they will oftentimes be bountiful, and show their
benevolence upon such, as a great deal worse deserve it. We see that our
collections and distributions are made many times amiss, and such as are most
profane, are best provided for. Such as are idle Drones, beastly Drunkards,
filthy Harlots, and their graceless bastardes, are more regarded and
respected, and have better experience of our Alms then such poor as are godly
minded, heirs by grace, Saints by calling, and sons by faith. This is an
inuerting and ouerturning of the order that God has set and settled to remain
among us, for this is his ordinance which he has left with us, Gal. 6. 10.
While we have time, let us do good unto all men, but specially to them that
are of the household of Faith. So the Apostle prays for the Thessalonians,
that the Lord would increase them and make them abound in Love one toward
another and toward all men. First it must extend to such as are members of the
Church, and afterward to all others. 1. These. 3. 12. Lo here is an Ordinance
of God perpetually and inuiolably to be kept, as a Law of the Medes and
Persians which could not be altered: we must do good to the distressed Saints
and poor servants of God before others and more then to others. God indeed is
good to all, Psalm. 125. 9.
and his mercy is over all his works, but in a special sort he Psalm. 73. 1.
is good to Israel, and gracious to them that are pure of heart. He saves man
and beast in body, but he saves the souls of his elect for ever: He does not
only preserve them temporally, but he will glorify them eternally. From hence
such as are poor and have godliness laid up in their hearts must learn, to
bear the heavy burden of poverty with patience, seeing that howsoever they are
neglected of men in the daily ministration, yet they are highly respected of
God, and he vouchsafes to leave special direction for them above others, to
be sustained. The greater our poverty is, the greater should be our piety: that
the more miserable we seem to the world, the more honorable we may be in the
sight of God and of all good men. True godliness will sweeten the bitterness of
the Cross, which has the promises of this life and of that which is to come.
But a poor estate joined with a profane life, and extreme necessity
accompanied with extreme iniquity and impiety, is a double misery, a double
wretchedness, a double unhappiness. Let this therefore comfort us, and temper
the greatness of our affliction, seeing God does care for us above all his
Creatures; yea, before the rest of mankind, charging those that are rich in
this world to make a difference between man and man, between person and
person, between poor and poor, even such a difference as he himself has
made, who prefers the sheep of his own Pasture before Goats; the Sons
and Daughters of his own family, before bastards; the heirs of his Kingdom
before Aliens and strangers; the vessels of honor, before the vessels of
dishonor. As for the poor that are wicked, ungodly, lewd, and profane, so
long as they live in their wickedness, ungodliness, lewdness, and
profaneness, they are no parts of Gods family, they are bastards, not sons;
they are members of the Devil, not members of Christ; they are cages of
unclean Birds, not Temples of the holy Ghost; they are as dung and dross of
the earth, not silver and Gold for the Lords house. Seeing therefore God does
cast them down into the second rank, let not us advance them above their
place. God is the God of order, not of confusion: and if we be of God, let us
establish among us the order that he has planted. Let us judge with righteous
judgment, and lay all partiality aside. Let us not respect the poor because
they are our friends, but because they are the friends of God. Let us not see
to those that are nearly alied to us, but to those that are of the kindred of
Christ, which hear Mat. 12, 50. Luke 11, 28.
his word and keep it, who are his Mother, Sister, and brother. Hereby they
shall be encouraged in well doing, and we shall by our godly care of them,
provoke them to greater zeal, and to a constant continuance in their
profession. Wherefore let this be the rule to guide and govern us: Such are to
be used best which are indeed best, let them have most relief of the body,
that have most grace and godliness in the heart. Godliness gives the
pre-eminence, and ungodliness brings reproach and sets a note of infamy
upon his face that is defiled with it. True it is, others must have their
portion and proportion: but it must be so rated, that they be in the first
place* provided for, that are most religious in heart, and painful in their
callings, and thankful to their weldoers. For where true Religion has taken
place, it will make them diligent in their business, and serviceable to those of
whom they have received good things. As for those that are idle, and
unthankful, they never tasted of sound Religion, and do nothing else but
abuse their profession. Thus much of the persons to whom we must do good; that
is, especially to the faithful.

[ Toward the Saints.] The faithful are here called by the name and title of
Saints. By this word are all such called as are the true members of
Christ-Iesus, whether they be living, or dead; in this life, or out of this
life. But in this place only such are meant, as live under the covenant of
grace, and fight the Lords battles against Sin, the World, and the Devil.
Now they Why the Godly are called Saints.
are called Saints, or holy, for these causes: First, because they are
separated by the mercies of God, from the filthiness and damnable condition of
this world: they are gathered into a Church, and set apart for the pure service
of God. Secondly, because they are purged and cleansed from their sins, by
the precious blood of Christ. Thirdly, because they express the fruit hereof
in holiness and righteousness, they are altered and changed from that which
they were by nature, they are regenerate and created anew, they are renewed in
their wills, affections, purposes, and practices. This is contray to
profaneness. Doctrine 9. Such as truly belong to Christ are Saints.
We learn from this title given to the faithful, that they which truly
belong to Christ are Saints; that is, are sanctified, cleansed, and purged
from their sins and iniquities by the blood of Christ, are delivered from the
slavery and bondage of sin, and are enabled by the grace of God in some
measure to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life.
In this respect the Isralites, when God had chosen them out of the world to be
his people and servants, Exodus 19. 6. 1 Pet 2, 9.
are called a royal Priesthood, and an holy Nation. This name of Saints is
usual and common with the Apostle Paul in all his Epistles. In the Epistle to
the Romans he writes to all Rome beloved of God, Rom 1, 7. Acts 9, 41.
called to be Saints. So he writes to the Church of God which is at Corinth,
to them that are 1. Cor 1, 2. and 14, 33.
sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling, with all that call on the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place: and afterward he says, God is not the
author of confusion; but of peace, as we see in all the Churches of the
Saints. So he shows in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephe 3, 8. and 5, 3.
that to him the least of all Saints, this grace was given, that he should
preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. The Prophet David
also says, Psalm 85, 8.
I will hearken what the Lord God will say, he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints, that they turn not again to folly. All these
places do plainly prove, that they which believe in Christ and belong to him,
truly may be called Saints and holy men.

Reason 1.
The reasons are these. First, because they are thereunto called and chosen in
Christ, they are thereunto justified and redeemed by Christ. For we are chosen
before the foundations of the world to be holy, Ephe 1, 4.
He has chosen us in him, that we should be holy and without blame before him
in love. It is the end of our calling, as the Apostle teaeheth 1. These. 4. This
is the will of God, even your sanctification, and that ye should abstain from
fornication, etc. for 1. These 4, 3, 7.
God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. It is the end of
our redemption, as Zachary shows, that the Lord God of Israel has visietd
and redeemed his people, Luke 1, 68, 74, 75.
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies should serve him
without fear all the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness befort him.
Seeing therefore God has called us with an holy calling, and appointed us to
be Saints, by his decree of our election, by the efficacy of our calling, by
the virtue of our Justification, and by the power of our redemption, it
follows, that all the faithful may worthily challenge the name of Saints.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the servants of God must be Saints, to the end there may be a
conformity and likeness unto him that has had mercy upon us. It is requisite
that there should be a resemblance between God and his people. God is holy, it
is one of his names, he is called the holy one. Christ is holy, and he is
called the holy one of God. Seeing therefore God is holy that has called us,
it follows that holiness belongs unto us. The son bears the Image of
his father, and thereby is easily known whose son he is. If we be the sons
of God, we must express his Image in holiness and true righteousness. This is it
which Moses declares and repeateth Leuit. 11. Leuit 11. 44.
I am the Lord your God, be sanctified therefore, and be holy, for I am holy,
and defile not your selves with any creeping thing that creeps upon the
earth. Heereunto accords the saying of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet 1. 14. 15.
As obedient Children fashion not your selves unto the former lusts of your
ignorance, but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation, because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy. If then he
that is the God of all the Saints be holy, if it be one of his essential
attributes, so that he can no more cease to be holy then he can cease to be
God, the Saints themselves must be Saints, not only in name, but in deed,
they must be transformd into a likeness of him, they must show the fruits of
holiness, and be partakers of the divine nature, in that they flee the
corruption which is in the world through lust.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the faithful are called by the name of Saints, that there might be
a difference between that which we have of our selves, and that which we
receive from God; between the old man, and the new man; between our first
birth, and our second birth: between nature, and grace. No man is a Saint by
nature, we have not holiness from our selves, but we are strangers to it, and
that is a stranger to us; nay, we are enemies to holiness who love nothing else
but profaneness, and desire to be any thing else then to be Saints and holy.
The Apostle putting us in mind of our first birth, that we might so much the
more magnify the grace of God, which is marvelous and glorious in his Saints,
says, Ephe 2. 12. 13.
Remember that ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, and called
uncircumcision of them which were called Circumcision in the flesh, made with
hands, that ye were at that time without Christ, and were Alians from the
common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the Covenants of peomise, and
had no hope, and were without God in the world; but now in Christ Jesus, ye
which once were far off, are made near by the blood of Christ. And to the
same purpose he speaks in the Epistle to the Colossians, Col 1. 21. 22.
You which were in times past strangers and enemies, has he now reconciled in
that body of his flesh through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and
without fault in his sight. Seeing then, that we are called to holiness, seeing
we must as Children resemble our father, and seeing God will have a difference
between our natural condition and the estate wherein we stand by grace; we
may conclude, that all such as are in the number of true believers, are also
Registered in the number of true Saints, sanctified inwardly by the spirit of
God.

Use 1.
Let us now make use and application of this Doctrine unto our selves. First,
we see plainly hereby, that there are Saints upon the earth; that is, men
and women regenerate and sanctified. The prophet David says, Psalm 16. 3.
All my delight is in the Saints that are upon the earth, whereby it
appears, that there are two sorts of Saints, one in heaven, the other on the
earth: one sort is the spirits of just and perfect men, the other such as are
clothed with flesh, who have a righteousness begun in them but are yet far
from perfection: some that have already received their Crowns, that are
already glorified, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; others that
are yet in warfare against sin, the world, and the devil, and carry about
with them the remnants of natural corruption. Therefore we profess to believe
in the Articles of our Faith, the Communion of Saints. So the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 6, 1, 2, 11.
Dare any of you having business against another, be judged under the unjust,
and not under the Saints. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world?
And afterward, Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. This serves to reprove all those, which in scorn and derision, mock the
servants of God, and vpbraide them with their profession, saying; O you are a
Saint, you are of the little flock, you are an holy man; A young Saint, an old
devil. Thus is Religion made a Proverb and common byword, and thus are men
come to sit down in the seat of Scorners: but hear this, O ye contemners of
God! and know, that whosoever is not holy, is profane; he that is not pure,
is impure; he that is not a Saint of God, is a bond-slaue of the Devil: there
is no mean between the one and the other. He that is not of the little flock
of Sheep, is of the great Heard of Goats, and of the multitude of unbelievers
that shall be condemned. He that enters not in at the strait gate that
leads to life, walks in the broad way, and enters at the wide gate that
leads to destruction. He that is not a Saint before he dies, is a Devil
incarnate before his death. This is that which our Savior speaks concerning
Judas, John 6, 70.
Have I not chosen twelve, and one of you is a Devil? Now he spoke of Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon, for he it was that should betray him. This Judas
was not a Saint, and he is pronounced to be a Devil. Now choose whether thou will be a Saint, or be accounted a Judas, a Devil, a member of the devil.
For, he that is not in some sort changed, renewed, regenerated, and sanctified
in the inner man, shall never see life. If we begin not the way to salvation in
this world, we shall never be received into glory in the world to come. This is
the Doctrine which Christ preaches to Nichodemus, John 3, 5.
Verily, verily. I say unto thee, except that a man be borne of water, and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. So the Apostle says, To.
8, 13, 14
If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye mortify the deeds of the
body by the spirit, ye shall live: for as many as are led by the spirit of God,
they are the sons of God. And in another place, 2 Cor. 5, 15.
Thus we judge, that if one be dead, and he died for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them,
and rose again. Sanctification goes always before glorification. Every one
would be glorified, but every one will not be sanctified: every one would live
with God, but every one will not dye to sin: every one would receive the
victory, but every one will not fight the battle. But let us not be deceived,
God is not mocked. If we would attain to salvation, we must first have
sanctification, we must be Saints in this life; if we look to be Saints in
glory hereafter; we must be Saints upon the earth, if we would be Saints in
heaven; we must first make a beginning, before we can come to the ending. We
must take pains, we must labor hard, and sweat much, before we can come to
our iourneyes end.

Let us therefore take heed we do not make a mock of the Saints, least we
mock at our own sanctification, and consequently neglect, nay despise our
own salvation. If we make any account of holiness of life, let us not cast it
out as a reproach, to be holy. Let us consider, that this is the will of God,
even our sanctification; it is not therefore his will that we should delight
in profaneness, and ungodliness. And as for those that are scorned and abused,
or rather not they, indeed, or their persons flouted and contemned, but their
Faith, their Religion, their Sanctification: let them not hang down their
heads, and be discouraged, but walk boldly through good report and evil
report, and be so far from shrinking back for these taunts and reuilings,
that rather we should prepare our selves for an harder battle, and an hotter
encounter. We have not yet resisted unto blood. Remember what our Lord and
Master has endured, the reproach of the world, the slanders of the ungodly,
the mockings of the malicious, the shame of the cross, and what not. We must
not look to fare better then he, we must not think to be entertained
otherwise then he was. If this be the worst that they can say by us, if this be
the greatest fault they can report of us, that we are Saints and holy persons,
let us not be discomforted, but rather comforted herein, that God is glorified
in us, his name is honored, and the mouth of Iniquity is stopped, having
nothing to detect us off, nothing to object against us. The enemies of Daniell,
howsoever they watched all occasions and sought all opportunities to betray him
and destroy him, yet the greatest crime they had to charge him withal, Dan 6.
11. and 3. 12.
was, that he prayed to his God three times a day, and made supplication unto
him. The Caldeans had no other fault to charge the Jews to have committed,
then that they would not bow down unto an Idol. If they could have found any
other matter to accuse them of, as Malefactors, their malice was so great to
their profession and to their persons, for their professions sake, that they
would not have spared and held their peace. But this was the glory of these
servants of God, that they suffered not for their sins and deseruings, but
for their faith, and a good conscience. This was it wherein the Church and
faithful comforted themselves, Psalm. 44. If we have Psalm 44. 20, 21, 22.
forgotten the name of our God, and holden up our hands to a strange God,
shall not God search this out? For he knows the secrets of the heart: Surely
for thy sake are we slain continually, and are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. This is that place which the Apostle alludeth unto Romans 8. Whereby
he comfort the people of God in their afflictions: whereby we see, what is
the portion and condition of the Saints in this life: they are sheep, not
wolves; they are afflicted, they do not afflict; they are killed, they do not
kill: they are killed not because they have forsaken and renounced God, but
because they would not forsake him and renounce him: They are slain not for
their own sin, but because they would not commit sin against God. If this
be our case and condition, that we are reproached for our righteousness and
religion, and if we 1 Pet 4, 13. 14.
be railed upon for the name of Christ, we have cause to rejoice, in as much as
we are partakers of his sufferinges and shall be partakers of his glory; yea,
blessed are we, for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon us, which on
their part is evil spoken off, but on our part is glorified. Let us comfort
our selves and our brethren with these things.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing all the faithful living in the world are Saints, this
serves to convince the Church of Rome, who appropriate the word Saints to
those that are dead, and honor none with this title that live upon the earth,
but such as are departed out of this life, and being famous for miracles, are
Canonized by the Pope, whom they account as a God upon the earth. Hence it is,
that they add farther, that our Church cannot be an holy Church, because there
was never yet any Saint or holy man of it, approved to be such by miracle or
any other evident token. They renounce our Church, because it is no holy
Church, and they conclude it is not holy, because we have no Saints that are in
it or ever were of it. First, lct us speak of our Saints, and then somewhat
touching their Saints, whereof they boast so much, and in whom they glory so
greatly. Touching the former, the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men of the first
Churches, were professors of the same faith that we believe, as appears by
the Scriptures, by which we offer to be tried in all controversies; but our
Adversaries will not deny these to be Saints, and such Saints as have been
approved by miracles. Again, we have in our Churches true believers, justified
by the blood of Christ, and sanctified by the spirit of God, and therefore are
Saints by calling, as we have showed before. We have the fruits of
sanctification, as necessary effects of a living faith, we profit daily in
repentance from dead works, we labor more and more for Col 2, 2. 5. Rom 8, 16.
the full assurance of understanding and steadfast faith in Christ, for our
redemption. But such as live in sin, and walk in the flesh, have not the spirit
of Christ, they are not of our church, they are no true Saints; they may be
among us, but they are not of us. As for the popish Saints which are found in
their Golden Legend (so called) and stand in read letters in their Kalenders,
it is no marvel if we do not account of them, when Caiet. tract. de concept.
and de indulgent.
many among themselves do seem not much to respect them; and affirm, that
the Saints canonized may be no Saints, and the miracles whereupon it is
grounded, no miracles. And because the Church of Rome speaking of Saints do
always mean such as are in the Popes Calendar, and of his canonization (who
is now held to be the only Saint-maker upon the earth) and propound such to
the people, to the honored and worshipped, let us consider a little what those
Saints are, and whom they adore and call upon. Our Savior Christ accuses and
reproves be Samaritans, John 4.
Because they worshipped the thing which they knew not: a worship they
performed, but they knew not what. But this falls flatly and fully upon the
papists heads, for they worship many fictions for Saints, and shadows for men;
whereas there were never any such that lived upon the earth. It were easy to
allege sundry of this stamp, but a few shall serve and suffice insted of
many. Saint George is worshipped among the Papists, as a renowned Saint, but
such a Saint as they report and receive this George to be, was never extant in
the world, who is said to have killed a Dragon, that was so big, that four
yoke of Oxen could hardly draw him out of the City, which Baron. notat. in
Martyr Roman. Aprilis. 23
sundry of their own writers esteem little better then a fable. Secondly, S.
Christopher is solemnly adored by the Church of Rome, who is reported of some
to be a man of twelve foot long, and of other to be twelve cubits high: this is
he that went up and down to seek the Devil to serve him; for he said, I go
to seek my Lord the Devil to serve him. If this were a Saint, he was one of
the Deuilles Saints, whom he served, and called him Lord, and not one of Gods
Saints. The like we might say of S. Catherine, and infinite other, whom
falsehood has forged and devised, and superstition norished and retained.
Moreover, their Legends of Saints are so full of fables and fooleries, that
they do not only set them down for Martyrs, which never had being in the
world, but they adore devoutly for Saints and Martirs, those which (by the
confession of their wisest writers) were pagans and Jews, traitors and
heretics, men of a wicked life, and of a doubtful faith: what was the soldier
I pray you, that pierced the side of christ, but an Infidel? for otherwise he
would never have thrust his spear so spightfully, and offered that villainy and
violence to the body of our blessed savior; yea, it may probably appear and
be gathered out of the scripture, Revel 1, 7.
that he was not only a cursed unbeliever, but a damned wretch and reprobate:
and no approved history makes mention of his calling and conversion, yet the
blind ignorant papists do worship this soldier as a Saint, under the name of
Longinus, what is this but to make Pagans and Infidels Saints; yea, when so
many dead men's bones and blood, their relics and ashes, are worshipped in
every coast and corner where popery reigns; what assurance can any man have,
that he does not worship the bones and bodies of pagans and heathens? Gamaliell
mentioned in the Acts, was an incredulous Jew, and a right Pharisee, Acts 5, 39.
as apeareth by the counsel which he gave to the Jews in the Counsel, fit for
a Politician, unfit for a Christian; showing rather a wily and witty head, then
a religious heart, and if he had believed in Christ, he would not have feared to
confess his name; yet has he a place among the Romish Saints, and reverently
are his relics esteemed of them. How many of their Anselme, Becket, More,
Fisher, Campian, Sherwin, etc.
English Martirs were devilish traitors, odious, perfidious, disloyal,
seditious, rebellious, unfaithful to their Prince, and enemies to their
country? Some endeavored to stir up foreign Princes against their Sovereign
Lord, which no man can deny to be an act of treason. Some went about to stir
up the Kings Subjects to rebellion, and stood at open defiance, and at the
swords point with the Prince. Others, have bin slain in the field in the midst
of the rebellion which themselves raised, and among the rebels which themselves
armed. Others were executed as notorious Traitors, for maintaining the Popes
Bulls of deposing princes, and would by no means condemn them; none of them
would promise to ioyn with the Princess side, and take her part, if the Pope
should send an army against her, to depose her person, to spoil her subjects,
and to invade her country. Of this sort here set down, thus qualified and
sanctified, are Becket, More, Fisher Forest, Sanders, Campian, Sherwin, Parry,
Ballard, Babington, Someruil, and such like; who are canonized by the Pope, and
agnized for Saints by the Papists: they pray unto them, and keep their bones
and rags for holy relics, and worship them, whereby it apeareth, that they
put those in the Popes calendar, as rubricated Martirs, and imagine them to be
Saints in heaven, who by all likelihood are tormented and damned with the devils
in hell. The time will not suffer us to make a Catalogue of these their Saints,
but this may suffice to show, that the Papists honor diverse Saints, which
never lived in the world, but are merely fansied and fondly imagined: others,
that are doubtful, and not certainly known to be such as they are reported:
others likewise, that were pagans in superstition, Jews in religion, Heretics
in profession, traiotrs in practice, and wicked men in their conversation; of
whose damnation in hell there is more certainty, then either of their faith in
earth, or salvation in heaven. And thus we will leave them, their Saints, and
their Saint-maker.

Use 3.
Thirdly seeing all they that belong to Christ are Saints, it belongs to
every man to try the assurance of his salvation, by the fruits of his
sanctification. For heerby we may assure our selus that we are in the communion
of saints if we lead a sanctified life. If we have our conversation in
holiness, we shall have in the end everlasting life. The Apostle teaching
that the foundation of God abides sure, so that the Lord knows who are his,
shows how we shall know that we are the Lords, even every one for his own
assurance 2 Timothy 2, 19.
must depart from iniquity. Heereunto comes the saying of John in his first
Epistle, 1 Ioh. 1, 6, 7.
If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do
not truly: but if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses
us from all sin. And Paul writing to the Romans says, Romans 8, 10.
If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life
for righteousness sake. We glory in the names of Christians, we would be
accounted Christ's, we take upon us the Title of Saints, and yet we are not
careful to bring forth the fruits of Christians, and to lead a sanctified
life. All Trees in the beginning, when the world was created, were made
fruitful, nothing was barren, nothing fruitless. If we be the Garden of God,
we must be rrees of righteousness, Psalm. 92, 13.
and bear much fruit even in our old age. Many that are barren in bearing
good fruit, are too fruitful in bringing forth the unsavory fruits of the
flesh, which the Apostle names, Gal. 5. who may justly fear the curse that
God Luke 13, 7.
laid upon the Figtree, and every day look to be hewne down and cast into the
fire. It is not enough for us to be fruitful, but we must labor to be more
fruitful. It is not enough to be holy, but we must be more holy. It is not
enough to be Saints, but we must increase in sanctification. This the Prophet
shows in the Psalm, Psalm. 92, 12.
The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree, and shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon: Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the
Courts of our God: they shall still bring forth fruit in their age, they shall
be fat and flourishing.

Where we see, that Gods Children are never void of the fruits of faith, but
have them in them to their endless comfort. Other Trees oftentimes fall to
degenerate and grow out of kind; and if they do hold out, yet age makes them
decay and dye, albeit you dig, and dung, and water them never so much, it
cannot keep them from wasting and withering; it is not so with the faithful,
which are planted in his Church, as it were in his Garden, even in their old
age they bring forth abundance and store of fruit, albeit they be never sold,
yet they shall never be barren but yield a plentiful increase, being
continually watered by the working of the spirit. To this purpose Christ
speaks in the Gospel, John 15. 1, 2
I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, every branch that bears
no fruit in me, he takes away; and every one that bears fruit, he purges
it, that it may bring forth more fruit. And in the Revelation of John he
says, Revel. 22, 11
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be
filthy still; he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is
holy, let him be holy still. On the other side, there is no comfort to profane
persons, that are irreligious, that are mere natural men, that find no change
in them, that are not bettered by the means afforded unto them from God, that
keep the spots of the Leopard, and the skin of the Blackamoore continually
upon them. These walk in the flesh, and savor nothing but of the flesh, and
therefore of the flesh shall reap corruption. This is that which the Author to
the Hebrews speaks, Heb. 6, 7, 8.
The earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth herbs meet for them, by whom it is dressed, receives blessing of God:
but that which bears Thorns and Briars is reproved, and is near unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned. Where he compares those that continue in
faith, and bring forth the fruits of faith to good ground, that answers the
labor of the husbandman; but such as forsake the faith, and a good conscience,
he resembles to evil ground; these bring forth nothing but the unfruitful
works of darkness, as it were so many thorns and Thistles, and therefore are
near to cursing and consuming. So the Prophet Esaias notably expresses this,
Esaias. 65, 20.
There shall be no more there a child of years, nor an old man that has not
filled his days: for he that shall be an hundred year old, shall die as a
young man, but the sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed. The
faithful in Christ's kingdom shall flourish through his gifts, and be blessed of
God: but such as are unfruitful are accursed, and albeit they seem for a time
fresh and flourishing, yet they are no better in the sight of God then dead
carcasses, and stinking carrions. So that we see, there can be no comfort
without sanctification.

Use 4.
Lastly, as all they that are in Christ, are Saints, so it is our duty to use
the fellowship and to delight in the Communion of Saints, abhorring and
renouncing, separating and withdrawing our selves from all ungodly and
unlawful societies of men in the world. The Psalm. 16, 3. and 119, 63.
delight of the Prophet was in the Saints. He professes himself to be a
companion of al them that fear the Lord, and keep his precepts. The
conjunction and communion of the faithful is threefold, in piety, in amity, in
glory. In piety, because the hearts of the faithful are joined together in
faith, and in the fear of God. In amity, because they love together as
children of the same father, knowing that heerby we shall be known to be the
disciples of Christ, if we love one another. In glory, because they are heirs
of the same kingdom where are many mansion places prepared for the^. If we
desire to be partakers with the children of God in eternal happiness in the
heavens (as al men will seem desirous of blessedness) we must be united to them
in a godly life, and in Christian love: we are willing to hear of felicity, but
we care not for the practice of piety, or for walking in charity. Balaam, that
was hired with the wages of iniquity to curse the people of God, when he saw
the goodly order among them, cried out, Number. 23, 10
Let my soul die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.
He desired to communicate with the godly in eternal life, but he would not ioyn
with them in a reformed life. But it is necessarily required of us to be linked
to them in love, to be of one heart, and to be joined with them in godliness,
to be of one faith, if ever we look to enjoy with them the same inheritance of
immortality. Such therefore, as will neither be friends and familiars with
them, but hate and abhor them worse then a Dog or a Serpent, nor be Worshippers
of God with them, reforming their lives, and repenting from Dead-works, but
follow the lusts of the flesh with greedines, and draw iniquity as with
cartropes must know, that they shut out themselus from the kingdom of heaven,
and shall not ascend with them into the mountain of God. Now, as the faithful
delight in those that are faithful, and the godly in such as are godly, so they
account it a great grief to be among the ungodly, where they shall see much
iniquity, and hear God dishonored, and feel themselves many ways endangered.
This made the Prophet lament his own condition, Psalm. 120, 5, 6, 7.
Woe is to me, that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar; my
soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace: I seek peace, and when I
speak thereof, they are bent to war. These corrupt and contagious societies,
are manifold in the world, which we are to avoid more then a place of infection
that may endanger the body, among the which there is a knot and band of such
lewd companions, and loose mates, as accompany together in drinking, gaming,
swearing, whoring, rioting, reuelling, and railing at all religion, and at the
servants of God that are the professors of religion. This society in evil is
to be found in every place, but this society is not of God, but of the devil:
it is not the communion of Saints, but the company of sinners that make a
practice of all wickedness. Again, there is another sort, who albeit they be
not so fully and foully disordered, yet are as far from the kingdom of God. For,
when they should accompany the faithful in the assembly of the Saints, they
keep company with their catle, beasts, and swine. When the faithful on the
lords day, are going into the house of God, they are going into their fields;
when they should be with their brethren, they are looking on their bullocks,
and show no more conscience to religion, then if they had no other souls, then
their Swine or dogs have. A lamentable case, that such profaneness should be
found in places where the precious word of God is preached, and yet it were
easy to point out such prophan persons among us. These have the hearts of Esau,
Heb. 12.
who preferred a mess of pottage before his birthright. If these be busy in
their bargaining and buying, or be with their friends and gossips at home, it
is held no good manners to part company. Many of our poor brethren in other
places would greatly rejoice to hear the word, that are barred from it, and
would give god thanks if they might be suffered publicly to profess it with
freedom of heart, and liberty of conscience, which we proudly and scornfully
cast from us, as a contemptible thing. And yet if a survey of most of our
parishes were made, and a view taken of them, it is to be feared, that both
these sorts would take up the greatest company, and the fewest sort be found of
those that with good and honest hearts, attend to the word with diligence and
reverence. These men that thus absent themselves from the church of God,
deserve to be separated from the Saints and Sacraments, from the word and
prayers, that they may learn not to be so profane, and be ashamed of their
evil.

6 That the fellowship of thy faith may be made effectual, and that whatsoever
good thing is in you through Christ Jesus may be known.

7 For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because by thee Brother,
the Saints bowels are comforted.


The method and meaning of the words.
IN this place we have the shutting up of the entrance of this Epistle. We
heard before how Paul gave thanks to God for Philemon, he prayed for him, and
that daily: he praised greatly his Faith toward Christ, and his Love toward the
Saints, that is, the poor and distressed christians. These words do depend
upon the fourth verse. For we must know that the Apostle goes not on in the
praise and commendation of Philemon begun in the former verse, magnifying his
Faith and Love whereof he had heard by the report of the Church; but they
agree with that which he had spoken before; namely, that he is mindful of him
in his Prayers. For, if it be asked, for what cause did he pray for Philemon?
The answer is, to the end that his Faith showing forth good fruits might not
be found counterfetted, but approved to be true. We have therefore in these two
verses, these two things to consider; first, what was the matter of his
prayers, what was the substance and contents of them; to wit, that he might
manifest his Faith, not to lie idle, but to be extended to others. Secondly,
the reason why he made that, the matter of his prayers, and wherefore he
prays that his faith might be effectual. Touching the first point, which is
the matter of his prayers, he craved two things; first, that his faith might
be made common to many, and the benefit of it might comfortably flow to the
refreshing of many souls. For although faith have her secret and hidden
dwelling in the heart, yet the fruits of it are imparted to others: Secondly,
that it might be effectual; now faith is effectual when it works by Love, and
brings forth good works to the releeuing of others; as if the Apostle should
have said, that thy Faith by communicating it self to others, and not
remaining with thy self alone, may more and more show the virtue, force, and
power thereof, in all goodness. Thus he prays not only for grace, but for the
increase of grace to be given unto him. Then he declares wherein this
effectual faith stands and consists; to wit, in the acknowledging of those
good things which were in him, that so they may be brought into the light to be
seen of al men, and to be felt of those that were in need. For the apostle
James (as we have showed) calls that not an effectual or living faith, James
2, 20.
but a dead and idle faith, which is not declared and professed by works. In
the last place he adds (through Jesus Christ) whereby he means, that
whatsoever good thing we have in us, we have it by christ without whom we have
nothing that is good. Touching the second point, which is the reason why he
prays for an effectual Faith in him, because the love that appeared to be in
him, had wrought great joy and gladness of heart in him, which love of his he
commends by the effect, The bowels of the Saints were comforted through him.
This fact of his, the Apostle commends, first, by the consideration of the
persons to who^ his love was manifested, not to those out of the church, but to
the saints. For charity to the Saints is to be commended, inasmuch, as it
cannot be bestowed on a better subject; they do stand in the place of Christ,
who accepts of our love and liberality as extended toward himself. Secondly,
his love is commended by the name of bowels, whereby the extreme necessity of
the Saints is signified, who were (as it were) pained in their bowels and
inward parts. Now, the great poverty and penury of those upon whom we bestow
our charity, increases and makes it the greater. Thirdly, Math. 11, 28
the word of comforting, refreshing, and cherrishing the heart, is a matter of
great commendation. For it is no small thing to comfort and strengthen the weak
and feeble, and to give rest to the soul and body, that has bin tossed and
trobled with much affliction. Thus does the Apostle set forth the fruits of
Philemons love most effectualy. This is to be observed of us concerning the
method and meaning of these words, which are thus much in effect; If thou
would more fully know the cause of my giving thanks, and the remembrance of
thee in my prayers, surely it is this, that as God in mercy has bestowed upon
thee a true saving faith, so my earnest desire and humble request is unto him,
that the offices, fruits, and duties of thy faith may be more and more
communicated and fitted to the benefit of the poor Saints; that so whatsoever
good thing is to be found in thee through the grace and working of Jesus
Christ, may be acknowledged, manifested, and published abroad, to the glory
of God, the comfort of the faithful, and the provocation of others. For indeed
thy love gives me great occasion of much joy, because thou (my brother) do
not only cheer the Saints, and reioycest them, but cause their very hearts and
bowels, even their secret and inward parts to be refreshed and rejoiced. Diverse
points to be observed out of these Verses.
But before we handle the doctrines arising in this division, it shall not be
amiss a little to examine the force of the words, and the manner that Paul has
observed in the penning of them. First observe, that he says not simply, thy
faith may be made effectual, but [ The fellowship of thy Faith] that the
fruit thereof might redown and return to many. Secondly, he says not barely [
That his Faith might be known,] but [ Every good thing,] that is; every grace
that was in his heart, because when Faith is made known to others, and brought
into sight and open light: many other gifts of the Holy Ghost are made known,
as Love, Patience, Liberality, and such like. For the grace of Faith is never
alone in the heart, but is guarded with a troop and company of all other
virtues, and when it comes as it were out of the doors, it comes abroad
with a band and train of all other graces. Thirdly, he declares the author
and cause of all these blessings, from whence they proceed, to wit; from
Christ, that we should learn not to think or speak of any benefit, without
making mention of Christ. Fourthly, he draws an argument or reason why he
prayed for the efficacy of his Faith, from the former experience of his Love,
which was as effectual as his Faith, teaching that the experience of grace
already given, should move us to beg and crave the increase of that Grace,
and a perseverance and continuance in that grace: and therefore, we must not
be so simple or senseless to imagine, when we see grace bestowed upon any
man, that we have no more need to pray for the increasing and growing of that
grace. For, we must know, that there are degrees of grace, there is a first
Grace, there is a second Grace. Now, that Grace may be multiplied, and a
continual increase and access to it may be added: we must make daily prayers,
we must pray that we may have Faith, and when we have it, we must not be
secure, but pray that it may be effectual and working by love. Last of al, in
the commending of Philemons liberality, Theophil. in hunc locum.
he does not nakedly say, that [ he gave to the poor,] but [ To the poor
Saints,] for all that are poor, are not poor Saints; many are poor that are
wretched and ungodly, and have no part of sanctification: neither does he say
only, that he gave to the Saints, but he refreshed them; and not only that he
refreshed the Saints, but the very bowels of the Saints. Now let us come to the
Doctrines.

That the fellowship of thy Faith may be made effectual. Here the Apostle
remembers the matter and substance of his prayer, what it was that he
besought and requested of God; where we see he affirms that it consisted in
this, that the fruits of his Faith might be increased, and continually
augmented. Doctrine 1. It is our duty to stir up our selus and others to
increase in good things.
We learn from this place, that it is the duty of all men, earnestly to
desire, wish, and procure the good of others, and to stir up our selves and
others to increase in the graces of Gods spirit. The growing and proceeding of
our brethren in the best things should be sought for of us. When Moses had word
brought unto him, that some in the host did prophesy; that is, had received
notable gifts of the spirit, for the guiding and directing of his people, he
said, Number. 12, 29
I would to God, that not only these, but that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that he would pour out his spirit upon them. The Apostle writing
to the Thessalonians, says, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 1.
Furthermore, I beseech you Brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye
increase more and more, as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and
to please God. They had increased already exceedingly, they had gained in the
Faith, and were grown to a perfect age, they receive this Testimony and
commendation, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 6, 7, 8. and 2, 13. and 5, 1, 2. and 4, 9, 10. and 3,
10, 11
that they became followers of the Apostles and of the Lord; They received the
word in much affliction with joy of the Holy Ghost; They were as ensamples to
all that believe in Macedonia, from them sounded out the word into al quarters;
they received it, not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the word of God,
which works in them that believe. Touching the times and seasons, he had no
need to write unto them, because they knew perfectly that the day of the Lord
should come as a thief in the night Touching brotherly love, they had no need
he should write unto them, for they were taught of God to love one another: and
yet he prays to God still to increase them, and make them abound in love one
toward another, and toward all men; yea, he desired exceedingly night and
day, that he might see their face, and might accomplish that was lacking in
their faith. Heereunto tends the exhortation that Paul gives to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4, 14 15.
Despise not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the company of the Eldership: these things
exercise, and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen how thou profitest
among all men. When the writer to the Hebrews had reproved the sluggishnesse
of that people, he adds, Heb. 6, 1.
Therefore leaving the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us be led
forward unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from
dead-workes, and of Faith toward God. All these places of Scripture serve to
teach us the truth of this Doctrine, that we must all labor to perfection,
that we may be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect, and endeavor to
draw on others to perfection.

Reason 1.
Let us see the Reasons. First, Christian profession is a way, in which men
must not stand still, but must walk and go forward in the way, they must not
stay in one estate, but be always stirring forward. So when the Apostle had
exhorted the Thessalonians to increase more and more, he adds, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 1.
As ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to please God. We are
now in this life in our journey, we must not think that we are come to our
iournies end, which cannot be before our lives end. As then they that have a
great journey to go, do not rest till they come to their iourneyes end, so must
it be with us, we must make have on our way, and be swift in our race. The way
which we are to go is our profession: the Traveler that enters into the way,
is every true Christian, the end of our journey is the entrance into life; the
judge of our going, and giver of the victory, is God. He that stands still can
never come at his iournyes end, it is he that goes in his way, and runs in
his race, that shall receive the crown of everlasting happiness.

Reason 2.
Secondly, Christians are compared to Children. Children are always growing in
age, increasing in stature, going forward in knowledge and in Wisdom; if
they do not prosper and proceed, we commonly call them and account them
Vrchins and Changelings. So must we grow in grace, until we come to a perfect
aged man in Christ. The Prophet speaking of the faithful that were zealous in
the worship of God, says, Psalm. 84, 7.
They go from strength to strength. So the Apostle exhorts, that we 1 Cor.
14, 20.
should not be Children in understanding, but as concerning maliciousness we
should be Children, but in understanding we should be of ripe age. He would
have us as Children, and he would not have us as Children: he would have us
Children in malice, but he would not have us Children in knowledge. We see
they fall out Terent. in Hecyr pueri inter sese quam pro leuibus noxis iras
gerunt.
for light offenses, because the mind is weak that rules and guides them:
one word will raise anger, and another word will make them friends, and
therefore though they fall out quickly, yet their falling out is far from
malice, and they are easily reconciled. Thus he would have us to be children,
but in wisdom, in knowledge, and in understanding, he would have us to be of
ripe age, and proceed in these gifts, as we do in our years. No man's life
stands at a stay, let us increase in the other as we do in this, that so the
graces of God may be perfected in us.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, we must so walk in our way, and hasten to our iournies end, that we
may obtain the prize. He that 1 Cor. 9, 25. Math, 24, 13. Revel. 2, 26, 27.
and 3, 5, 12.
ouer-commerh and holds out to the latter end, only shall be saved. He
that gives over, is a faint soldier, a weak Worke-man, a slow runner, a
feeble wrastler. We must so fight, that we may overcome, we must so work that
we may rest, we must so run that we may obtain, we must so wrestle that we
may receive the Crown, we must so prove Maisteries, that we may win the
victory. Staying in one state is a token of reprobation and reiection from God,
they are cast into a spirit of slumber and drowsinesse, they sleep in
security, and cannot see their way. This did the Prophet prophecy, and this
does the Apostle testify to be true concerning Israel, Rom 11, 8.
God has given them the spirit of slumber: eyes, that they should not see, and
ears, that they should not hear unto this day. Seeing then that our
profession is the way wherein we are to walk toward the heavenly Jerusalem,
seeing we must be like Children that grow in age and years, and lastly seeing
we must labor to obtain the Crown, to win the victory, to receive the
price, and to get the wages; it follows, that we all must endeavor to go
forward, and to bring others forward toward the Kingdom of Heaven.

Use 1.
The uses remain to be handled, that we may have the profit of this Doctrine.
First we learn, that God has a just action and suit to commence against all
idle bellies, and unprofitable Drones, that be Truants and no proficients in
the School of Christ. The church of God is the School of Chrst, he is the
Master, all of us are or should be his Scholars. We are brought forth into
the world, that when we come to years of understanding, we may be Scholars in
his School. If any of us put our Children to a free School to be taught, if
they should still stay and stand in the lowest form, and never a whit proceed
in learning, we would judge them either void of ordinary diligence, or
destitute of ordinary capacity. We look when we set them to School, that they
should increase in learning. We have a common proverb, that Scholars of all
other have the best conscience, that whereas others never think they have
enough, they think they have to much for their money. But let us see how it
fares with us, who are likewise Scholars in the best School that ever was,
the Church of God: and have the best Master that ever was; to wit, Christ
himself. God has put us to School to learn at the mouth of Christ, who has
committed us to Pastors and teachers, as to his Deputies to be instructed. It
is required of us, that we grow in knowledge, in faith, in zeal, in obedience,
and in all the works of sanctification. If we be good Scholars, we must grow
forward and ascend higher, we must proceed from grace to grace, and from one
step to another. But alas, how many are there in our congregations, who
having lived under the Gospel, that offers salvation to men all the days of
their life, and continued ten, twenty, thirty, forty years, hearing the word
of God sounding in their ears, Ephe 4, 14.
yet are no wiser in Religion then a young Child, and are no forwarder then
when they first stepped and entered into the Schoole-house of God. I doubt not
but they are wise in matters of the world, but in the book of God and in
matters of their salvation they have no knowledge. They receive the grace of
God in vain, and are Dunses and Dwarfes in this School of Christ; without
growing and increasing in Godliness. They are not in truth able to say unto
their own Souls, I have received some greater measure of knowledge, I have
attained better strength of Faith, I have found some increase in Godliness, I
have felt some care and conscience to please God. Nay we may truly say, that
many are more ignorant in knowledge, more lewd in life, more backward in good
things, more profane in heart, more contemning the word of God, and loathing
the means of salvation, then they were in the beginning of their days. This
is our estate and condition, most lamentable and fearful, and yet we can
complain of Idle boys and sluggish Scholars, that think they take to much
learning for their money, and never consider that we are the men, and that the
proverb concerns our selves. God will enter into judgment with us, and if
we be not learners in his School, he will remove us and discharge us out of
his School. It had been better for us that we had never known God, that we
had never received his truth; nay, it had been better for us that we had never
been borne, or been borne Turks and Canibals, Pagans and Infidels, then to
have the Gospel among us, and not to hear it; or to hear it, and not to
learn by it: or to learn by it, and not to obey it and grow daily in the
practice of it. This appears by the grievous threatenings denounced by Christ
our Savior against those Cities where his word had been preached and
professed, and his great miracles had been wrought and showed, Mat. 11. 21.
22. 23. 24.
Woe be to thee Corazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works
which were done in you: had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented
long agone in sackecloth and ashes, but I say unto you, it shall be easier for
them at the day of judgment then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted
up unto Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell, for if the great works which
have been done in thee, had been done among them of Sodom, they had remained
to this day. But I say unto you, that it shall be easier for them of the Land
of Sodom in the day of judgment; then for thee. He compares here Corazin
and Bethsaida, with Tire and Sydon: likewise Capernaum, with Sodom; that is,
the places where Christ had dwelled, where the Gospel had been offered, where
many of his miracles had been manifested, with such Cities as never had the
Law, never heard the Gospel, never saw the Prophets, never knew the Doctrine
of salvation, but lived in ignorance and in idolatry. And in this comparison he
teaches that such Towns and Villages as have had the preaching of the word,
and the ministry of the Gospel among them, shall receive greater punishment in
the day of judgment then other poor blind wretches that never had these
means offered unto them. We would all of us think it a very harsh and homely
comparison, and far from all likelihood of truth, if I should compare us,
even us of Isfield, with Sodom and Gomorrah, we know Ezekiel. 16. 49.
how foul and filthy these places were, we confess they are loathsome in our
eyes, and odious in our ears, we know that for their wickedness they Genesis 19,
^4.
were destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven: and yet I say unto you in
the name of God, from the warrant of his sacred word by which we shall all be
judged, that if we live in this contempt of the truth that is preached unto us,
and do not bring forth the fruits of the Gospel, it had been better we had
been borne Sodomites and Gomorrheans, for our judgment shall be greater, and
our punishment heavier, because our sin is heinouser. No sin greater then
the contempt of the Gospel, as no mercy is greater then the peaceable enjoying
of the liberty of the Gospel, and therefore no reward of sin shall be more
horrible; So that we may truly say from the mouth of Christ, it shall be
easier for Sodom in the day of judgment, then for our Village. Let us apply
this to our selves, and lay it to our hearts to work in us true repentance.
Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum had many privileges, and might glory as much
as we in the favors vouchsafed unto them, and yet they are vpbraided by Christ
with their vnthanke-fulnesse toward the Gospel, so that the case of Sodom is
made better. Take heed therefore least we contemn the Gospel, and so
committing one of the greatest sins we make our selves guilty of the
greatest judgments that can fall upon mankind. The contempt of the Gospel,
has brought the heavy hand of God upon the Jews that were Gods own people.
Let us not be high minded, we are no whit better: but rather fear least God
spare not us, and tremble under his grievous, but yet righteous judgments, who
spares not those that are dear unto him when they sin against him.

Use 2.
Secondly, we are bound to use the means that may further these guiftes in us,
that is, the ministry of the word, which being reverently used, has a promise
of blessing. It is a light unto our feet and a lantern unto our paths, it
sets us in our way, and directs us unto our iourneies end. The Apostle
teaches, 1 Cor 3. 6.
that Paul planteth, Apollos waters, but it is God that gives the increase;
to wit, by the planting and watering of the Ministers. The Husbandman tilleth
and toyleth about his ground, he sows his Corn, but he cannot make it spring
up, nor send the early and latter rain. So is it with the Ministers of the
Gospel, the Lords Husbandmen, they must labor in his field which is the
Church, that the people may grow in faith and grace. This reproves those that
attend not to the ordinance of God, with care and diligence, but neglect the
work of the Lord in them. They will not suffer themselves to be ploughed and
tilled, that grace may grow in their hearts, as Corn does in the Fields. They
say they increase and proceed in the ways of Godliness, but they will not use
the means which God has ordained, and therefore they do deceive themselves.
He that hears not at all, does not grow at all: he that hears negligently,
grows slowly in any good thing. For as we sow, so we shall reap. Again,
this checketh the dullness and drowsinesse of such, as when they have begun in
the spirit, would end in the flesh, which say the word is profitable and
necessary to gather a Church, but not to continue it; to begin faith, but when
it is begun and begotten in us, we need not hear still; we have faith already
by the preaching of the word; we shall not therefore need to frequent the
preaching of it still: we have that wrought in us which the word is appointed
to work. These men under a color of having faith, do scorn and deride the
preaching of faith. But the word is not only the immortal seed to beget us,
but wholesome food to sustain us: it is milk for such as are weak, and
strong meat for such as are of riper years. He never had faith by the word,
that seeks not the strengthening of it by the word. It is not enough to have
says, but we must seek the increase and continuance of it; which is continued
and preserved by the same means that it is bred and ingenderd. This it it
which the Apostle Peter teaches in his first Epistle, 1 Pet 1, 23. with Chap
2, 2
that being borne anew, not of mortal seed but of immortal, by the word of
God, which lives and endures for ever, we should as newborn babes desire
that sincere milk, that we may grow thereby. Whereby we see, that he calls
the word immortal seed to regenerate us, and sincere milk to nourish us, so
that we have as well our growing up as our first birth by it, and there is a
continual use of the preaching of the word as well to men that are called
aready, as to them that are to be called hereafter. For the end of preaching
is, not only to convert us, but to continue us: not only to raise us up, but
to uphold us: not only to beget us to the faith, but to strengthen us in the
faith: not only to give the first life to us, but to renew us after our
manifold slippes and often infirmities. We are even in the state of our
regeneration as a ship, which if it lie still without use will rot in the
Haven, and if it be kept never so carefully, it will want rigging and
repayring. So is it with every one of us in this life, Phil 3, 12.
we have not attained to perfection, we always lack somewhat, we stand in
need of renewing and repairing, we must be mending that which is impaired,
increasing that which is lessened, restoring that which is decayed, and keeping
in his course that which is rightly ordered.

So then we must acknowledge a perpetual necessity of the word, to increase in
us the graces of Faith and Sanctification, which without use of the means are
subject, if not to dying, yet to decreasing; if not to perishing, yet to
diminishing; if not to withering away, yet to a languishing and loosing of
those degrees that have been begun in us. Hence it is that the Lord says,
Esaias 27, 3.
I the Lord do keep it, (that is, the Church which is the Vineyard of the
Lord) I will water it every moment, least any assail it, I will keep it night
and day. It is not with the Ministers of the word as it is with men of other
Trades, who when they have begun a work and are departed from it, though they
return not to it in a long time, yet they find it in the same case Chrisost.
homit. 13. ad popu Antioch.
as they left it. The Goldsmiths that has melted his silver in the fire, and
cast a vessel in the mould, and begun to hammer it with his Tools, if he lay
it aside at night, the next day when he comes to his work, he finds it as
he left it. The Carpenter that has hewed his Timber, or the Mason that has
squared his stones in what sort soever they left their work when they departed
from it, in the same they are sure to see it, it is not better, it is not
worse, but as it lay, so it continues. And thus it is in all other Sciences.
It is not so in the Art of hearing and teaching, we do not always find the
people as we left them, we labor to have them reformed and made zealous; yet
they are no sooner departed, but the multitude of business, the strength of
tentations, the corruptions of their nature, do so beset them and besiege them
round about, whereby they are beguiled and ensnared, that they make the work
of reformation more hard and difficult then it was before. This made the
Apostle Paul say of the Galathians, that he travailed in birth again with
them until Christ were formed in them, and was afraid least he had labored
among them in vain, Gal. 4. 11. 19. This also made the Apostles consent and
agree together to visit the Churches where they had preached the Gospel, Acts
14. 22.
to confirm them in the truth which they had received. For as we eat often
for the restoring of the force of nature, and repairing of the decaies of the
body: so it is our duty to hear often, for the making up of the breaches and
ruins that Sin and Satan have made in our souls. We see by daily
experience, that after our repentance and the renewing of our minds, we are
subject to stumble and fall into sin, and ready to lie long in it, as men cast
into a deep and dead sleep, if we be not awaked with the Trumpet of the Lord
in our ears. David was by the subtilty of the enemy surprised, 2 Samuel 12, 7. 13.
and drawn to commit two horrible sins, Adultery and murder, he lay a long
space securely in them, until he was by the Prophet Nathan roused up and
recovered. Wherefore as there is a continual use and exercise of repentance,
so is there a continual use of the preaching of the word, that we should not
stand at a stay, but increase more and more, until we come to the fullness of
the perfect age of Christ Jesus our Lord.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing we should desire our own profit and others, it condemns
three sorts of men: first, such as stand at a stay: secondly, such as go
backward: thirdly, such as envy the good and growth of others in the best
things. The first reprofe.
Touching the first, we have many that stand still and move not, they are cast
as it were into a dead sleep, call and cry unto them, lift up thy voice as a
Trumpet, they have no ears to hear. If one come to a sick man, and feel his
pulses, yet cannot perceive them to beat or stir, we will say he is near
unto death, or in some ecstasy: so is it with such as have the word of God
preached unto them, if they be not moved by it to go forward, but we find them
at the years end, where they were at the beginning, it is an evident sign of
a spiritual lethargy and slumber, and that they are in danger of death. He is
accounted an evil scholar that learneth not somewhat every day, but many
thousands remain in the schoole-house of Christ, that are so far from
profiting every day, that they suffer whole weeks and months, and years to
pass over their heads, without calling themselves to an account what they have
learned that they knew not before, and wherein they yield obedience which they
practiced not before. If a man should ask them, whether they have bettered
their knowledge, increased their faith, furthered their sanctification more
this year then before, they cannot yield a reckoning of any access is come to
any of their gifts. In this number are the greatest sort that live among us,
they are standers, and not walkers: they are sitters, and not mouers; where you
left them this year, you shall be sure to find them the next year, and many
years after. They see the time of their life, and the years of their age
proceed and hasten unto an end, yet they never endeavor to proceed in
Godliness, and to hasten to Gods Kingdom: whereas we should all provide, that
as the outward man decays, so the inner man may be renewed; and as the body
is weakened, so the spirit may be strengthened. Wherefore let all such know,
that not to go forward, is to go backward: not to increase, is to decrease: not
to labor, is to loyter: not to go before, is to come behind; and not to
proceed is not to profit, but to loose all. Our Savior speaking Mat 25, 18,
26, 27, 28, 29.
of the servant, to whom he had given one Talent that dug it in the earth,
and hid his Masters money, says: Thou evil servant and slothful, thou
knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I strewed not, thou
ought therefore to have put my money to the Exchangers, and then at my coming
should I have received mine own with advantage: take therefore the Talent from
him, and give it unto him which has ten Talents: for unto every man that has,
it shall be given, and he shall have abundance, and from him that has not,
even that he has shall be taken away. Cast therefore that unprofitable servant
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Where we
see, he went not backward, he lost not that which he had, but he kept his own,
and yet he is called an unprofitable servant and is cast into utter darkness.
So the Apostle reproves the Hebrews, because Heb 5, 12.
when as concerning the time they might be Teachers, yet they had need again
to be taught what are the first principles of the word of God, and were become
such as had need of milk and not of strong meat. The second reproof.
Secondly, it reproves such as run a while and then give over, so that al
their righteousness is as a morning dew. These are they which were zealous,
but they return to their old sins, and start away as if they had never been
the men. This the Apostle condemns in the Galathians, Gal 5, 7.
Chap. 5. Ye did run well, who did let you that ye did not obey the truth?
Hymeneus and Philetus were held to be great Christians, and obtained a good
report in the Church, 1 Timothy 1 19, 20, and 2 Timothy 2, 18.
yet afterward they fell away, putting away a good conscience, making
shipwreck of faith, and saying that the resurrection is past already, thereby
shaking the foundation of religion as it were a maine pillar of the building,
and so destroying the faith of certain. In like manner he complains of Demas
a great professor of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4, 10.
that he had forsaken him, and embraced this present world. Good beginnings
help not without good proceedings. If a man have a long iourny to make, what
avails it to go many miles, if he stand still in the midway, he were as good
never begin as not continue. We see this in Lots wife, she went out of Sodom
with her husband and seemed as forward as he, but in the end she looked back,
Gen 19, 26.
and was turned into a Pillar of Salt. We must forget that which is behind, we
must not pause in our race, nor stay to take breath, until we come to the end
of our course, when we shall freely breath and rest from all our labors. We
must therefore strive and contend, that we may out-go not only others, but
even our selves. We must never stay our journey, but always hasten, and so
every day amend our pace, that we run more swiftly to day then we did
yesterday, and to morrow then we did to day. This the Apostle teaches, setting
down the laws to be observed in running, 1 Cor 9, 24.
Know ye not that they which run in a race, run al, yet one receives the
prize. So run that ye may obtain. And again, If 2 Timothy 2, 5.
any man strive for a Maistery, he is not crowned, except he strive as he ought
to do. We have in the holy Scriptures many laws to incite and provoke us to
walk, to go forward, to run, to strive, to wrestle, but we have none to sit
still, to be idle, to loyter, to be careless and secure, like to those that
stood idle in the Market place, Mat 20, 6.
to whom Christ said, Why stand ye here all the day idle. It is the will of
God, that we should always make strait steps with our feet in this life, that
when we have kept the faith and finished our course, we may rest from all our
labors. It is a woeful case, to run, and never to come to the iourneyes
end: to labor, and yet to reap no fruit of his labor. This made the Apostle
say, 1 Cor 9, 26.
I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that beats
the air. It is not enough to run, except we run well.

The third reproof.
Thirdly, it reproves such as envy the good blessings of God upon their
brethren. For if we should desire their profit as well as our own, and their
increase as well as our own, we ought not to repine at their good success in
or heavenly. It is noted to the great praise and commendation of Moses, that
when Joshua envied the gift of prophecy in the Elders, and would have Moses
to forbid them, he answered, Number. 11. 29
Enuiest thou for my sake? Yea, would God that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them. He cared not what
became of his own credit and estimation among the people, so that God might be
honored and glorified among them. The like mind was in John Baptist, when his
Disciples told him that all men began to flock after Christ, and to resort to
him, whereby they feared the fame of their Master would decay, he said unto
them, Ioh. 3, 28, 30.
Ye your selves are my witnesses that I said, I am not that Christ, but that I
am sent before him: he must increase, but I must decrease. The like we see,
when the Disciples of Christ forbad him that cast out devils in Christ's name,
because he was not one of the Disciples: for Christ said unto them, Mark 9, 38.
Forbid him not, for there is no man that can do a Miracle by my name, that can
lightly speak evil of me: whosoever is not against us, is on our part. Let us
take heed of this envy, which is a grief arising of another man's prosperity,
always joined with a secret kind of malice toward him that is envied. This
is a wild plant springing up in the soul, which destroys true Charity,
rejoicing at the evil, and sorrowing for the good that befalls our Brethren.
And howsoever envy be noisome and pernicious to others, it is more hurtful to
him that possesses it, it tormenteth his mind, it wastes his body, it
fretteth his mind, it shortneth his days, and it destroys his soul. It
sets him on work to backbite and slander his Neighbor, and to deny him
all duties of humanity. So then, envy, hatred, and back-byting, always go
together, as three Cankers, and evil sores, that consume the body, hurt the
good Name, lessen the gifts, and repine at the goods of our Brethren. And if
it be evil to envy the gifts of God, and our eye should not be evil,
because the Lords eye is good: Much more evil is it, to scorn, mock, and
disgrace the gifts of God in his Servants, as profane Beasts, and Heathnish
Atheists do in these days, saying; you are an holy Brother, you are a Saint,
you are a man of God. This sitting down in the seat of Scorners, is worse
then dwelling in the foul and irksome Cave of envy; and therefore, let us
beware thereof. Let us praise the guiftes of GOD, in whomsoever we find them,
whether in Friend or enemy.

Use 4.
Lastly, seeing we should all seek to profit our selves and others in
godliness, we must know that it is our duty to stir up the gifts of God in
us, that we do not bury them as in a Grave: we must exercise the gifts that
we have by continual practice. Use makes men prompt and ready, want of use
makes men untoward. Let us take heed we do not quench the spirit, and grieve
him. The spirit of God is in many respects resembled to fire, which purges
some things, consumes other things, and heateth other things. So does the
Spirit of God purge, consume, and warm. It refineth and purifieth us as
metal is from dross, it wastes and consumes sin in us as straw and
stubble, it kindles in us the heat of zeal, and warmeth us when we are
frozen in our sins. Now, as the Spitit is compared to fire, so our sins are
likened to Water; Water we know will quench the Fire, Sin will quench the
Spirit. Let us therefore blow this Fire, let us kindle the Coals of it, let
us stir up the Brandes, and put more matter to it, that it die not. The
Priests in the time of the Law, Leuit. 6, 5. and 9, 24. and 10, 1
were appointed to maintain the Fire upon the Altar day and night, that it
should never go out, because it was from Heaven, and they were forbidden to
offer strange Fire. So the Apostle warns Timothy, and 2 Timothy 1, 6.
puts him in remembrance that he stir up the gift of GOD which is in
him, by the putting on of his hands. Objection.
But here some man may Object; If the Spirit it self may be lost, then much
sooner and easier the lesser gifts? Answer.
I answer, the Spirit of Faith and regeneration can never be quite lost, for
the faithful and regenerate are begotten not of mortal, but of immortal
seed; their knowledge is like the light of the Sun, the others are like the
brightness of the lightning, and flashing in the air, which shines for a
season, and by and by vanishes and fades away. True it is, the best gifts may
decay, but not die; they may be weakened, but not quite wasted; they may be
lessened, but not utterly lost. They may seem to perish, and be wholly gone in
time of tentation, as we see in David, Peter, and many others, yet even then
they remain in them, though not felt, as fire covered in the ashes, or as the
light ouer-shaddowed with a cloud. This the Apostle John testifies, saying; 1
John 3, 9.
Whosoever is borne of God sins not, for his seed remains in him, neither
can he sin, because he is borne of God. Where he teaches, that Faith and
Love of Holiness are never lost, which serves to the comfort of the Godly,
not to nourish security of the Flesh in themselves.

[ The fellowship or communication of thy Faith.] Here we see how the Apostle
in the matter of his Prayer which he used for Philemon, entreated for the
communicating and fellowship of his gifts, that is, that they should flow and
issue out, to the good and benefit, to the profit and bettering of others.
Doctrine 2. The guiftes which we have received, must tend to the good of others
This teaches us, that the gifts and blessings of God, whether temporal or
eternal, bestowed upon any, must not lie hid or dead, but be used and employed
to the good of others, and so yield a fellowship and communion to others.
Whatsoever good things we have received, we must have them, not for our selves
alone, but for the good of others. This we are taught in the Parable of the
Scribe taught of God, unto the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 13, 52 and 25, 14.
Luke 19, 13.
he is likened to an House-holder, which brings forth out of his Treasure,
things both new and old. His old and new store must not be kept to himself,
but be brought forth, and serve for his fellow Servants.

So in the parable propounded, Luke 19. this appears; A certain Nobleman
went into a far Country, to receive for himself a Kingdom, and so to come
again: and he called his ten Servants, and delivered unto them ten pieces
of Money, and said unto them, Occupy till I come. And afterward, the first
came, saying; Lord, thy piece has increased ten pieces: and the second
said, thy piece has increased five pieces. The Apostle likewise shows, that
all the gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith, Prophesying, the guiftes of
healing, the operation of great works, the discerning of spirits, the diversity
of toongs, the interpretation of tongues 1 Cor. 12, 7.
are distributed to every man severally to profit withal, and for the good of
the whole body. And speaking of such as have temporal things, he charge
Timothy to charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives
us abundantly all things to enjoy, that they do good, and be rich in
Good-workes, and be ready to distribute and communicate. All blessings
therefore are to be communicated and distributed to others, they ought not to
be laid up in a Napkin, or be buried in the earth, or be covered under a
bushel, as the manner of many men is.

Reason 1.
The Reasons of this truth, are to be sought out and considered of us. First,
we are servants unto all, to do them good, and to further their salvation. True
it is, the faithful are most free, being set at liberty by Christ from the
curse of the Law, and from the Dominion of sin, according unto the saying
of Christ. John 8. If the Son make John 8, 36.
you free, you shall be free indeed. Notwithstanding this freedom, it is a
part of their dignity to be the servants of God, and a part of their duty to
be servants to men, to seek their good, to procure their benefit, to further
their edification, and to finish their salvation. This is it which the Apostle
Paul sets down, 1 Cor. 9, 19. Though I be free from all Men, yet have I
made my self Servant unto all Men, that I may win the more. We are brought
into the World, to do good to others, and to be as Candles to give light to
others, rather then to our selves. This made the same Apostle in another place
say, 1 Cor 4, 5.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
servants for Jesus sake. If then, the Ministers be the servants of the Church,
and all men Servants one toward another; we must in all things show our
selves Servants, by serving the necessities, and seeking the good of all our
Brethren amongst whom we live.

Reason 2.
Secondly, we are members of the same body, and therefore in this respect
should profit one another. We see it is so in every part of our body; the eye
sees not for it self, the head inuenteth not for it self, the hand works
not for it self, the foot walks not for it self, but they do these duties
for the whole body. Thus it ought to be among all the faithful; if Christ
Jesus be our head, we must be affected as mutual members one to another. So
the Apostle teaches, that as the 1 Cor. 12, 12
body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body, which
is one, though they be many, yet are but one body; even so, is Christ. And
afterward, If one member suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had in
honor, all the members rejoice with it. If then we had Faith to believe, that
we are nearly joined together, one to another, as members of one body, we
would faithfully employ our selves to the good and comfort one of another.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, we are all of us Stewards and disposers of the manifold graces of
God. For God being as a great Nobleman that has a great house, rules all
things in it by his Steward. So has God committed his goods to us, and made us
Stewards of his family, to Minister in season to all in the Household; and he
will take an account how we use them, when it shall be said to us, Give an
account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. This is the
reason urged by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4, 10.
Let every man as he has received the gift, minister the same one to another,
as good disposers of the manifold grace of GOD. Seeing then, we are made
Servants, Members, and Stewards, to serve one to another, to help one another,
and to Minister one to another, we are bound to respect the faithful as our
fellow-seruants, to do them good as our fellow members, and procure their
benefit as parts of the same Family with us.

Use 1.
The Doctrine being thus cleared by store of witnesses, and by strength of
Reasons, let us not pass from it, until we see the Uses of it. First of all,
this teaches us to remember and mind the benefit and good of others, and not
only to desire, but to effect the same, as much as we can, especially their
eternal good. It is a good thing to do good unto the bodies of our Brethren;
but the cheifest good is to do good to their souls. There is none of us but
have received some gift, and by the use thereof may do some good. God indeed
with a liberal hand distributed his blessings, he has not dealt couetously,
niggardly, and sparingly toward us; but liberally, richly, bountifully. He has
given all his goods among us all, he has not given all to every one, but he
has bestowed some to one, and some to another, in one measure to this man, in
another measure to that man. But howsoever the number of our gifts be small,
and the measure of them little, yet no man has so small a number, or so little
a measure, but he may gain some glory to God the giver of them, and do some
good to his Brethren by the use of them.

We see in the Parable, he that had received five Talents, increased five other
Talents; and he that had received two Talents, gained other two also; and
these are called good and faithful Servants. The Apostle Paul writing to the
Phillippians, Phil. 2, 4.
Look not every man on his own things, but every Man also on the things
of other men. Hereby such are reproved, as are Lovers of themselves, invent
for themselves, care for themselves, labor for themselves, and do the duties
of their calling for themselves: these do not mind or mean any good to the
Church, or to their poor Brethren, they care for nothing but their own
advantage.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing such are reproved as have gifts, and yet use them not but
hide them, and so diminish them by idleness and want of conscience. Such as
use their gifts, do increase them; such as use them not, decrease and diminish
them. The first reproof.
It is the just judgment of God upon all unconscionable persons, that have
received gifts in a great measure, and never employ them or bestow them to the
profit of others; they have their gifts taken from them, their knowledge is
diminished, their judgment corrupted, their memory decayed, their zeal
quenched, their diligence abated. We see this in the Ministers of the Gospel,
who are made able and apt to teach, who are filled and furnished with gifts
answereable to their calling, to do good in their places, when they grow
sloathfull, and spend their days without care and conscience of their duties,
they are infatuated of God, and abhorred of men, they run into gross errors,
and are made ridiculous even to children. This is it which the Prophet long ago
prophesied, and threatened from God to fall upon these proud and profane men,
Zach 11, 17
O Idol Shepherd, that leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm,
and upon his right eye: his arm shall he clean dried up, and his right eye
shall be utterly darkened. The like we may say also of the people, who have
profited by the preaching of the Gospel, and gathered much instruction, to
their great comfort, when they begin to stand at a stay, and to cease the
course into which they are entered; all things go backward with them, they become
lukewarm, they have less knowledge (I speak of many of our professors) then
they had; ten, yea twenty years ago: their zeal is turned into coldness,
their forwardness into backwardness, their Prayers into pleasures, their
earnestness into negligence, their love into loathing, their hearing into
dullness and deafness, their ears aie stopped, and are made hard and heavy;
they were wont to draw others to the exercises of Religion, but now themselves
stand in need to be haled and pulled unto them: they were wont to light a
Candle, and lead the way to others, now their light is put out, and they
remain in darkness themselves.

These men through their benumming and backsliding, cause the name of God to
be evil spoken of, raise a scandal upon their profession, bring an evil name
upon the word, and open the mouths of wretched men to speak against true
Religion, and all those that do embrace it. True Religion is a worthy work,
and a great building, it requires hard labor, great patience, much striving,
and long continuance, whereof our Savior Christ puts us in mind, when he
says, Luke 14, 28. 29.
Which of you, minding to build a Tower, sits not down before, and counts
the cost, whether he have sufficient to perform it, least that after he has
laid the foundation, and is not able to perform it, all that behold it begin
to mock nim, saying; This man began to build, and was not able to make an end.
Wherefore, it stands all Pastors and people upon, to remember from whence
they are fallen, and to do their first works, lest God come against them in his
anger, and vex them in his fore displeasure. The calling of the Ministry is an
high calling; it is one of the highest callings; but if we make it a calling
of ease and idleness, feeding our selves, and not teaching the people, we
disgrace our office, and make it most vile with God and men. This is it which
our Savior expresses under the comparison of Salt, when he says, Luke 14,
35.
Salt is good, but if Salt have lost his savor wherewith shall it be salted? It
is neither meet for the Land, not yet for the Dunghill, but men cast it out.
All other things, though corrupted and spoiled, yet retain some other use; as
we see in Wine when it is sower, in a Tree when it is dead and withered, and in
straw when it is rotten, they are turned into other uses; but if Berent. in
Luke 14.
the Salt be unsavory, it is good for nothing, it is hurtful for the Land, it
is unprofitable for the Dunghill, no reckoning or account is to be made of it,
Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 13.
but to be trodden under foot as unsavory. So then, such as are made Ouer-seers
of others to teach the Church, and watch over the people of God, are reproved,
being idle and slothful, and such as will take no pains in instructing those
that are committed unto them. Let Ministets be diligent and watchful to do
the duties of their calling: let them preach the word in season, and out of
season; let them beware of sluggishnesse and slothfulness. Al such as are idle
and negligent, are not worthy to be maintained, they usurp that hire which
they receive, they have no right or interrest to live of the Gospel, that do
not preach the Gospel; they have no just title to eat the milk of the
flock, that do not feed the Sheep, albeit they may claim their wages by the
Laws of men, yet they are no better in the account of the high God, then
Thieves and robbers that live by ruin and spoil of the people, Gal. 6. 6.
who are partakers of all their goods, and yet like wrongful usurpers, they
will not teach them in the word; yea the good ordinances of men require, that
such as receive wages should do the work, and such as take the hire, should
take the pains.

If any man have an house to build, if he see the Carpenter and Mason idle, and
do nothing, so that the frame to be set up, is in no greater forwardness in
the end of the year, then it was in the beginning, will he pay them their
wages? Or if we have any business to do, will we pay the workmen before the
work be finished, or if they let it alone and leave it undone? And shall it go
worse with the people of God, then all other that hire laborers to labor for
them? Or shall they alone be constrained, to maintain and sustain idle
Lubbers and loyterers that can do nothing, or will do nothing, more then a
Child of seven years old may do as well as themselves? We are the Lords
Builders, and spiritual Masons to build his Church; we are his husbandmen to
Till his ground; we are Shepherds to feed his flock. It is out duty to
frame his building, and every day to add somewhat to the building. It is our
duty to Plough up the fallow ground, and sow the precious seed of the word
among them, that they may grow thereby. It is our duty to feed his Sheep with
wholesome food, and to lead them into green pastures. If we be not careful
to do our work, there is no reason we should receive his wages; and if we care
not to discharge the duty, we cannot with a good Conscience take a penny: if we
will be at no pains, what warrant have we to make any gains by our idleness.
God has provided for us a liberal allowance; he requires of the people a
cheereful performance thereof, and he charge the ministers to have a careful
remembrance to labor in the Lords harvest, that so they may eat their own
bread, and not live by the sweat of other men's brows. It is a general rule
delivered by the Apostle, binding all persons and degrees of men, 2 These. 3, 10
11.
Even when we were with you, this we warned you of, that if there were any
which would not work, that he should not eat: for we hear, that there are
some which walk among you inordinately, and work not at all, etc. Let all
such therefore, as are negligent in the work of the Lord, and stand idle
without employment, consider, that as God has given no gifts to be idle, but
to be used, so he would have no idle persons to be maintained, he does grudge
them their meat, he does not allow them a Morsel of bread, he regards not
though they starve, that will not set their hands to labor. For, he
inhibiteth and forbids his Church and people, to bestow any thing upon
sluggards, or to give them any succor, to the end, that the forcible weapon of
necessity may constrain them to set their hand to work, and also to busy
themselves in the Calling which they profess. And this stands with exceeding
great equity, and good reason. For, what is meat, but the reward of Labor?
And what is the Wages which they have, but the recompense of the Work? Or,
what is hyre, but only the reward of paines-taking?

Now, he that does no good, but is unprofitable to mankind, and is not
dilligent in his business, what right or reason is it, that he should be
rewarded as a Labourer? The second reproof.
Moreover, they are here reproved, that use their guiftes ^o the hurt and
hinderance of others. For, if such be justly blamed and condemned, as hide
their gifts to their hinderance, and use them not to the benefit of others,
they are much worse, that abuse them unto evil, that use their wit to
undermine the ignorant, their wisdom to beguile the simple, their learning to
subvert the truth, their knowledge to overthrow the faith, their riches to
undo the poor, their credit to cross justice, their authority to disdain,
their strength to oppress the weak, their power to contemn others, and every
gift to the dishonor of the giver, as the Serpent did his wiliness to deceive.
These are al like mad men armed. It were better that a mad man had no armor
and weapon, then that he should use, or rather abuse them, to the death and
destruction of others: so it were better these men wanted these guiftes, then
that they should profane them to the dishonor of God, to the hurt of others,
and to the bringing of a fearful judgment upon their own souls. It were
better to do nothing, then to do evil; as we say, it is better to be idle,
then to be ill occupied. It were better to let the sword rest in the scabbard,
then to draw it out to wound the innocent; to let our riches corrupt, and our
garments be moth-eaten, and our treasure be cankred, then we wear them with
pride, and wast them in drunkenness, whoredom, and all wickedness. We must
one day give an account unto God, both what we have received, and how we have
bestowed that which we have received. If the Merchant that has had his Factor
in a strange Country, wasting his goods committed to him on harlots, and in
riotous living, will call him to an account how he has spent his time, and
misspent his goods; shall we not think that the eternal God will summon us
before the bar of his judgment seat, to give in a reckoning and an exact
account what we have done with such gifts as he has lent us, and how we have
bestowed them?

The third reproof.
Thirdly, they are here also reproved, which bar and lock up such gifts of
such, as might be profitable to the Church and Commonwealth, which suffer them
not to employ their gifts, that desire to employ them, which do little good
themselves, and yet hinder those that would do good. The Dog that lies in
the manger, will not eat the Hay himself, nor suffer the Ox that labors
to eat of it. So we have lamentable experience of such men, or rather Beasts,
as open not their own mouths, but have learned to shut the mouths of others
that would preach the gospel. These are like to Amazia, that proud Priest of
Bethel, that falsely informed the King against the true Prophet of God Amos,
and charged him to hold his peace, Amos 7. 10, 12.
he sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying; Amos has conspired against thee
in the midst of the house of Israel, the Land is not able to bear his words.
And he said to Amos, O thou the Seer, flee thou away into the Land of Judah,
and there eat thy Bread, and prophesy there, but prophecy no more at Bethel,
for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. These are like to the
cruel Priests and Prophets, that suffered not Ier. 26, 8. and 38, 6.
Jeremiah to publish the word of the Lord, but stopped his mouth, and clapped him
up in prison, and if their rage had not bin repressed, and their malice
restrained, they would not have rested, till they had put him to death, and
brought him to destruction. He was as a silly Lamb in the jaws and claws of
blood-sucking Wolves, and led unto the slaughter, he sought not any revenge
against them, but only said, Ier. 26, 14. 15
As for me, bohold I am in your hands, do with me as ye think good and right:
but know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring
innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this City, and upon the Inhabitants
thereof, for of a truth the Lord has sent me unto you, to speak all these
words in your ears. These are like to the Acts 4, 17. and 5, 28.
chief Priest and Pharisees, who threatened and charged the Apostles that they
should thenceforth speak or teach no man in Christ's name; but they answered,
We ought rather to obey God then men. And again, Whether it be right in the
sight of God to obey you rather then God, judge ye. These are like to that
ambitious Diotrephes, mentioned by the Apostle John in his third Epistle. 3
John 9, 10
who as he loved to have the pre-eminence among them, so he pratled against
the true servants of God with malicious words, and not therewith content,
neither he himself receives the Brethren, but forbids them that would
receive them, and thrusts them out of the Church. It is an horrible sin to
take away the preaching of Gods word from men. For whatsoever men pretend to
excuse their sin, and what Fig leaves soever they patch together to cover
their shame, they are guilty of the destruction and damnation of so many
souls, as by them might have bin instructed. Judas was guilty of an heinous
sin for betraying and delivering the body of one innocent to a temporal
death: but these shall be arraigned of high treason against Jesus Christ, who
betray many thousand souls into the hands of Satan, and throw them into the
jaws of death, even of eternal death. Such are the bloody Papists, which deny
the use of the scriptures to the people, and debar them of the means of
getting knowledge. And such are all carnal Gospellers, which think the
preaching of the Gospel, to be a needless and superfluous thing, and account
the people to have sufficient, so that they have a praying Ministry alone, and
the service read distinctly among them. Let us therefore take heed, that we
do not stop the course of the Gospel, or put out the light that would shine
into our hearts, but rather further (with all our power) the truth that God
has set up among us, and spread abroad his saving health, that so glory may be
gained to his name.

The fourth reproof.
Lastly, it reprooueth the neglect of employing the gifts of God bestowed upon
them; that is, in the people. Whether God have given us spiritual graces or
temporal blessings, we must take heed how we use them. We are ready to
hear, and willing to learn the faults of the Ministers; yea, we can speak of
them our selves, and talk of them all day long; we can tell that some use not
their gifts to the good of the Church, others abuse them to the hurt of the
Church: but never consider how themselves employ their own gifts, or what
account they shall give to God that has bestowed them. The benefit of them,
is not in having of them, but in the using of them; not in the enjoying, but in
the employing; not in the possessing, but in the practicing. Not to use them,
is all one as if we had them not. For, as the covetous man wants as well the
things that he has, as those which he has not, so do these sluggards receive
the grace of God in vain, which have the use of those things they enjoy, no
more then of those things which they have not obtained. This made the Apostle
say, Heb. 6, 11, 12
We desire that every one of you show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end, that ye be not sloathfull, but followers of
them which through Faith and Patience inherit the promises. God is constrained
oftentimes to take away the means that he sends for our good, when we make no
good use of them; he takes away good Pastors, he sends and sets up evil
Pastors in their rooms, when we do not profit, nor are careful to make others
profit by us. This the Prophet Zachary denounces from the mouth of the Lord,
Zach. 17, 16
I will raise up a Shepherd in the Land, which shall not look for the thing
that is lost, nor seek the tender Lambs, nor healt that that is hurt, nor
feed that which stands up, but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear
the claws in pieces. This also Christ our Savior teaches in the Gospel,
Math. 13, 12
Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but
whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away, even that he has.

Furthermore, in the parable of the man, that going into a far Country,
called unto him his servants, and delivered unto them his goods; we see that
the evil servant, that having received a Talent hid it in the ground, and
brought only a Talent to his Master again, has Math 25, 28.
that taken from him, and it is given to him that had gotten and gained five
Talents. It is accounted an evil Tree, not that only which brings forth
evil fruit, but that also which brings forth no fruit. It is accounted evil
ground, not only that which bears Thorns and Briars, but that also which
brings forth no Corn for the use of man. He is accounted an unjust steward,
not only that wastes his Masters goods and conuerteth the^ to his own use,
but he that keeps them safe and sound without employment, which he had
received to lay out, to dispense and to distribute. He is accounted an evil
servant, not only that sells to others or reserueth to himself his Masters
Corn which he should have sowed in the earth, that it might have brought forth
great increase and a plentiful Harvest, but he that keeps it by him, and in
the end delivers it back in the same manner and measure that he took it. So
are we unfaithful servants, unjust Stewards, and evil bestowers of our
Masters money, if we let it lie by us, and do not employ it to some gain. If
then they be blamed and unrewarded that gain nothing, what shall they be
esteemed, that loose the Stock, and dash away the principal. Again, if God
have given unto us this worlds good, he requires of us to do good with it, to
help those that are in want, and to distribute to the necessities of the
Saints. Has God been liberal to us, that we should be hand-bound and
heart-bound unto others? He has left the poor with us, that we should be in
stead of God to them, Exodus 4, 16.
as Moses is said to be given to Aaron in Gods stead as a wise Councellor, so
we are appointed to be unto them as a wise distributer, supplying that which is
wanting unto them. How should God give much unto us, when for his sake we will
not give a little. If we were in their case and condition, and had experience
how great the misery of want is, and how heavy the burden of poverty is, we
would be willing to be refreshed, comforted, and eased: Mat 7, 12.
Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Whatsoever we do unto them, shall
not be unregarded, or unrewarded: we sow it in a fruitful ground, and we shall
reap it again with great increase.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing we must employ that which we have received to the benefit of
others, it serves greatly to comfort such as have been careful to communicate
to others rhose things that they have received, and to make them partakers of
the same comfort that they have reaped by them. It is a blessed thing when men
have endeavored to their power to benefit others, to exhort them, to admonish
them, to comfort them, to refresh them, and have used our guiftes to the profit
of our brethren. O what a wonderful comfort and consolation shall it be unto
us when we must leave this world and go the way of all flesh, to remember that
we have not spared to do good to others, we have not failed to benifit others,
we have not ceased to scatter abroad a part of that which we have gathered. Let
us lay this to our hearts and apply it to our consciences, both we that are
the Ministers and you that are the people. If we that are made watchmen over
the City of God, and overseers of the Church, shall to the utmost of our power
employ our gifts and spend our selves to give light to others, God will not
forget the labor of our hands, but great shall be our reward in heaven,
according to the promise mentioned in Daniell the Prophet, Dan 12, 3.
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever.
Heereunto accords the answer of Christ to the question of Peter, Luk 12, 42,
43.
Who is a faithful Steward and wise, whom the Master shall make Ruler over
his household, to give them their portion of meat in season? Blessed is that
servant whom his Master when he comes shall find so doing. We shall find
more comfort of conscience and joy of heart, and gladness of spirit, when we
depart this life, that we have been faithful in that little committed to our
trust, and made others partakers of it as well as our selves, then if we had
great abundance of earthly blessings, and were owners of the whole world.

The like comfort shall all faithful people of God find, that have distributed
their Masters goods, they shall receive their reward, according unto their
work. We see the harvest is answereable to the seed time, and they shall reap
as they have sowed. Then they shall taste the sweetness, and reap the comfort
of their labor, bestowed in applying themselves to the profit of others. Their
last day shall be a blessed day unto them, when they shall find God as ready
to communicate unto them his glory, as they have bin to do to others their
duty, and to bestow upon them the fruits of mercy, and the works of charity.
The greatest good is to seek to gain their souls; the next, is to give to
their bodies. On the other side, how uncomfortable shall that day of our
leparture be, how woeful and full of trouble, bringing horror of conscience,
vexation of spirit, and confusion of face: Woe then, woe (I say) to all idle
Ministers, and sluggish people, that when they are to be gathered unto their
Fathers, and ly upon their death beds, cannot remember what good they have
done, but shall be troubled and tormented with the consideration of this, what
good they might have done, that they might have been fruitful trees, but have
been barren; Good ground, but have been evil. These men have nothing else to
muse and meditate upon, but how they have spent whole days and nights, whole
months and years, in eating and drinking, in feasting and company, in
pleasures and pastimes, in surfeiting and drunkenness, and what comfort shall
their poor distressed soul, and languishing body, feel in that day, but
cry out with a lamentable cry, and a pitiful howling, able to move the
stones, and to pierce the rocks, that all is vanity, and then condemn their
folly, that have placed their happiness in this unhappiness, and the joy of
their spirit, in this sorrow of their heart. For, if that be true which the
Prophet says, Psalm. 128, 1, 2 Prou. 10, 4.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways: when
thou eatest the labors of thine hands, thou shall be blessed, and it shall be
well with thee: It is no doubt as true, that such as eat not the fruit of
their labors, but eat the fruit of their laziness and loytering, are
accurssed. This is it which our Savior adds, Luke 12, 45 46.
If that servant say in his heart, My Master does defer his coming, and
shall begin to smite the Servants and Maidens, and to eat and drink, and to
be drunken; The Master of that servant will come on a day, when he thinks
not, and at an hour when he is not ware of, and will cut him off, and give him
his portion with the unbelievers, and that Servant that knew his Masters will,
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes. Where he teaches, that as eternal life is the reward of
diligence, and discharge of our duty, so is eternal destruction the wages of
all idle bellies.

Such as do no good to others shall know at the last that they have indeed done
no good unto themselves. The more serviceable we have been to others, the
more profitable shall we be in the end to our selves, and the comfort of all
shall be felt in our hearts, when we shall say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4, 7, 8
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing. A notable example hereof, we have in
Obadiah, who was Governor of Ahabs house, when he saw himself in distress of
famine, and in fear least Eliah should depart, he called to remembrance the
fruits of his Faith, the worship of God, and the favor showed to his children,
and herein he was comforted. When Iezebel 1 Kin. 18, 13
slew the Prophets of the Lord, he hid an hundred men of the Lords Prophets by
fifties in a Cave, and fed them with bread and water. Let us therefore never
be without such arguments to comfort us, we shall find the benefit of them
when we are in trouble, and especially when we are going out of the world.

[ And that whatsoever good thing is in you through Christ Jesus may be
known.] The Apostle in these words, mentions this to be the cause, why he
would have the gifts of God bestowed upon Philemon, to be communicated to
others, because by that means, they might be made known to others, and
acknowledged by others, and so spread abroad far and near. Doctrine 3. The
goodness of God toward our selves or other must be made known.
We learn from hence, that it is the duty of every one to manifest and show
forth, yea, to spread abroad and to speak of the gifts of God bestowed upon
themselves and others. When God is good toward us, and distributeth his graces
among us, we must be ready to confess and acknowledge them, when we feel them
in our selves, or see them in others. This our Savior Mat 5, 16.
teaches Math. 5. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Thus the spirit of
God in the Scriptures remembers the righteousness of Noah, the faith and
obedience of Abraham, the patience of Job, the chastity of Joseph, the
meekness of Moses, the single heart of David, the sincerity of Nathaniell, the
labors of Paul, the repentance of Peter, the restitution of Zacheus. Christ
Jesus publishes the graces of God that shined in John Baptist, John 5, 35.
he says he was a burning and shining Candle, and that they would for a season
have rejoiced in his light. The Apostle declares 1 Timothy 4 14.
that the faith of the Romans is published throughout the whole world. The
praise of Timothy was noysed and notifyed in the Church, whereof Paul puts
him in mind to make his proceedings answearable to his beginnings and to the
hope that was conceived of him, 1 Timothy 4 14.
Despise not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prohecie, with
the laying on of the hands of the company of the Eldership. So likewise the
fact of Mary, anointing the body of Christ, and working a good work upon him
to bury him, is commanded to be made known, and not kept secret, Mat 26, 13.
Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout
all the world, there shall also this that she has done be spoken off, for a
memorial of her. Thus the Apostle remembers the 1 These 1, 3.
effectual faith, and diligent love, and the patience of that hope in our Lord
Jesus Christ which was in the Thessalonians. So he records and commends the
liberallity that was in them of Macedonia toward the poor Saints at Jerusalem
that were in distress. All which Testimonies serve to teach us, that it is our
duty to publish the guifes of God upon us or our brethren, not to hide them:
to spread them abroad, not to smother them: to make them known, not to cover
and conceal them to our selves.

Reason 1.
And albeit these examples may be sufficient to move us to embrace this as a
certain truth, yet we have sundry reasons yielded in the Scriputre farther to
confirm it unto us. First, to the end that Gods graces being seen and known
he may be glorified and blessed for them, who is the author and giver of them.
It ought to be our chiefest desire and study, that God may have his praise and
glory among us. This is that reason which Christ our Savior points out unto
us, when he commands us to show forth our good works in our life, Mat 5, 16.
that God our Father may be glorified which is in heaven. One end of good
works is the glory of God. They can never please him, unless they aim at
that mark, and tend to that end. This the Apostle Peter teaches, 1 Pet 2.
Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil
of you as of evil doers, may by your good works which they shall see,
glorify God in the day of visitation. The glory of men and the magnifying of
their name is not to be sought after; but of God, to whom all glory is due.

Reason 2.
Secondly, we are to make known the guiftes of God in our selves or in others,
because the more they be known, and the farther they are spread, the larger
praise and more abundant thanksgiving may be given unto God and yielded to his
name by many. The rendering of thanks unto him is a sacrifice that smells
sweetly in his Nostrils. The Apostle speaking of the liberallity of the
Corinthians, and exhorting them to the works of mercy, he uses this reason,
that by beholding of them, not only the godly are refreshed, but God is
glorified, 1 Cor. 9, 11, 12.
That on all parts ye may be made rich unto all liberality, which causes
thorough us thanksgiving unto God, for the ministration of this service, not
only supplieth the necessities of the Saints, but also abundantly causes many
to give thanks to God. The reason is direct, and of great force.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, in respect of others, because the more the goodness and graces of
God are spoken of, and the more largely they are dispersed, the mo by that
means may be provoked and stirred up to an imitation and following of their
example, and to a treading in their steps. This is another end that we ought to
respect in publishing the mercies of God to draw others to do the like, and to
provoke them as by an holy emulation of their godliness. Hence it is, that the
Apostle stirring up the Corinthians to a bountiful helping of the Saints at
Jerusalem, he sets before them the example of the Churches of Macedonia,
that they should follow them, 2 Cor. 8, 1, 2.
We do you also, to wit Brethren, of the grace of God bestowed upon the
Churches of Macedonia, because in great trial of affliction their joy
abounded, and their most extreme poverty abounded unto their rich liberality.
Having set before them this glass to look upon, and in it to behold
themselves, that albeit the Macedonians themselves had heavy burdens laid
upon them, and many charges of their own that pressed them down, whereby they
were made poor, yea extreme poor, yet they hung not back, but were forward
according to their power, yea, beyond their power to succor others. He
exhorts the Corinthians hereupon, Verse 7.
That as they abounded in every thing, in faith, and word, and knowledge, and
in all diligence, and in their love toward the Apostles, even so they should
show themselves to abound in this grace also. Likewise he commends the
Thessalonians, that they became followers of them, 1 These. 1, 6. 7
And received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost, so that
they were as ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia, and in Achaia. So when
he has proved that Abraham's Faith To 4, 22, 23
was imputed to him for righteousness, he adds; Now it is not written for
him only, but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed, which believe in him
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. So then, if we lay these things
together, and consider the person of God, of the Church, and of others, that
God is to be glorified, that the faithful must have their mouths opened to
praise him, and that all others must be provoked by our good example; in all
these respects we learn, that whenever God bestows his gifts, and we taste
of his graces, or others are made partakers of his goodness, we must be
careful to make the same known to othets.

Use 1.
The Uses are now to be stood upon. First, we see there may be sometimes a
foolish modesty in concealing those good things which should be uttered and
published, if they may further the cause of Religion, or provoke others to
godliness, or bring glory to God. God is not ashamed of us, to be called our
God, and to do us good; let us not therefore be ashamed to acknowledge him to be
good unto us, and confess his goodness to the sons of men. We see how men
are not ashamed to make known their ungodliness, and proclaim it openly with
brazen faces; they glory in it as at a triumph, and never blush at any thing.
Let us therefore be bold to speak of good things, and account it our duty to
sound out alowd the graces that we have received. It is to great niceness to
hide Gods glory and our gifts. This was the cause, why Paul mentioned his
labors, his calling, his knowledge, his pains, his 2 Cor. 12, 2.
visions, his revelations, when the false Apostles extolled themselves above
him, to the reproach of his person, to the slander of his calling, to the
disgrace of the Gospel, and to the dishonor of God. This compelled and
constrained him not to be silent in his own cause, or rather in the cause of
God and his Gospel. For, albeit his enemies seemed only to contemn him, and
set his person at naught, yet the contempt reached farther, and thorough his
sides they gave a blow and a wound to the truth it self, we must not be so
dissolute and careless to neglect what every one speaks of us, but be
jealous of our credit and maintain our good name, especially when our
sincerity and Gods verity are joined together. We see how Samuel before all
the people 1 Samuel 12, 3.
protested his innocence in his life, and uprightness in his calling, because
the Isralites had rejected him and brought his ministry into question. There
was a a time when Christ would not have himself and his works known; to wit,
when the knowledge might hinder him and his preaching, but he Mat 10, 27.
commanded his Apostles to speak that in the light which he had told them in
darkness, and to preach that in the house tops, which he told them in the
ear. This serves to condemn those that derogate from the godly, and diminish
the graces that God has given unto them, and bestowed upon them. For howsoever
the notes of Godliness are stamped upon them, and the guiftes of God do shine
as brightly as the light of the Sun in them, whereby they are marked to be
his, and known to belong unto him, yet they will lessen and extenuate them and
as it were clip the Princes Coin, that so they may be disgraced. This is a
manifest note of a Child of the Devil, and of representing his Image. For as
the names given to Satan describe his nature, so the word (Devil) in the
orriginall tongue which the holy Ghost uses, Revel 22, 10
signifies a false accuser, a carper, a cauiller, a disgracer, a slanderer,
one that by all means seeks to deface the truth and those that uphold and
support it. Thus the nature of our spiritual adversity is notably painted and
purtraied out unto us. His whole practice stands in false accusations,
wrongful imputations, and wilful calumniations of God to man, and of man to
God. He falsely accused God to our first parents, in the beginning, Gen 3, 5.
to envy their good estate, and therefore of malice forbad them the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. He falsely accused Job to serve God; Job 1, 9, 10.
11.
in hypocrisy, not in sincerity; with show of the body, not with singleness
of heart; to be seen of men, not to approve himself with an upright
conscience in the presence of God. These quallities of the Devil are to be
found in all the wicked. If you talk and reason with them, of such as truly
fear God, either they will censure them as Hipocrits, and falsely accuse them
not to be the persons which they make profession to be, or else they will
detract from them and diminish those guiftes that God has abundantly bestowed
upon them. Christ Jesus himself could not escape this viperous brood, who was
accused by the Devils offspring, and the Children of darkness, the Scribes and
Pharisees, to be a Samaritan, to have a Devil, to be a Drunkard, to be a
Seducer, a Blasphemer, and what not? So was it with his Apostles, they were
filled with the holy Ghost, and endued with the guiftes of tongues, yet they
felt the smart of this rod, and were wounded with this sharp sword, they were
accounted Deceivers, accused as Drunkards, slaunderd as Disturbers of the
common peace, and reviled as Traitors, and Rebels against Caesar, for the
Disciple must not look to be John 15, 20.
above his Master, nor the servant greater then his Lord. These reuilings and
reproaches are not peculiar to Christ and his Apostles, but common to all the
faithful and true believers in his name, they taste of the same cup, and have
the like measure measured unto them. They are slandered and backbited, they are
reviled and taunted for the truths sake. But let all such carpers and cauilers
look to themselves and take heed to their estate, John 8, 44.
they resemble their father whose works they do, and they show themselves to
be petty-Sathans, and very Devils incarnate. Now such as are the Children of
the Devil, must look to have their portion with the Devil, and his Angels.
Let us therefore be ready to magnify the mercies of God toward our brethren;
let us speak of the praises of him that has given them; let us remember what
God has done for us and others; and especially let us beware that we do not
disgrace them and their guiftes, which tends to the dishonor of him that
gave them. For as Solomon says, Prou. 17, 5. and 14, 31.
He that mocketh the poor, reprocheth him that made him: so is it true, that
whosoever contemns and despises, reuileth and treads under his foot the
Godly, adorned from the Throne of God with the precious graces of his spirit,
he reproves and reproacheth God himself 1 John 2, 29
who has given that anointing which they have received of him. Thus we see
how we are to behave our selves in respect of Gods guiftes; we must not be
ashamed to confess them, but we must be both ashamed and afraid to deface
them, and so to defraud God of his honor due unto him.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing it is our duty, when God has been good unto us or others,
to make known his goodness: we learn hereby, how the Saints of God may be
rightly and religiously honored of us, and remembered to their everlasting
praise. It is our duty to give thanks to God, who has blessed them with his
graces, and governed them by his holy spirit, and to pray unto him so to direct
us, and dispose of our ways, that we may follow their godliness, and walk in
their steps wherein they have gone before us. True it is, the church of Rome go
a great deal farther, and teach us to go further in the honoring of them then
God allows, and the word approves. For they lade them with the spoils of
Christ, and take from him the royalties of his Priesthood, and therefore indeed
they do not honor them, but dishonor and disgrace them, when they deck them
with feathers that are not theirs. Is there any good and godly man living on
the face of the earth, that could be content to have thieves and robbers
spoil other men of their goods, and bring them unto him, and if they offered
them, would he accept and receive them? If he would not receive them as his
own, but refuse and reject them as belonging to others, how should the blessed
Virgin, the holy Apostles, and other Saints of God, account those sacrilegious
wretches to be their friends, which rob and spoil God of his honor, and thrust
Christ Jesus our mediator from his office to bestow upon the^? It is their
honor to honor the same God with us, and to worship him. And it is our honoring
of them, to give all honor to God, by walking in those ways wherein they have
led us the way, and by following the light which they have carried before us.
And if we would know how to honor the Saints aright, and to give them their
due, Wherein the honor of the Saints consists.
it consists in these points: First, that God be magnified and praised in
them: our praising of them must tend to the praising of him, who has advanced
them, and crowned them with his gifts. God must be all in all to us, and his
glory must be preferred and sought for of us. The Apostle remembering the
History of his own calling and conversion, tells that the Churches of the
Jews said, Gal. 1, 22, 23
He which persecuted us in times past, now preaches the Faith which before
he destroyed; and they glorified God for me. When they heard he was gained to
the Gospel, they considered therein, the power, goodness, and mercy of God,
and with joy of heart, they gave him thanks for it. Secondly, the Saints
should be honored by an approbation of Gods guiftes in them, and by an
honorable mention of them. For, seeing they have used the gifts of God
faithfully, he will have their gifts praised and extolled, and the Saints
themselves to be magnified and commended. So the Apostle mentioning his
persecuting of the church in the time of his ignorance, adds, 1 Cor. 15, 10
But by the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace which is in me, was not
in vain, but I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God which is with me. So in the Parable of the talents, they that used
their talents well, and increased much by the use of them, do hear this to
their great praise, Math. 25, 21
It is well done good servant and faithful, thou have bin faithful in little,
I will make thee Ruler over much, enter into thy Masters joy. Moses is
reported to be Heb 3, 5. and 11, 2.
faithful in all the house of God, as a seruanr, for a Witness of the things
which should be spoken after. So the Holy Fathers are commended by the Apostle
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, who through their faith obtaind a good report.
3. They are honored of us by following of their lives, and by an imitation of
their virtues, being as examples and patterns for us, to walk after. For this
is the glory of the Saints, if we follow their Faith, Hope, Charity,
Patience, Doctrine, and other like graces that have appeared in them. The
Apostle wills the Phillippians to be blameless and pure, as the sons of
God without rebuke, in the midst of a naughty and crooked Nation, shining among
them as lights in the world: and he adds, Phil. 2, 16.
Holding fast the word of life, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I
have not run in vain, neither have labored in vain. And to this end does the
Scripture make plentiful record of the graces of God, given to the Saints,
that our Faith might be strengthened and confirmed, and we encouraged in all
well-doing. This is the right manner of honoring the Saints and faithful
Servant of God, when God is honored in them, and for them, when they are
praised and commended, and when we are stirred up to good things by their
example. As for Religious Worship of adoration and invocation of them; it is
not due unto them, it is proper to God, Revel. 22, 9.
and the Saints do not desire it, or accept it. Wherefore, it is a notorious
slander of the Church of Rome cast out against us, that we contemn and
despise the Saints, that we deface them, and set them at naught, whereas we
honor them as God has commanded them to be honored, and give them that
reverence that he has appointed. It were horrible impiety to speak
reproachfully, or to think irreverently of them whom GOD the Father honors,
whom the Son acknowledges for his Brethren and Heirs with him, whom the
holy spirit calls his Temple to dwell in. The Righteous Psalm. 112, 6. Prou.
10, 7. Luke 1, 48.
shall be had in everlasting remembrance. The memorial of the just shall be
blessed. The Virgin Marie says, He has looked upon the poor degree of his
servant; for behold, from henceforth shall all ages call me blessed. On the
other side, The name of the wicked shall rot, Psalm. 109, 13
and in the generation following, it shall be put out. But the Romain Church,
under a false Title of honoring the Saints, do hide and cover all their
superstitions, and bring in their merits and mediation, under color of doing
reverence unto them.

Now, the Scripture has forewarned us, that nothing falls out more often or
easily, then to err and offend in honoring of the Saints. Christ reprooueth
the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 23, 29
who builded the tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the
righteous, yet they bare mortal hatred to the Gospel, and to the professors of
it. And he reproves the Jews, John 8, 44.
who magnified the memory of Abraham, and boasted themselves to be his
Children, yet they showed themselves to be the children of the devil, and
would not do the works of Abraham. But we give them sufficient honor, when we
publish their praises and gifts, and follow them in our lives, as they followed
Christ the author and finisher of our faith.

Use 3
Thirdly, we must beware that vainglory be not the end which we seek for.
We are to give the glory to the Author, not to the Instrument; to God, not to
man; to the Creator, not ^o the Creature. When Herod was magnified by the vain
applause of the people, and honored for his great gifts as a God, Acts 12, 23.
Immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not glory unto
God, so that he was eaten of Worms, and gave up the ghost. This is it which
Christ obiecteth to the Jews, John 5, 44.
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes of God alone? Yea, this is it which he speaks of
himself, Ioh. 8, 50, 54
I seek not mine own praise, but there is one that seeks it, and judges;
if I honor my self, mine honor is nothing worth. This vainglory here
contemned and condemned, is as rank poison to infect, as a bitter root to
corrupt, and as filthy mire to defile our best works, be they never so
excellent. What more heavenly work, or profitable duty can we perform, then
to pray unto God, and to call upon his Name, for the prayer of a faithful man
avails very much, if it be fervent; yet, if it be a Sacrifice offered with
a vain heart, it becomes unfruitful. We ask, and we obtain not, because
we ask amiss. The like might be said of alms and fasting, the one a fruit
of Faith, the other a furtherance of Faith (for Charity testifyeth, fasting
helps our Faith) if we perform them in hypocrisy, hunting after the praise
of men, not desiring the honor of God, we may have our reward from men, but
we cannot receive any reward from God. They shall have the praise of men, they
shall not have the praise of God. For, as the children of the Prophets among
many herbs, gathered one that was bitter and dangerous, and shred it into the
pot of pottage amongst the rest, who when they began to eat, cried out and
said, 2 King, 4, 40
O thou man of God, death is in the pot: So if among the duties we perform to
God, we mingle the vanity of our own hearts, and sprinkle them with the darnell
of our own glory, we may truly say, Death is in the work. In all things
that we do, we must seek to set forth the glory of God. If any man minister 1
Pet. 4, 11.
(says Peter) let him do it as of the ability which God ministers, that God
in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ. Likewise, the Apostle
Paul gives this precept, 1 Cor, 10, 31
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
If we aim at any other end, we miss the mark, and mar the work, how good
and glorious soever, it may seem to be in the eyes of men. For, as God sees
not as man seeeth, so he judges not as man judges: man looks upon the
outward appearance, but GOD pondereth the hearts. This is it which Christ spoke
to the Pharisees, Luke 16, 15.
Ye are they which iustifye your selves before Men, but GOD knows your
hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men, is abominable in the
sight of God. Let us therefore publish the guiftes of God upon our selves and
our Brethren, not to the magnifying of our own persons, but to the extolling
of his praises; and let us so spread abroad our graces, as that we remember
his glory, that wrought them in us by his Spirit.

Verse 7. [ For we have great joy and consolation in thy Love.] Hitherto we
have spoken of the matter of his Prayer: now let us see the reason why he made
this the matter thereof. For the Apostle might have craved and asked of God
many other things for him of God; yet he desired that his faith might be
communicated to many; and so be manifested to be effectual, working by love.
The reason here rendered, is from the effect or fruit of his prayers, they
were not uttered in the air, they fell not without profit and good success to
the ground, but he felt great comfort and consolation wrought in him by the
works of Philemon, performed to the glory of God, to the praise of his Faith,
and with the approbation of the church. Here then he shows, that he had
occasion offered him of great joy and gladness, in regard of the graces of God,
effects of faith, and fruits of true piety, which he heard and knew to be in
Philemon. Doctrine 4. The spiritual graces of God bestowed upon others, give
occasion of joy to the Saints.
From hence we learn, that spiritual blessings and graces of God bestowed
upon others, do give just occasion to the Saints of God, of great gladness and
comfort. It is our duty greatly to rejoice, when we see spiritual blessings
in heavenly things, given to the Children of God. This truth our Savior
Christ teaches in the Parables of the stray Sheep, of the lost Groat, and of
the prodigal Son. The Shepherd Luke 15, 5, and 10, 31.
having found his sheep, lays it on his shoulder with joy, he comes home,
he calls his friends, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found my Sheep
which was lost. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven, for one
sinner that conuerteth, more then for ninety and nine just men, which need none
amendment of life. The poor woman having lost a Groat, lights a Candle,
sweepeth the house, searches every corner, and when she has found it, she
gathers together her neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the
Groat which I had lost: whereupon he adds; Likewise I say unto you, there
is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, for one sinner that conuerteth.
The Father of that riotous son, which wasted his goods, has compassion upon
him, runs to meet him, fell on his neck and kissed him, put apparel on
his back, a ring on his finger, and shoes on his feet, reproved his son
that envied and repined at it, saying; let us eat and rejoice, it is meet we
should make merry and be glad, for this thy Brother was dead, and is alive
again; he was lost, but he is found. Heereunto comes the Thanksgiving of
Christ to his Father, when he saw the increase of his Church, and the
overthrow of Satan's kingdom, Luke 10, 21
That same hour rejoiced Jesus in the Spirit, and said; I confess unto thee
Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the
wise and understanding, and have revealed them to Babes; even so, Father,
because it so pleased thee. The Prophet David rejoiced with great joy, when he
saw that the people 1 Chronicles. 29 9, 10.
offered willingly unto the Lord with a perfect heart, and he blessed the Lord
God of Israel. When the Jews heard of the conversion of the Gentiles, and that
the Holy ghost fell upon them, as upon themselves at the beginning, Acts 11, 18.
They held their peace and glorified God, saying; Then has God also to the
Gentiles, granted repentance unto life. When the apostle perceived the notable
zeal of the Thessalonians, in receiving and entertaining the gospel not as the
word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God, 1 These. 2, 19 20.
he witnesses that they were his hope and his joy, his crown and his glory in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming. Likewise the Apostle John
3 John 4.
rejoiced greatly, when the Brethren testified of the truth that was in Gaius,
and how he walked therein, He had no greater joy then this, to hear that his
sons walked in the verity. Whereby we see, there ought to be great joy amongst
the faithful, when they see the Church prosper and flourish, and the graces of
God to increase among them.

Reason 1.
The Reasons are many that confirm this unto us. First, the glory and praise
of God is much increased, which should comfort the hearts, and rejoice the
spirits of the Saints. The more we abound with spiritual blessings in heavenly
things, the more God is honored, and his name glorified. This the Apostle
teaches, speaking of the releeuing of the Church at Jerusalem, 2 Cor. 9, 12.
The ministration of this service, not only supplieth the necessities of the
Saints, but also abundantly causes many to give thanks to God. Where he
shows his joy, that he received and conceived for their voluntary submission
to the Gospel, and compassion to the brethren; this was a special cause, that
God was praised; this ministered greater gladness to him, then that the Saints
were comforted and relieved.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the general good of the church must lead us to this duty, and cause
us to rejoice, which next unto God should be dearest to us. For when we see the
Church increase, and many souls of many men and women saved, when we see their
hearts converted, and regeneration wrought in them, so that they begin to live
to God, who before in the time of their ignorance lived to themselus, to sin,
to condemnation: who can have such hearts of Flint, or of Iron as not to be
moved with joy, and even tickled with a sweet meditation of Gods mercy,
beholding the enlarging of the kingdom of Christ. The prophet reioysed to see
the people willingly affected, and religiously minded Psalm. 122, 1, 2
to go to the house of the Lord, Because Jerusalem did thereby prosper, peace
was within her walls and prosperity within her palaces. Where he shows, that
his rejoicing was for the wealth and welfare of the house of God.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the Ordinances and Laws of God are walked in and observed, and so
his blessings procured and obtained. For, if we hearken and obey his voice, we
have a promise to be respected and rewarded. Such as walk in the Statutes and
commandments of the Lord to do them, shall be blessed in the house, in the
field, in the City, in body, in soul, in temporal things, in spiritual
things. Now, when God is obeyed, men should rejoice and be glad; and when his
Laws are broken, they should be much grieved and troubled. The Apostle John
writing to an elect Lady 2 John 4.
rejoiced greatly, that he found of her children, walking in truth, as they
had received a commandment of the lord. On the other side, we see David's
Psalm. 119, 136
eyes did gush out with Rivers of tears, because Wicked men kept not his
Laws. These Reasons, being duly waighed, and rightly considered, do teach
us, that Gods blessings bestowed upon our Brethren, must minister matter of
joy, and great comfort unto us.

Use 1.
Let us now proceed to the handling of the Uses, that we may have the benefit
of this Doctrine, and not suffer it to pass from us without profit. First of
all, seeing Gods graces upon others must work joy in our selves, we learn the
truth of that article of our faith, which al profess to believe, but many do
not understand, to wit, the communion of Saints. There is a double communion,
What the munion of Saints is, which we believe.
one which we have with Christ; the other, which the church has among
themselves, and the former is the cause of the latter. For Christ our head,
has given himself unto us, whereby we have the right of adoption, the
imputation of his righteousness, and a title to the kingdom of heaven. From
hence, as from a fountain, issues that communion which all the members, both
in heaven and earth, have among themselves, howsoever severed in place one from
another, howsoever the one sort be dead, the other living; and howsoever the
one sort is triumphant, the other Militant. Our Brethren in heaven wish well to
the Church, pray for it general, desire the perfect consummation of it, and
crave the full and final deliverance of it from all troubles. The Apostle
brings them in, speaking on this manner, Revel 6, 10.
How long Lord, holy and true! Do not thou judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth. True it is, they know not, they see not, they
hear not what things are done upon the face of the earth, and therefore they
cannot pray in particular, for the particular conditions and persons of men. On
the other side, we who live upon the earth Phil. 3, 20.
have our conversation in heaven, our minds, our hearts, and souls, are there;
we do in our desires and affections converse with them, we pray to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Our Communion among our selves consists in
three things; first, in the affection of the heart; secondly, in the gifts of
the spirit; thirdly, in the use of temporal riches. The first in heart, when
we are so linked and coupled together, that we are like affectioned one to
another, so that when one is grieved, the rest are grieved; and when one
rejoices, the rest are refreshed. The Evangelist describing the estate of
Christ's Church, says, Acts 4, 32.
The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul. The
Heathen wish well to their own blood and kindred, but we must wish well to
all Christians, as to our selves; we must not only know and hear of, but
feel their miseries, and mourn with them that mourn; we must not tell them
as news, but lay them to our hearts. The second branch is in the blessings of
God bestowed upon us, we must impart to our Brethren our spiritual gifts, we
must teach them by our example, we must advise them by our Counsel, we must
guide them by our admonition, we must stir them up by our exhortation, we
must raise them up by our comforts, we must help them by our Prayers. The
third part of our communion Galat. 6. 10.
stands in temporal things, when we are content not only to leave our
superfluities, but even to spend our selves for the good of our fellow members;
we must be ready to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to harbor the
harbourlesse, which are not only of our own flesh, but of our own faith; not
only clothed with the same Nature, but adorned with the same Name. This is
the communion which we profess and believe, and is confirmed and concluded in
this place.

Use 2.
Secondly, we learn to desire the best gifts, that we may rejoice and comfort
the godly. For, when we profit in good things, we cheer the hearts and minds of
all the faithful. Every living thing has his prospering and proceeding, and is
known to have life in it by increasing from one degree of perfection to
another. The grass springs, the plant shouteth, the corn florisheth, the
tree grows. If we have any life in us of Gods Spirit, and be not as grass
that is withered, as plants that are dead, as Corn that is blasted, and as
trees that are plucked up by the roots, we must go forward from one measure of
grace to another, from a lesser to a greater. This serves to reprove sundry
abuses, and to meet with many corruptions that abide and abound among us.
First, it condemns such as delight to offend, to grieve, and vex the Saints
of God. For, if we should seek to rejoice and comfort them, and to Minister
all occasion of joy unto them, then we are not to discomfort and trouble them,
we are not to work sorrow and anguish in them. The estate of these offensive
livers, is fearful, as Christ our Math. 18, 7.
Savior declares. Woe unto the world because of offenses, for it must needs
be that offenses shall come, but woe be to that man by whom the offense
comes: whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me,
it were better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the Sea. We ought to give no offense either to
Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of God, for woe shall be to them that offend
their Brethren, that grieve the Spirit of God, and cause the enemies of our
Faith to blaspheme. Secondly, it reprooueth such as converse only with the
ungodly, and can be merry only in their company. The Children of God have
always accounted it a great cross and vexation to dwell with such as are lewd
in their course of life, and are bare and barren in good things. The Prophet
says, Psalm. 120, 5.
Woe is me that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar. It is an
heap of miseries, and a very representation of Hell, to be continually vexed,
and exceedingly grieved with their wicked conversation. Just Lot was vexed with
the 2 Pet. 2, 7, 8.
unclean conversation of the wicked; for he being righteous and dwelling
among them, in hearing and seeing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day
with their unlawful deeds. And in what place almost now can a man live, where
all kind of vile and vicious dealing is not practiced, where all uncleanness
of life is not used? There is great comfort in the society of the faithful,
and not only great comfort, but great profit. The Wiseman teaches, Prou. 13,
20.
That he which walks with the wise, shall be wise, but a Companion of fools
shall be worse. On the other side, the company of the wicked is accompanied
with danger. It is a presumption of our own strength, to thrust our selves
among wicked companions. Such as are continually in the Sun, must needs be
Sunburned. Such as walk in the mist, must needs be berayed: such as touch
pitch, cannot but be defiled: so, such as abide in bad company, live in places
of danger, by reason of the infection of sin, of the weakness of the flesh,
of the forsaking of God, and of the power and liberty that Satan has in such
places where he sets up his Throne. For wheresoever sin is practiced,
defended, and maintained, where it covers the earth as water does the Sea,
there the Devil Revel. 2, 13.
reigns; there he keeps his court, there he has his residence and
remains, there he possesses al things. So long therefore, as we keep
company with those that commit sin with greediness, and run on in their
evil courses without controulement, we shall be sure to learn their ways,
and are in danger to receive destruction to our souls.

Thirdly, it reprooueth those that go backward in their profession, that are
corrupt trees and without fruit, twice dead and plucked up by the roots. Where
shall we in these days find matter of joy to comfort our selves, when
godliness so much decays, and wickedness is set aloft? The Apostle says
notably to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2, 31.
I fear least when I come again, my God abase me among you, and I shall
bewail many of them which have sinned already, and have not repented of the
uncleanness, and fornication, and wantonness which they have committed. Suffer
me a little to paint out unto you in his colors, the unclean leprosy, and
filthy morphew, that has by sprading so disfigured the face of this world, as
it is made odious in the eyes and judgments of all that have any light of Gods
spirit to discern it. If we consider the times wherein we live, we may truly
say, they are the perilous seasons Luk 18. 8. 1 Timothy 3, 1, 2.
foreshewed by Christ and his Apostles, when faith is scarce found upon the
earth. What can we hear or see in any company to which we resort, and not be
either grieved, or guilty? For when we behold iniquity practiced without fear,
and maintained without shame, if we be not grieved at the committing of it, we
are made guilty of it. If all Records were searched from the beginning, and a
narrow view of other times taken, it would be found by experience (our helps
and means greater then theirs considered) that we ouermatch them all, in all
kind of profaneness and abominations. As forswearing, lying, whoring, pride,
Atheism, wantonness, looseness, unmercifulness, oppression, coueteousnesse,
sacrilege, luxury, drunkenness, envy, Hypocrisy, malice, contempt of the
word, and such like, they have ouerspread the whole world as a running soar,
as a fretting Canker, and as a loathsome ulcer, whereby our age is become as
the dregs and lees of all that have gone before us; yea, as a common sink that
receives all filthiness and corruption into it. If any object, there was
never more light of knowledge then is in our days, and that the word was never
so plainly and plentifully preached. I answer, if it be granted that the
light of knowledge is wonderful great, yet it is also as true that there was
never more darkness of impiety, never more mistes of ungodliness, then now
remain among us; so that it seems our greatness of knowledge, serves to no
other purpose, then to add to the greatness of our condemnation. We are grown
worse then our predecssors and forefathers, because if there had not been such
light, there could not be such darkness. If we had been blind and not seen
the light, we should not have so greatly sinned. Thus our Savior speaks to
some of the Pharisees, Ioh 9, 41,
If ye were blind, ye should not have sin, but now ye say, we see, therefore
your sin remains. The Sun of the Gospel, having shined upon our marish
grounds, has raised these stenches, and given li^e and growth to these
monsters. For where the Gospel does not soften, it hardneth; where it works
not conversion, it works confusion; where it effects no good, it makes men
worse, yea, worse then Tire and Sidon, worse then Sodom and Gomorah. Thus
truth compels me, and woeful experience constrains me, to be a witness of
that I would not if I could otherwise choose touching the common corruption and
iniquity of our age. Objection.
But some man may say, the goodness of our professors will make amends; and
heal this soar; yea, make a full recompense of the former disorders and
abuses. Answer.
Indeed I acknowledge with all thankfulness and rejoicing, that God has his
Church, and chosen flock among us, contrary to the opinion and practice of
such as have made a rent and separation from us. But although we have a true
Church of Christ with us, it is a little flock, a small remnant, a gathering
after the Harvest, a gleaning after the vintage. It is an hard matter to find
a true Isralite in whose heart is no guile. They are rare hands that are free
from the contagions of the times, and pure from the spots of filthiness now
reigning. We may take up the complaint of the Prophet, Mica 7, 4.
The best of them is a briar, and the most righteous of them ts sharper then a
Thorny heage. A man would have thought, he might have engaged his life, and
pawned his soul for the sincerity of some, whom now we may behold to be gone
as far as Demas was, in the love of this world. Their love to the Saints,
their zeal to the word, their affection to the Ministers, seemed to be such,
that no man doubted but their names were written in the book of life; who now
seem to be rased out of that book which God has written. They endured the
bitterness of the Cross, they despised the shame of the world, they suffered
the taunts of the wicked, who now are set down in the seat of the scornful,
and are become lukewarm in their profession. Self-love has quenched
brotherly love, mercy is swallowed up through hardness of heart, compassion is
turned into sencelesnesse, yea all civil and just dealing seem to have taken
their Wings and to be fled up into heaven, or else to be sunk down into the
Center of the earth, and to have left the society of our new Christians. It is
now accounted a rashness, an heat of youth; yea, a sin worthy of sharp
punishment, to stand to the rule and line of the word. If a man give but a
look toward the Gospel, and do not profess himself an open enemy unto it:
if he show the least entertainment to the truth, and do not set himself
against the professors of it, though he be a common Gamester, a rioteous liver,
an usurer, an incrocher, and oppressor; he has the name and title of a good
Christian, he has the praise and commendation of a good professor. What joy
therefore can the Children of God have in such works of darkness, and in such
workers of iniquity. We may wish with the Prophet, Ier 9, 1.
that our head were full of water, and our eyes a Fountain of tears, to weep
day and night for the desolation and destruction that hangs over their heads.
The Husbandman takes no pleasure to see Tares and Darnel grow in his field, in
stead of good Corn. The Gardener cannot without grief behold weeds spring up
in his Garden in stead of wholesome Herbs. So when we see the Church of God,
to bring forth Chafe instead of Wheat; Beans, instead of Fruit; vice in stead
of virtue, and sin in stead of righteousness; what greater grief can arise
in our hearts, or what greater sorrow can be wrought in us? If we grieve
through the wickedness of our ways, and profaneness of our lives the
Children of God; we likewise grieve the spirit of God, and quench such good
motions as are inspired into us.

Use 3.
Lastly, it is our duty to seek the good and prosperity of the Church, by all
good means, and to draw them and move them, to embrace the ways of salvation.
This duty has many branches growing from it. For seeing Gods graces bestowed,
give occasion of great joy, it ought to teach us to exhort one an other, to
comfort them that are comfortless, to reprove them that go astray, to pray
for our brethren, to seek to gain and win them to the faith; and when they
are gained and won, to rejoice unfeignedly at their conversion, and if we see
any hope of their repentance and turning to God, to converse with them and not
to be ashamed of their company. Certainly, he is not truly converted himself,
that does not rejoice at the conversion of others. He never knew what true
repentance means, that conceiueth no joy at the repentance of others. He is
ignorant of the way of salvation, that is not greatly delighted and comforted,
when others begin to be saved: that we say of them, as Christ does of Zaccheus,
Luk 19, 9.
This day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he is also become the
son of Abraham. This does directly reprove four sorts of men. The first
reproof.
First, such as rejoice in those that will sin with them and run into all
excess of riot with them. Great is the delight that sinners take in the
society and company one of another. They join hand in hand together, it is
their solace and pastime to agree together as brethren in evil, it is as meat
and drink unto them to follow after ungodliness. Christ teaches, that the
Angels in Heaven rejoice for one sinner that repents. Our joy arises upon
their repentance. Their turning to God works our rejoicing.

So long as men flatter themselves in their sins, and proceed in their evil
doing, no matter of joy is offered unto us. The second reproof.
Secondly, such as seek to draw them to evil, to vanity, and to all
ungodliness, (a common sickness that reigns in our days,) when men entise
one another to evil. These men bear the Image of the Devil, and are
transformed into his likeness. For how can they gain their brethren to
Godliness, that are means to seduce them and so to bring them to all
ungodliness. Hence it is that Solomon councelleth us, Prou 1, 10.
when sinners entise us, not to consent unto them. It is a grievous sin to be
an entiser, but it shall not excuse him that is entised. Let us therefore know,
that we must exhort one an other to piety, not to impiety, and further one
another to salvation, not to condemnation; and bring one another to heaven, not
to hell. The third reproof.
Thirdly, it teprooueth those that envy and murmr at the calling of our
Brethren to Repentance, and at their bringing into the Kingdom of Christ.
This corrupt affection was in Joshua, Number. 11, 29.
who repined that the Elders had the gift of prophecy bestowed upon them, as
well as Moses. This was in Jonas 4, 1, 2.
Jonah, when he had preached to the Ninevites, and saw the great mercy of God
in sparing of them, and not destroying them according to hls preaching, and
their deseruinges, was angry, and it displeased him exceedingly. He regarded
his own credit and estimation among men, more then their conversion and
preservation. This was in the elder Brother of the riotous and prodigal Son,
Luke 15, 31
when he saw the joy of his Father, at the receiving of his Child, and his
readiness to forgive, he was angry and would not go in. But his Father
persuades him, that there is no cause why he should be grieved, inasmuch as he
is not himself hindered or indamaged by this receiving of his Brother into
favor; and reproves him, in that having no regard of his brother, he is sorry
for the common joy conceived of his return. That joy did offend him, whereof
he should have bin a Companion. These two Reasons are to be noted and observed,
to root up all envy and malice out of our hearts, considering that we loose
nothing, whenever God does graciously receive into favor, those which
through sin were fallen from him, and that it is haughtiness without
godliness; grief without mercy; and cruelty without compassion; not to
rejoice and be glad, when we see any of our fellow servants restored from death
to life, raised from sin to righteousness; and found, who before were lost.
He then is unrighteous and ungodly, who enuyeth his brother received into
favor, and he does peruersely and maliciously, which does murmr at the mercy
of God upon our brethren. The fourth reproof.
Fourthly, it condemns such as fail in the former duty, that never exhort
their brethren to godliness, never dissuade them from sin, never comfort
those that are in misery, never praying for them that are in distress, never
desire God to be good unto them, never rejoice with them, when God has showed
mercy.

We live in these times, when the hand of God is stretched out against many of
our brethren, they are restrained and shut up by the contagion of plague and
pestilence. This their woeful condition, does call upon us, and cry unto us, to
be mindful of them, and to pray to God our common Father, to have pity upon
them, to call in his arrows that he has shot against them, to remember his
old mercies, that he was wont to show to his inheritance. The Prophet
exhorts and stirs up the people Psalm. 122, 6. and 51, 9.
to pray for the peace of Jerusalem: and that duty which he requires of
others, he daily practices himself, praying unto GOD to be favorable to
Syon, and to build the Walls of Jerusalem, according to his good pleasure.
Let us examine our selves, whether this affection be found in us, and learn
to testify our Love toward them, by procuring their good and safety. When
we are in misery, our desire is to taste of the kindness and compassion of
our Brethren. Let us be as careful to promote their happiness. God is ready
to hear us, his ears are open unto our Prayers, so that we plainly bewray,
that we shall remain without feeling and sense of their misery, unless we
pray unto him for them, who is the God of all Mercy, and the Father of all
Consolation.

[ Because by thee (Brother) the Bowelles of the Saints are refreshed.] These
Words, are a reason rendered of the words going before, declaring wherefore he
had great joy and consolation in his love, because the needy Members of Christ
were succored by him. This tends to the praise of Philemon, who by his
Charity and merciful dealing toward the poor Saints, did continually refresh
and comfort the bowelles of them that wanted. Doctrine 5. The works of mercy,
are to be showed toward the poor Saints.
We learn from hence, that the works of mercy and compassion, are to be
showed toward the poor Saints. It is our duty to be bountiful and liberal,
to those that are in necessity. This Doctrine is proved and confirmed unto us
by sundry commandments, and examples in the word of God. Heereunto comes the
charge given by Moses, Deuteronomy 15, 7.
If one of thy brethren with thee be poor, within any of thy Gates, in thy
Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor
shut thine hand from thy poor brother, but thou shall open thine hand unto
him, and shall lend him sufficient for his need which he has. Likewise
Solomon says, Eccle 11, 1, 2.
Cast thy bread upon the waters for after many days thou shall find it, give a
portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be
upon the earth. Also the Apostle speaks, to the same purpose, Heb 13, 16.
To do good and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. The examples of the Children of God that have gone before us in the
perfourmance of this duty are many, both in the old and new Testament. It is
recorded to the perpetual praise and commendation 1 King 18, 13.
of Obadiah, that he hid the Prophets of God in a Cave, from the cruelty of
Iesabell, and sustained them with food, and ministered all things necessary
unto them. The like we see in Job, Job 31, 16.
who restrained not the poor of their desire, nor caused the eyes of the
Widow to fail, he saw not any perish for want of clothing, nor any poor
without covering; his loins blessed him, because he was warmed with the fleece
of his sheep. The widow of 1 King 17, 10.
Zarephath relieved Eliah in the Famine. The Apostle commends Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1, 16.
because he often refreshed him, and was not ashamed of his Chain, but when he
was at Rome he sought him out very diligently and found him. The Evangelist
Luke in the Acts of the Apostles declares, that Tabitha Act 9, 36. 39, and
10, 2.
was full of good works and alms which she did, for she made many Coats and
Garments to cover the Saints. Cornelius is reported to be a devout man, and
one that feared God with all his household, which gave much alms to the people,
and praised God continually. All these Testimonies of holy Scripture teach us,
that to do good, to yield relief, and to minister comfort unto men, especially
to the Saints of God, is a necessary duty belonging to all the servants of God.

Reason 1.
Now as we have heard sundry commandments and examples to move us heereunto,
so diverse reasons may be produced to confirm the same unto us. The wise man
in the book of Ecclesiastes is plentiful in this argument. First, he presses
upon us this duty, in respect of the rich reward that shall be rendered to those
that are merciful to the poor. For exhorting all men to Eccl 11, 1.
cast their bread upon the Waters, that is, even where it seems to be lost,
and where no hope of recompense remains: he gives this reason: for after
many days thou shall find it. And in the book of the Proverbs he says,
Prou 19, 17. Mat 10, 42.
He that has mercy upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. When one lends to an honest man he
fears no loss, but hops to receive again; much more may we be assured
that God himself will restore and repay, who is not as the sons of men, that
he should delude or deceive us.

Reason 2.
Secondly, he moves us to the fruits of Charity and compassion, from the
consideration of the uncertainty and vanity of all things, insomuch as albeit
we know what is present, we are ignorant of that which is to come. All things
in this life are mutable and uncertain. 1 The life of man is uncertain, we
know not how short a time we have to live and to exercise our liberallity. We
know not what one Prou 27, 1.
day may bring forth, and that one minute and moment may cut off all
opportunity to show mercy. 2 It is uncertain, whether the riches, which now we
have in plenty and abundance, shall continue and abide with us. The Apostle
calls Riches by this title; 1 Timothy 6, 17
uncertain riches, and Solomon says, Prou 23, 5.
Will thou cast thine eyes upon them which are nothing? For Riches takes her
to her Wings as an Eagle, and flies into the heaven. Who was to be compared
with Job, among all the men of the East, yet suddenly he was stripped of them,
and made one of the poorest. It is uncertain, what our estate and condition
may be, and to what necessity our selves may come, we may be brought to that
extremity, that we may stand in need of the help of others, and be constrained
to ask alms, and beg our relief of them, when as we by the righteous
judgment of God shall find rich men so affected toward us, as others have found
us, when we had the goods of this world. Lastly, it is uncertain what thy
son and heir will prove, thou know not whether he will riotously wast,
and prodigally consume all that thou have left, which thou have gotten with
care and travel, or whether a stranger shall enter upon thy labors, and
usurp that which is not his own. This is that reason which Solomon sets
down in his Ecclesiastes, Eccl. 11, 2.
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil
shall be upon the earth. In all these considerations, being compassed about,
and hemmed in on every side with a world of uncertainties, it stands us upon
to follow the counsel and advise of Christ our Savior, Luke 16, 9
who wills us to make us friends with the riches of iniquity, that when we
shall want, they may receive us into everlasting habitations, which is not
spoken of goods euilly and wrongfully gotten, but of goods that may be wickedly
and wrongfully taken from us by open force, or secret fraud; by violence of
Robbers, by pretense of right, by color of Law, or by the power of the
oppressor.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the poor cannot recompense and repay again that which is bestowed
upon them, but God himself will restore it seven fold into thy bosom. We
must herein imitate our Heavenly Father, who is ready to show mercy to all.
This is the precept of Christ, Mat. 5, 42, 45
Give to him that asks, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not
away, etc. that ye may be the Children of your heavenly Father, for he makes
his Son to arise on the evil, and the good, and sends rain on the just
and unjust. So likewise it behooves us, to follow the example of Christ, 2
Cor. 8, 9.
Who being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we thorough his poverty
might be made rich. This was the greatest grace and mercy that could be showed.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, the poor have been in all ages, and shall always remain with us
to the end of the world, to the end that their bowels may feel our refreshing,
and their loins bless us, and pray for us. For, if it had pleased God, he
could have made all men rich, and none to stand in need of the aid and
assistance of others; but this difference in degrees among men, placing some
above, and others beneath, making some rich, and others poor, setting some on
high, and others low, serves most for the advancement of his glory, and the
maintaining of fellowship and friendship, of concord and unity one with
another. If all were rich, and abounded in outward wealth, we should neither
know God, nor our selves, nor our Brethren: we would be ready to say, Prou. 30,
9.
Who is the Lord? We would be ready to disdain and despise our Brethren. If
all were poor, and in necessity, there would be nothing but robbing, stealing,
perjury, and all confusion. Wherefore, it is the ordinance of God, that some
should be rich, and some poor, some wealthy, and others in want. He makes
some poor, to exercise their patience, and to try how they will bear that
burden, and behave themselves under the cross. He makes others rich to
exercise our mercy, to be obiectes of our pity and compassion, and that we
should never want some occasions to show forth the fruits of a lively faith.
Seeing therefore, we shall receive a great advantage in this life, and be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just; seeing we are uncertain what shall
happen hereafter, and know not what evil may fall upon the earth: seeing we
are commanded to follow the example of God the Father, who is good to al, and
of Christ his son, who being rich, made himself poor, and of no reputation,
and lastly, seeing we must always have the poor to exercise the works of
mercy, and to relieve their misery; it follows, that we are to distribute the
outward blessings of this life to those that be in want and stand in need of
comfort.

Use 1.
The Doctrine being thus cleared and confirmed, let us see the uses that arise
from hence. First, this being so necessary a duty required of all men, it
teaches a difference between the Heathen and Christian religion. The
Heathenish Religion never took order for the poor, nor required any
compassion toward them; but the profession of Christ, charge this duty upon
all true believers, and teaches that judgment shall be without mercy, to those
that show not mercy. When Paul departed from the rest of the Apostles at
Jerusalem, they Gala. 2, 10.
warned him only that he should remember the poor, which thing also he was
diligent to do. But this was never remembered, nor regarded, nor intended among
the Nations that were unbelievers. True it is, the Painims and Philosophers,
have held and delivered many morrall instructions, and spoken well of Justice,
Temperance, Clemency, Prudence, and Friendship, of obedience toward parents, of
Gentleness toward men, of liberality toward the poor, of love toward our
Country, of Loialty toward Princes, and such other virtues. He that should deny
Antimachia. preface before the second book
their precepts in part to be well spoken, and in part to be well practiced,
should do them great wrong. But the Christian Religion, as it has all these in
common with them, approving and allowing of them; yea, not disdaining to read
their books and to learn such Doctrine of them as they have left in writing,
so it has lanched out a great deal deeper, and entered farther, and considered
better of the precepts of good life, and the practice of good manners, then the
Heathen and Infidels have done. It was a rule of one of the wisest among the
Gentiles, Plato.
that we are not borne only for our selves, but that our birth is partly for
our Country, partly for our Parents, and partly for our friends. A goodly and
Golden sentence much admired, and greatly commended, and oftentimes alleged.
But if it be compared with the Doctrine of Christ, and the duty of all
Christians, it will be found maimed in his limbs, and defective in his parts,
neither having a good beginning, nor making a perfect ending. For first of all,
he prescribes that our Charity should be employed toward our selves, which
they have well marked, allowed, and followed, which say, that a well ordered
Charity begins at himself. But this is far from the Doctrine of Chist and
his Apostles. Christ himself commands us Mat 22, 39.
to love our Neigh-as our selves, and Paul teaches 1 Cor 13, 5.
that Charity seeks not her own things. Again, he makes mention of our
Country, of our parents, and of our friends, and rangeth them into good order,
but what becomes of the poor? where or in what place of this notable
sentence does he place them? he speaks not of them at all, let them shift as
they can, they are quite forgotten, the Philosophers Charity stretches not to
them; let them sink or swim, live or die, feed or starve, it was all one to
him and to that Religion that he believed. And indeed a poor person in the
time of the Painims had no other means to live and sustain himself and his
family, then to sell himself as a slave to him that would buy him, if no man
were found that would buy him, he perished for hunger, and died through want
and famine. True it is, when they saw some men with their eyes languishing in
misery, and heard them with their ears pitifully complaining in their
extremity, they were sometimes touched with commiseration and compassion toward
poor persons, but they never called or accounted this duty of humanity a
virtue, but only an humane passion or natural affection. Furthermore, they
never builded or erected any Hospitalls or houses of refreshing to lodge and
nourish the poor, neither had the Princes their Almoners, to distribute their
Alms as Christians have. When a Child was borne misshapen and euill-formed
among them, it was killed; Halicarnass. Romans Antiq. lib. 2.
yea, it was not only allowed, but commanded, to stifle and strangle it, that
it should not be brought up: a cruelty and inhumanity against Nature, and a
despite and injury done to the Creator, who created them, and formed them in
their Mothers womb. They made account of poor men as they did of Beasts; for
alas, as those poor wretches came into the Market place, and set themselves to
sale, as men do their Cattle, so such as bought them, standing there at offer
and proffer, had full possession to do with them what they would, they had
power to kill their bondmen at their pleasure, when, and how, and for what
cause they thought good, and were not subject to give any account of their
death, and for their so doing. They did ordinarily slay their slaves and
Servants, when they became unprofitable Dion in Augusto.
unto them, and reserved such as were strong to labor, and able to do them
service. Moreover, they set up sundry Theaters for Combats, to offer
pleasure, and make pastime to the Beholders, and caused their poor Slaves to
band themselves in two parts, one against another: then, they brought them
forth, causing them furiously to set one upon another with naked swords, and
with naked bodies, none of them being furnished with any defensive Armor; and
the people assembled to see this most ungodly sport, laughed at it, and took
no less pleasure to look upon it, then we take pleasure to see Cocks fight
one with another.

Thus we see what the Religion of these Panims and Miscreants was, barbarous,
beastly, bloody, defiled with all cruelty, contrary to al pity and piety,
regarding the poor no more then brute beasts, and making no more account of
them, but for their service they drew from them, and for the want they had of
them. For among all the morral precepts which they taught and delivered, we
never read that they spoke any thing, that they prescribed or persuaded any
thing touching the poor, nor that they ever established any good policy to
help them. Notwithstanding, it agrees well with natural reason, that every
one do good to his like. And it is a sound principle confessed among all,
Lamprid. in Atexan.
What thou would not should be done to thee, do it not unto another: but we
must do to another, as we would he should do unto us. But the Religion which is
called the Christian religion goes farther, and begins where nature leaves
us: It teaches us to respect the poor as our own flesh, to regard them as the
members of Christ, to account of them as of those that bear the Image of God,
to relieve them as heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, and to remember that the
Lord Jesus accepts and rewards that which is done unto them, as done unto
himself. So then, no man can deny, but all men must confess, that the
Christian Religion is in all points more excellent and perfect, then all other
Religions, which are of Men, and savor of the Flesh.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing the works of mercy must be showed to the poor Saints, it
reproves those that are weary and backward in doing good, and have no care to
relieve them that live in great poverty and penury. We see many that are
bountiful, and (as I may say) prodigal and wastfull in pampering of
themselves, and feasting the Rich, which have no need, and stand not in want,
but are sparing and fast-handed toward the poor. These are like unto the
Rich man, that was cladde in Purple, Luke 16, 19
and fared deliciously every day, but would not yield unto poor Lazarus,
the Crummes and Offals that came from his Table. This is a great vanity, to
gain praise and commendation from the World, to be great Cheere-makers to
the rich, and to be miserable to the poor and needy. Indeed, it is no sin
to entertain thy rich Friends, and to Feast thy Kins-folkes, Genesis 18, 26
as Abraham did Abimelech; but the other to feed the poor, rather then to
Feast the rich, ought to be more common, and is approved to be more
commendable. But such as follow all riot, and live in all excess, are most
hard-harted toward the poor. For devilish prodigality and Christian
liberality, cannot stand together. Such as wast their goods in riotous living,
think it ill spent that is given to the poor, especially that which is
bestowed upon the poor Saints. We saw this in the rich Glutton, who abounding
in outward blessings, would communicate nothing to Lazarus, as full of wants as
he was of sores. We have hereof a lively picture, set up to be seen in
the Sodomites, Ezekiel. 16, 49
who exceeding in excess of pride, and fullness of Bread, offended
there-withall in contempt of the poor, and weakening the hand of the ndeeie.
Behold the practice of all that spend and wast their wealth in drunkenness,
surfeiting, and such like wickedness, it greeueth them more to give a penny to
good uses, then to lavish and dash away a pound, in following and feeding their
beastly humors; whereby God is dishonored, the poor are robbed, their bodies
are disfigured, their good Name is impaired, and their souls are endaungered
for ever.

There is no man, Objections of miserable men against liberality.
that delights in any sin, hut he has pretense and excuse for his sin.
The sloathfull servant that hid his Masters Talent and treasure committed unto
him, alleged this for himself, Math. 25, 44
I knew that thou wast an hard man, which reapest where thou sowedst not, and
gatherest where thou strowedst not. So the sluggard says, Prou. 22, 13.
There is a Lion without, I shall be slain in the street. In like manner, such
as are miserable and merciless toward the poor members of Christ, are ready
to cover their shame, though it be with Figge-leaues; to dawbe up their
hardness of heart, though it be with untempered mortar, and to paint their
hypocrisy, though it be with deceitful and fading colors. Let us see what
their Objections are, hindering their liberality, and shutting their hands, or
rather their hearts from this compassion, so often commanded of God, and so
much practiced of the godly. Objection.
First, they say, they cannot do that which they desire, they fear that they
themselves may want, if they should be liberal in giving. Answer.
I answer, this proceeds from the bitter root of infidelity. God has
promised to reward the liberal giver, but these men have not hearts to
believe him, and to consider that he is true of his word. They think that by
giving alms they shall be wasted, but the spirit of God pronounces, that
their wealth shall be increased. He that gives to the poor, Prou. 28. 27 and
11, 25.
lends to the Lord, and shall never lack. The liberal person shall have
plenty, and he that waters shall have rain. There is that scatters, and
more is increased, but he that spares more then is meet, surely comes to
poverty. Whatsoever is bestowed upon the poor, is accounted as given to
Christ, who is a rich Rewarder of all that seek him. Hence it is, that the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 9, 9, 10
He has dispersed abroad, and has given to the poor, his benevolence
remains for ever; also, he that finds seed to the sower, will minister
likewise Bread for food, and multiply your seed, and increase the fruits of
your benevolence. The Wise man teaches, that if our bread and our
bountifulness were cast upon the waters, yet after many days we shall find
them again. The Husbandman casts his seed in the earth, and burieth it
almost an whole year before he receives and reapeth the fruit of that he has
sown. Therefore, let not those that use to give relief to others, fear that
they shall want the relief of others. Objection.
Again, others plead and pretend that they are poor and needy themselves,
they are rather constrained to receive, then to give; to take, then to
distribute; to accept, then to bestow; for he that has but little, cannot
minister to others. But this cannot excuse the neglect of this duty. Answer.
Let such know, that if there be a willing mind, 2 Cor. 12.
A Man is accepted according to that which he has, and not according to that
which he has not. The poor Widdowe mentioned in the Gospel, cast but one
Mite into the Treesury, and yet that which she gave of her penury, Luke 21, 3.
was more respected of Christ, then all the abundance of the Rich. The
Churches of Macedonia, were themselves 2 Cor. 8, 9.
in extreme necessity, and in great poverty, yet sent relief to others, above
their ability. They that were converted to the Faith, after Christ's
ascension, diminished their own substance, when they sold their possessions,
Acts 4, 5.
and distributed the money among the poor, according to the necessities of
every one. Every man is bound to minister to his neighbor, and to supply his
wantes as God has enabled him. Objection 3.
Thirdly, others allege for themselves, that they have a great charge and
heavy burden lying upon their shoulders, they must provide for Wife and
Children, they have Father and Mother, and Kindered to relieve, and if they
should not sustain them, they are made worse then Infidels, and have denied
the Faith. Answer.
These shifts cannot serve our turn, nor justify us in our evil doing. True
it is, these things must be done, but the other must not be left undone. The
Church gathered by Peter's preaching after Christ's ascending into Heaven, not
only spent of their superfluity, but sold their patrimony to relieve the
poor, yet no doubt they had Wife and Children of their own to provide for. So
no doubt had the Macedonians, who not only according to their power, but also
beyond their power, were willing to do others good. We must commit our
Children unto him that has promised to be a Father unto them. He has
promised, that he will not leave us, nor forsake us, but be our deliverer, Heb.
13.
So that we shall not fear what Man can do unto us. We have a full
assurance of his word, That the righteous Psalm. 37, 25.
shall not be forsaken, nor his seed beg their Bread.

Such therefore, as set their hearts to prepare and provide much for their
posterity, do withdraw themselves commonly from helping the poor, and by this
means do oftentimes bring a curse upon their own goods, so that some of their
Children, or of their Childrens Children riotously wast them, and make havoc
of all most unthriftily. Objection 4.
Fourthly, some there are, that hang back, and will give no Alms, because the
poor are lewd and wicked, they are Idle and abuse their alms, they have bad
tongues, and are unthankful persons toward such as relieve them. Answer.
I answer, we must in our giving respect more the Commandment of God, then
the persons of men: and though it fall out, that their tongues curse us, yet
if we succor them in their necessity, the loins of the poor shall bless
us, and we shall thereby heap Coals of fire upon their head, and make them
ashamed of their evil. We are likewise commanded to love our Neighbor, it is
not mentioned in the gospel, that we should not love him except he be godly.
We are commanded to set before us the example of God, Math. 5.
Who makes the Sun to shine, and rain to fall upon the just and unjust, upon
the godly and the ungodly, that so we may be perfect, as our heavenly Father
is perfect.

Again, the Apostle Paul having taught, that idle persons which will not
labor should not eat, 2 These. 3, 13.
adds one thing further to be practiced, That we should not be weary of
well-dooing. Let us not therefore so much look upon the person of the men, as
consider the greatness of their want: Let us not look for a recompense from
them, but from him that has promised unto us, that a Cup of cold Water
shall be respected, and rewarded by him. This is it which Solomon means,
Eccles. 11, 3. when he says, Eccles. 11, 3
If the Clouds be full, they will pour forth Rain upon the Earth, and if
the Tree do fall toward the South, or towardet the North, in the place that
the Tree falls, there it shall be. In this place, the Wiseman persuades the
Church to liberality toward the poor; the Clouds, when they are full of water,
do not keep it to themselves, but pour it on the earth that gapeth for the
rain, as if it were a thirst, and opens his mouth to be refreshed; so when
men are laden with wealth, they are bound to cherish their brethren, as it
were pined away with hunger and third. Then he preuenteth that objection which
Covetous men make, to stay their hands from showing mercy, and to shut up
their compassion from the needy, because they are wicked and unworthy of any
favor, that they will abuse it to Whoredom, to Drunkenness, and to excess.
For, he tells them of the profit and reward, that they shall receive,
because as the Tree, howsoever it falls, on the right hand, or on the left,
on the North, or on the South, it skilleth not, seeing it becomes the owners,
and it falls to him; so the bountifulness of good men, whether it be given
to the worthy or unworthy, to the faithful or unfaithful, shall turn to his
benefit that bestowed it. To conclude, every Christian man, must have the
Spirit of Christ, Romans 8, 9.
if he be his; he that has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
But Christ is merciful, and therefore we must be merciful.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing it belongs to those that have the goods of this world, out of
their plenty to supply the wants of the poor, it belongs unto us to have an
earnest care and diligence to provide for the poor, especially, the poor
Saints. This duty and diligence was in the Apostle Paul, as it is expressed,
Romans 15. where it is Romans 15, 25 28.
said, That he Ministered to the Saints at Jerusalem, and withal, that he
gave himself no rest in this, until he had sealed this fruit unto them;
that is, till he saw it done and effected, according to his desire. It is not
enough for us, to give good words, or to utter from our mouths good wishes,
but we must in our several places, and particular callings, do our utmost
endeavor, that relief may even be sealed to our poor. It is not enough to
give to those that ask and crave the fruit of our liberality, but we must
learn to enquire of the wants of the Saints, and to search what is their
condition. It belongetb unto us, not only to have ears prepared to hear, but
to have mouths opened, to ask of the welfare of those that are in necessity.
We would desire to be so dealt with all our selves; and therefore let us be so
minded toward our Brethren. This we see in Abraham, Genesis 18, 19.
he stayed not till those strangers came into his house, til they desired to
be received and have lodging, but he went out of his tent of his own accord,
to see whom he could espy, that he might bring them to his house. So did Lot,
Judge. 19, 17.
so dealt all the Fathers. Thus did Nehemiah, when he saw some of his brethren
that were come from Ie^usalem, Nehem. 1, 2.
he asked them concerning the state of the Church, and of the residue of the
Captivity. We must not always wait, till we be entreated and urged to show
mercy, but offer it our selves, to testify the willingness of our hearts.
We must not only readily give our relief when the poor require it, but go
unto them, search them out, and call for them, whether they ask our Alms or
not, whether they require our relief or not. As Christ has loved us, so let
us love one another. Now, he loved us being his enemies, when we never asked
remission of our sins, for he was found of them that sought him not, and
showed mercy to them that desired it not, so ought we also to deal with our
Brethren, not tarrying till they crave, but offering our Compassion. There
have ever been poor, that make not their wants openly known, and are so
dejected and rejected of many, that they are ashamed to show their necessity.
This duty requiring our earnest care, to seek after, and see to the wants of
our poor Brethren, reprooueth three sorts of men. The first reproof.
First, such as help them only in words, but not in deeds; with their mouth,
not wirh their hands; in outward show, not by any true fruit of Charity. Such
men does the Apostle James note in his Epistle, Iam. 2, 15, 16
who when they see a poor man, or a poor Woman, which wants bread to eat,
and clothes to put on, they say unto him; God help thee (poor man) and succor
thee, and send thee relief, it is great pity thou art no better provided for.
These are destitute of a true Faith, which stands not in word only: and the
poor, notwithstanding all these fair Words, and goodly promises, may starve
for cold, and die for thirst, and perrish for Famine, if they should find no
better comfort, and if every man should serve them after this sort. It is a
very true saying of the Wise Solomon, A Man Prou. 25, 14.
that boasts of great liberality, is like Clouds and Wind without Rain.
So the Apostle John says, 1 John 3, 15.
My little Children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in
deed, and in truth. It is not enough for a man to say, he will help and
succor his Neighbor, unless he help him indeed.

The second reproof.
Secondly, it reprooueth those that do not rightly consider what poor the
Apostle means, and sets before us as objects of our compassion. He does
not understand the idle Beggar, or sturdy Rogue, or vagrant Companion, who not
applying himself in any lawful calling, makes a profession of beggary, and
lives altogether upon the spoil of other men's goods, the profit of other
men's labor, and the sweat of other men's brows. Neither does he mean such
manner of persons, as are common and continually haunters of Alehouses,
Unthrifts, Spend-als, Carders, Dicers, Drunkards, which spend all the Week in
going from one tippling place to another, having Wives and Children at home,
that want those things which they wast, and when they come unto them, they
rail and rage as mad men, against those they should relieve. These are
excluded and wiped out of the roll and Register of the poor Saints spoken of
in this place, being worse then 1 Timothy 5.
Infidels, and denying the Faith. The Turks and Sarazens shall rise up in
judgment against this wretched generation, and condemn them. But the Apostle
points out such unto us, to be helped and comforted, as albeit it has
pleased God not to bestow so great a portion of worldly blessings upon them, as
upon others, as the Artificer, the Handy-crafts man, and Day-Labourer, yet
labor diligently in their Callings, and follow their Trades with all
carfulness to relieve themselves, and to maintain their Families, as those
that profess the fear of God, and the Faith of Christ. Under this rank, we
may range poor Widows and Fatherless Children, all aged and impotent
persons, such ^s are lame and diseased, that would work, but cannot; that
desire to labor, but are not able. It is the rule of the Apostle, that ought
to take place in all Churches, 2 These. 3, 10.
That such as will not take pains, must not eat. All those, that through
frailty of Childhood, or weakness of Old age, or impotencie of limbs, or
greeuousnesse of sickness, or thorough greatness of their charge, laboring
according to the utmost of their strength, yet are not able to maintain
themselves, must have their wants supplied willingly and cheerfully; not
grudgingly and sparingly, showing our selves to have a feeling of their
necessities.

The third reproof.
Thirdly, it reprooueth such as never open their mouths to know the estate of
the poor Sain^s, or to enquire how they fare: Alas, how should they offer
their help of their own accord, and open the bowels of pity before they be
entreated, that will depart from nothing, but urged and constrained by force of
Law, or taxation of others? Or how should they extend their compassion to the
poor that are absent, who are like unto the rich man that despised Lazarus
lying at his gate, and would not give him the crumbs that fell from his table?
It is noted to the great commendation of David, that after the death of Saul,
he sought not revenge upon his issue and posterity, but did good to his
childrens children, and said; 2 Samuel 9, 1.
Is there any left of the house of Saul, that I may show mercy for Ionathans
sake? So ought we to seek out the servants of God, and to find out the poor,
and to enquire after the distressed Saints, and say; Is there any of the poor
yet left, to whom we may show mercy for the Lords sake? For they represent the
person of Christ: when they come unto us; Christ himself comes unto us; and
when they ask of us, it is Christ that asks of us, and says; I am hungry, I
am thirsty, I am naked, I am harbourlesse; so that whatsoever we would do to
Christ if he were with us, the same must we do to them that are among us.

8 Wherefore, although I have great liberty in Christ to command thee that
which is thy duty.

9 Yet for loves sake, I rather beseech thee, being such a one, even Paul an
Old man; yea now a prisoner of Jesus Christ.


The order of the words.
IN the words going before, we have heard the preface or entrance of this
Epistle, consisting partly in the Title of it, and partly in certain Prayers
used by the Apostle: Now we are to proceed to the rest of the Epistle, wherein
we must observe two points; First, the chief matter is handled; Secondly, the
whole matter is concluded. The chief matter, is touching Onesimus, or
himself. The first, concerning Onesimus, is handled from the eight verse, to
the 22. verse. The latter touching himself, is expressed in the 22. Verse,
wherein he wills to prepare lodging for him, hoping by their Prayers to be
delivered out of prison. The former point is set down in this short speech or
sentence, I Paul pray thet to receive Onesimus: The parts of which sentence
are not barely propounded, but amplified; and then, the whole is proved and
confirmed. We are therein to consider three parts; First, the entreating and
praying of Philemon; Secondly, the person praying and entreating; Thirdly, the
person for whom he prays and entreats. His praying of Philemon, is declared
by a diverse reason, Although I have great liberty to command thee, yet I pray
thee and beseech thee. The person praying and beseeching, is Paul, who is
described generally, being such a one, and then particularly by his old age,
and by his bonds. Touching the person, for whom he beggeth and beseeches, we
shall see afterward, Verse 10.

The meaning of the words.
This is to be observed touching the order of the words. Now, let us consider
the interpretation of them. First, he speaks of his liberty in Christ, that
is; as an Apostle and Minister of Christ, whose Messenger or Ambassador he is;
whereby he insinuates and signifies, that this power is not his own, or of
himself, but is Christ's; it is not the servants, but the Lords; it is not man's,
or the Ministers, but Gods. For even at Magistrates ordained and sent forth by
the Prince, can do nothing in their own name, but in the Kings name; so
Ministers called of God, and fitted to the office whereunto they are called,
must teach, command, reprove, and exhort, not in their own name, but in the
name of Christ their Lord and Master. He adds, That for loves sake he
entreats him. Love, in this place, may be referred either to Philemon, or to
Paul, seeing the Apostle leaves it at large, and restrains it not either to
his love, or to his own. If it be referred to Philemon, it carries this sense,
I do entreat thee, and not command thee, for thy compassion and loves sake,
which I have before commended in thee, and thou so diligently and devoutly
show unto the Saints. But I do not take this to be the natural meaning of
the words, so that we are to understand them rather of Paul's love toward
Philemon, that he so tendered and loved him, as that he had rather deal with
him in kindness, and by intreatance, then roughly and severely. Lastly, he
says, Paul, an Old man, and now a prisoner of Christ. In these words, is
included great force to move Philemon: We must understand the first Words of
his Age, not of his Office; of his years, not of his Ministry; and he
calls himself a prisoner of Christ, that is; for Christ's sake, and the
preaching of his Gospel.

So then, according to this Interpretation, these words are thus much in
effect, as if he had said; Seeing I hear every where of thy fervent Love,
and exceeding tender Compassion thou bear to the poor Saints, though I may
many ways command thee in things that are right and equal, as in that I am
an Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, in that I am stricken in Age, ready to
leave this life, and in that I am now a Captive and Prisoner, for the cause of
Christ and his Gospel, yet the love and tender affection I bear unto thee, do
move me rather to beseech and to entreat thee.

Now let us see what may be observed out of these words. Observations out of
these words.
First of all, the Apostle would not do that which he might do, and was
lawful for him to do, which may teach the Minister and all men sometimes to
be content to depart from their right, as Abraham did toward Lot, when a strife
arose between them, 1 Cor 9, 4.
and as Paul did oftentimes, according as himself testifyeth in his Epistles.
Which condemns those that stand strictly upon their right, 1 Cor 10.
and consider what is lawful but forget what is fit and expedient. For in
things that are indifferent we are not by and by allowed to do that which is
lawful, 1 Cor 9, 12, 15.
nor to use our power, but must suffer all things, that the Gospel of Christ
be not hindered. Likewise, the Apostle would not sometimes take any wages of the
Church, but preached freely and was not chargeable to any, because he would not
give occasion of speaking evil against the Gospel. Secondly, the Apostle
publishes his liberty to command, but it is only in Christ whose Ministers he
and we are, and not our own. Thus he calls himself an Apostle, Galtath. 1,
1.
not by man, nor by the will of man, but of Christ. This is the difference
between a civil Magistrate, and an Ecclesiastical Minister. The civil
Magistrate may give charge and send out commandments in his own name, but the
Minister must command in his Masters name, in as much as Christ has not
imparted the power, nor communicated the right which he has over men's
consciences unto any mortal man, no not to the Angels in Heaven. Wherefore,
whatsoever we speak or do, we must do all in his name that has sent us.
Thirdly, mark how far his authority stretches and extends, he can require
and exact no more then that which is right and equal and their duty to do. It
is no absolute or immoderate power, but limited within these bounds, that he
go not beyond them. This is required of all the Ministers of the word, they
are to teach that which is right, and he people are bound no farther to hear
them. Fourthly, he declares why he yielded up a part of his right and did not
prosecute it to the full, for love sake, it was for Charity sake that he turned
his power into prayer. All indifferent things must be measured by this rule.
Charity will cause a man willingly to give place where it is in the heart, but
where it is not, he will not regard to use his liberty with offense, nay to the
destruction of his brother. 5 Lastly, Paul to move Philemon propounds his
bands and afflictions, to teach that no man ought to grieve at the afflictions
of the Church. We ought to be so far from being ashamed 2 Timothy 1, 8. Ephesians.
3, 13.
of the Cross in our selves, and from being offended at the Cross in others,
that rather we are to know, it commends the Ministry, and serves greatly to
edification. For by this title he commends himself, and purchases authority
unto his Ministry, whereby he signifies not only that he is an Apostle, but
somewhat more; an Apostle, a prisoner; that is, adorned with the marks and
tokens of Apostolical honor, seeing the badges of the Apostleship are such
bands as he suffered for Christ's sake. So then, a Minister afflicted, is more
then a Minister: a Christian persecuted, is more then a Christian: and every
faithful man and woman, the more they are tried by suffering for the Gospel,
the more they are to be honored and the better to be esteemed in the Church.

[ I have great liberty in Christ, to command thee.] The Apostle having to
deal with Philemon, whom he had won by his Ministry to the Gospel, and whom
he had authority to command in the Lord; says, that he might be bold to urge
and press him to this duty in regard of the Office of Apostleship, of the
greatness of his age, and of the sufferings of bonds and imprisonment.
Doctrine 1. The Office of the Pastor, is an Office of power and authority.
Hereby we learn, that the Pastor by his Office has power and authority to
require and to command men as the Minister of Christ to do their duties. The
Teachers of the Church have power by their calling and place that they are
employed in, to be bold with their people, they have an interest in them, to
urge them to good things. We see then, that the Ministry is an office of power,
and the Ministers must have boldness in the discharge of their duty, and in
the execution of their calling. This we see in the practice of the Prophets of
God, and of the Apostles of Jesus Christ. When Eliah was charged by Ahab to be
a troubler of Israel, he answered with freedom of speech, and boldness of
spirit, and vehemence of zeal, 1 Kin. 18, 18
I have not troubled Israel, but thou, and thy Fathers house, in that ye have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. The
like we see in Jonah, he was not afraid when he came to Niniuie, to cry out
against the City and the Inhabitants thereof, Jonas 3, 4.
That except they repented; within forty days they should be destroyed.

This Doctrine among other places has most plentiful confirmation out of the
prophecy of Jeremy, whether we consider the commandment of God, or the
practice of the Prophet. Heerunto comes that which the lord speaks to him,
Ier. 10, 1.
Behold, this day I set thee over the Nations, and over the kingdoms, to pluck
up, and to root out, to destroy and throw down, to build and to plant. When
Pashur had smitten him, and put him in the stocks, Ier. 20, 4.
the Prophet said unto him, Thus says the Lord, behold, I will make thee to
be a terror to thy self, and to all thy friends, and they shall fall by the
sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it, etc. This authority
the Apostle Paul does often claim and challenge unto himself over the
people, and he shows what power he had by reason of his Ministry. When he
gives sundry instructions to diverse degrees among the Corinthians, he says, 1
Cor. 7, 10.
Unto the unmarried I command, not I, but the Lord. And in another place, 2
Cor. 3, 12.
Seeing then that we have such trust, we use great boldness of speech. It is
noted by the Evangelist, Math. 7, 29.
that Christ taught as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, that is;
boldly, not fearfully; zealously, not coldly; with great power, not as one
that tells a dream. The Apostle writing to Timothy, does not only gently
entreat him, but straightly charge him 1 Timothy 5, 21. and 6, 13.
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that he observe
those things, without preferring one to another, and do nothing partially. And
in the Chapter. following, I charge thee in the sight of God, who quickneth all
things, and before Jesus Christ, which under Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, that thou keep this commandment without spotte, and unrebukable
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Likewise, in 2 Timothy 4, 1, 2
the latter Epistle, I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and in his
kingdom, preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, improve,
rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and Doctrine. All these places of
Scripture laid together, comparing the Commandments, together with the
examples of the Prophets of Christ, and of the Apostles, do teach us by the
Ordinance of God, power, and Authority are always joined to the Pastors
Office, and never to be severed and divided from it.

Reason 1.
Let us see what are the Reasons. First, if we consider the names that are
given unto them, and the honorable Titles whereby they are called, we shall be
moved to confess their calling to be accompanied with power under Christ. They
are 1 Cor. 4, 15.
Fathers in Christ, but Parents may be bold with their children. They are
Pastors Ephe. 4, 11.
and Shepherds, but the Shepherd is to direct and order the Sheep of his
pasture. They 2 Cor. 5, 20.
are Ambassadors, but the Ambassador is not sent without authority from him
that sends him. They are Hebr. 13, 7.
Captains of the Lords host, but the Captain has rule and government over
those that are under his charge and regiment. If then the true Ministers of
Christ be Fathers, Shepherds, Ambassadors, and Captains under Christ the great
shepherd of the Sheep, their Office cannot be without jurisdiction and
authority over the people of God committed to their charge.

Reason 2.
Secondly, if we consider the fruits and effects that are ascribed in the word
to the Ministers of the word, we shall see that their Ministry is joined with
authority. They are the means and instruments to bring us to the knowledge of
Christ, to the bosom of the Church, and to the Kingdom of Heaven. Their
Office is to convert sinners, and to save souls. When Christ ascended up into
Heaven, he appointed Pastors and Teachers in his Church Ephe 4, 11, 12.
for the repairing of the Saints; for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet together (in the unity of
faith and that acknowledging of the son of God) unto a perfect man, and unto
the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. So the Apostle exhorts
Timothy to take heed to himself, to exercise his gifts, to give attendance to
Reading, to be diligent in exhortation, and to continue in delivering sound
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4, 16.
because in doing these things he should save both himself and them that
hear him. God has put into them and their mouths the word of reconciliation,
so that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the preaching of the word of
God, and therefore the Ministers are said to save their own souls, and the
souls of others.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, there is a co^peration of God and the Ministers Office together, and
an admirable simpathy between them. If then God and the Minister do work
together, he may lawfully inioyne men to do their duties. This is it which the
Apostle teaches, 1 Cor 3, 9. and 2 Cor, 6, 1
We are together Gods laborers, and in another place, We therefore as workers
together, beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, where to
comfort the Ministers against the contempt of the world, he declares, that it
pleases God to use their Ministry to work faith in whom he will. True it is,
the Ministers are not able to give or work faith in the hearers, either in
whole or in part, it is God only that gives increase and a blessing upon his
own means, but they are the instruments which he imployeth. He commands the
Ministers to preach, and he gives a blessing to their preaching. The Minister
labors on the heart and conscience God reformeth it, and gives the grace of
repentance. The Minister delivers the Doctrine of faith, God gives the gift
of faith. The Minister teaches righteousness and holiness of life, God
says; be it so, he shall be righteous and holy. The Minister pronounces mercy
to the penitent, God bestows mercy and forgiveness of sins upon him. Thus
God ratifieth their word, and after a sort tieth his blessing unto it. Seeing
rherefore, that the Ministers of the word have many titles of power and
jurisdiction given unto them, seeing they are the means and instruments
appointed to bring us to salvation, and Lastly, seeing they work with God and
as it were help him in bringing men to faith and eternal life; we may
conclude, that their Office is joined with power and authority.

Use 1.
Let us see what are the uses of this Doctrine. First, touching the Office it
self, we gather, that it is a worthy calling, an honorable Office, an
excellent Function, how base and mean soever it be esteemed among men of this
world. This the Apostle sets down writing to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3, 1.
If a man desire the Office of a Bishop, that is, a Minister of the Gospel, he
desires a worthy work, not only a work, but a worthy work. Therefore this
Office, is not only a lawful calling; but a worthy calling. It is hard to
discharge it aright, for who 2 Cor 2, 16.
is sufficient for these things? but those things that are hard, are
excellent. The Minster bears the person of Christ in preaching the word and
administering the Sacraments. We heard before that in furthering and finishing
the salvation of men, God works with them. It is a great and glorious account
which God makes of his word in the mouth of his Ministers, when it is truly
preached and rightly applied, he gives grace by it, and ordinarily works not
salvation without it. This is no small honor and estimation to the Ministers
of God, and to the Ministry of his word, that he admits them as
ioynt-workers, and as it were fellow laborers with him, he works when they
work, he exhorts when they exhort, he reproves when they reprove, he
teaches when they teach. This the Prophet teaches to be the Ministers
commission given him of God, when he has preached righteousness to man, Job
33, 24.
God will have mercy on him, and will say to the Minister, Deliver him that he
go not down into the pit, for I have received reconciliation. This the Apostle
says, 2 Cor 5, 20.
Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
through us, we pray you in Christ's stead that ye be reconciled to God. This our
Savior Christ also himself speaks, and avouches, in the person of Peter,
Mat 16, 19.
I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Whereby he teaches, that the Ministers are
the Porters of Heaven, they have the Keys committed unto them, they are
appointed to bring the Children of God into the sheepefold of Christ. They shut
the Kingdom of Heaven against all unbelievers, by preaching, that they shall
not enter, but be cast into utter darkness and be tormented in Hell. They open
the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers and penitent persons, by preaching that
they shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven and enjoy eternal life. To this
end and purpose Christ speaks to his Apostles after his ascension, John 20,
23.
Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain
they are retained. True it is, God only forgiueth sins properly, but he has
appointed his Ministers to preach, publish, and to witness to their
consciences that repent and believe the Gospel, that all their sins are
forgiven. And on the other side to preach and declare that such as will not
believe and repent, shall never have their sins forgiven them. For, how the
Ministers bind and loose, shut and open, forgive and retain, the Prophet
Esaias shows, Esaias 44, 25, 26.
when he says, Chapter 44. I will destroy the Tokens of the Soothsayers,
and will make them that conjecture, Fools: and turn the Wisemen backward,
and make their knowledge foolishness; but he confirms the word of his
servant, and performs the Counsel of his Messengers. Whereby we see, that
God does bind and loose, forgive and retain with him, when he confirms
their word, and performs their Counsel. This is the Dignity of the
Ministry, which serves to reprove the unthankful world, and ignorant
people, that make no reckoning or account of this ordinance, which is the power
of God, and the wisdom of God.

The first reproof.
First, it condemns those that think the Ministers proud and presumptious,
and accuse them as saucie and malapart, when they command us from the Lord,
and check us for our sins. It is their duty, not only to teach and
admonish, to exhort, and to comfort, but to convince and reprove, to threaten,
and to denounce Judgments from God, against the obstinate and unrepentant.
When they are stirred up with boldness and courage to tell the people of their
sins, we must know they do that which they may do, and speak no more then
they ought to speak: they must not hold their peace, unless they would
dishonor their Lord that sent them, and bring judgment upon their own heads.
An Ambassador, if he should not use the name and authority of his Prince,
should abuse his Prince, and make himself liable to grievous punnishment. So
the Ambassadors and Lieutenants of Jesus Christ, if they should not command and
charge us (his subjects) in the name of our Lord and Master, they should abuse
and abase him that put them in the office, and sent them to their charge.
Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor 4, 1, 2
Let a man so think of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
secrets of God, and as for the rest, it is required of the disposers, that
every man be found faithful. Zachariah reproving Ioash and his princes for
their Idolatry, 1 Cor 24, 20
they thought him to be a mad and malapart fellow, and put him to death. S^
when Jeremy was sent to prophecy against the Temple, and the City, and to
exhort them to amend their wages and their works, they could not bear his
words, but threatened to kill him. The second reproof.
Secondly, it reproves those that account the Ministers, their Vassals and
Slaves, whereas the case of a Pastor is not to be made an underling or a block
for every one to insult and tread upon, as the wicked Worldlings use them. This
is the measure indeed that is met unto us, this is the recompense that is
received by us, and this is the complaint that the Apostle makes, 1 Cor 4, 9.
11.
I think that God has set forth us, the last Apostles, as men appointed to
death, for we are made a gazing stock unto the world, and to the Angels, and
to men; unto this hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place. Whereas they should be regarded
as the Ambassadors of God, and respected as his Stewards set over the house of
God to dispense the mysteries of life and salvation. True it is, great contempt
lies upon our calling to the Ministry, even as much reproach is laid upon the
profession of Christ in sincerity. The Prophet declares that his adversaries
rejoiced at his calamity, and hated him wrongfully, because Psalm 38, 20.
he followed goodness, so do the Ministers of the Gospel suffer much hatred
and contempt by wicked and profane men, because they discover their Hypocrisy
and open their iniquity; yea, the word of God in their mouths is many times as
a fretting Corasiue applied to their consciences, that they cannot welter and
wallow so secretly and securely in their sins, as they would and as they
wonted to do. When they are resolute and resolved to continue in sin, and
think to rest and sleep quietly therein, as in a bed of ease, the word of God
does often raise them up, and rouse them out of their senseless security, and
summoneth them to the bar of Gods judgment. This is it that troubles their
peace and their patience, this makes them to spurn against their persons and
their calling, this causes them to watch them narrowly, and to hunt after
advantages through their infirmities, that thereby they may disgrace them: this
draws them to cast all contempt and dishonor upon their Office, that so
their disorders and profaneness may not be espied. For how should they abide
the Ministers of the word, that hate the word of God? Or how should they suffer
the Ambassadors, that cannot endure the Embassage and message that they bring?
But we must arm our selves against the scorn and contempt of the world, which
by wicked men is cast as mire and dirt in our faces, considering that we are
the 2 Cor 2, 15.
sweet savor of God as well in them that perish, as in them that are saved.
The third reproof.
Thirdly, the high excellency of this calling, reproves those that account the
Office to base and low for them and for their Children. Many there are that
live by the Gospel, that are ashamed to preach the Gospel. They live by the
Altar, and yet are ashamed to serve at the Alter. They can be content to have
the Milk and to cloth themselves with the wool of the sheep, and yet
disdain to feed the sheep. These are they that love Mat 23, 6, 7.
the chief places at feasts, and to have the chief seats in the assemblies,
and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi. Ambition
and vain glory have tied up their tongues, and made them cleave to the roof
of their mouths. Coueteousnesse and idleness have choked them and stopped the
passage of their voice. Pride in themselves and contempt of others, have sowed
up their lips and made them cast the care of the flock upon their substitutes,
who many times are as careless as their Masters, and in the mean season
between them both, the sheep of Christ bought with his precious blood, go to
wrack and run to ruin. What a shame is it, that any man should be raised up
and advanced merely by the Gospel, and yet account the preaching of the
Gospel a reproach to their high dignity? The son of God himself refused not
to serve in this calling, Mat 9, 35.
he went about al Cities and Towns teaching in their Synagogues and preaching
the Gospel of the Kingdom. If then Christ Jesus the son of God took pains
in this calling, what son of the earth shall disdain to discharge this
office that he has undertaken, and by which he is maintained. Again, seeing
the calling is so excellent, why should any be ashamed to consecrate their
sons to God, in the service of the Ministry, thereby to gain souls to him
and to his kingdom?

The fourth reproof.
Fourthly, if it be a calling of such dignity, it reprooueth those that run
before they be sent, and wait not a lawful calling from God, that they
discharge it afterward with peace of heart, and comfort of Conscience? We see
many young men make more have then good speed in entering into the Ministry,
who for the most part want that judgment, staydnesse, experience, gravity, and
moderation that is meet to be in men of that profession. Hence it is, that they
are called by the name of Elders in the Scripture. The Apostle thought it
necessary to give this charge to Timothy, a young man (though he were of rare
hope, and of excellent gifts) 2 Timothy 2, 22.
To fly the lusts of youth, and to follow after righteousness, Faith, Love,
and peace, with all them that call on the Lord with a pure heart. And in
another place he says, 1 Timothy 4, 12.
Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto them that believe an ensample, in
word, in conversation, in Love, in Spirit, in Faith, in Pureness. If he had
this need of instruction, how much more others?

The fifth reproof.
Fifthly, it reproves those, that are so hand-fasted, that they repine at their
maintenance that labor among them. How many places and Parishes are there,
that regard not how they be taught; or whether they be taught or not, so they
may be well dealt withal in their Tithes; that is, if they might pay little or
nothing to maintain their Minister? There is grown in many congregations this
agreement and bargain, between the Pastor and the people, if he will spare
them in temporal things, they regard not how he deal with them in
spiritual things. If they may pay little, they are content he shall preach
little; If they may enjoy their Tithes at a low rate, they are well pleased,
that he take his ease, and teach them seldom. But albeit, he preach in season,
and out of season, and do his duty with all diligence, yet they murmr and
repine at his allowaunce, and think every thing too much, that is bestowed
that way.

The sixth reproof.
Lastly, it reproves such as regard not the censures of the Church, inflicted
upon evil doers. The censures of the Church are made as a scar-Crow, and
esteemed of many as a mock. But if that power and authority were regarded in
the Ministers hand, that the word of God allows and appoints, whereby he is
authorized to exercise spiritual jurisdiction in Church Matters, not only to
preach, but to punish; not only to teach, but to correct; not only to
instruct, but to excommunicate; then would the Office be magnified, then would
the Ministry be esteemed according to the institution of them. Our Savior
giving order and direction to inform the Governors of the Church, when
scandals and offenses arose among them, adds; Math. 18, 18
Verily I say unto you, whatsoeaer ye bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven;
and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. We see God
promises to ratify the sentence pronounced and denounced in his name. The
abridgement of this power is the contempt of the men, and of their Ministry,
and the curbing and cutting short of their authority, does open a gappe to all
contumely and reproach of their persons and office. If a Magistrate should
prescribe and ordain that Law which is wholesome and profitable to the
Commonwealth, and have no power at all to punish the Malefactors and misdoers
that transgress, who is it that would regard the Commandment? If a
School-maister had authority only to rule and to teach, but were restrained to
take up the rod to correct and chastise the obstinat and sluggard, what
Scholar would harken or give ear to his teaching? In like manner, so long as
the Minister is allowed only to speak the word, or to threaten, but stinted
that he shall go no farther, his Ministry will be little regarded; as if a
Master should tell some of his Scholars of their shrewde tricks, but were
not licensed to punnish their evil doing. God has joined authority to the
Pastors office, and put into his hand the discipline of the Church, and the
Ministers of God, have exercised and executed the same according to his
ordinance. Hence it is, that the Apostle reproving an heinous offense amongst
the Corinthians, and showing the use of Ecclesiastical correction, says, 2
Cor. 4, 21
What will ye? Shall I com unto you with a rod, or in love and in the spirit of
meekness?

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing boldness to command under Christ, belongs to the office of
the Minister; it teaches us, and puts us in mind of many good duties; as
first, to ask this gift of God, and crave of him to indue us with the zeal
of his glory, and other graces of his spirit, that we may speak the word
Ephesians. 6, 20.
boldly, as we ought to speak. We see an example hereof in the Apostles, when
they heard the threatenings of the enemies of the Gospel, Acts 4, 29. and 5, 28,
29.
They lift up their voices to God, with one accord, and said, O Lord, thou art
the God, which have made the heaven and the earth, the sea, and all things that
are in them, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants with all
boldness to speak thy word. So, when the chief Priests said, Did not we
straightly command you, that ye should not teach in his name? And behold, ye
have filled Jerusalem with yoar Doctrine, and ye would bring this man's blood
upon us. Then Peter and the Apostles answered, We ought rather to obey God then
me^. Many men are endued with great gifts of learning and knowledge, but they
want the tongue of the Learned to minister a word in season, they want zeal
and vtteraunce to deliver the word of God to the people. Let every one
therefore, seek to fit and furnish himself to this calling, and in Christ
Jesus be bold to do this duty. This the Prophet says, Esaias 58, 1.
Cry alowd, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people
their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

This reproves those that have the word in respect of persons, who dare not
do their duties, and are afraid of men's faces. They would be counted the
Ambassadors of God, but they are affraide to do their Masters message. Let
such learn of John Baptist, who shrunk not back, but was bold to tell Herod,
that it was not lawful for him to take his Brothers Wife. We must not be
Dastards and faint-hearted soldiers, to fight the Lords battles, but first be
sure, we have a good warrant out of the word, and then go boldly into the
field, and fear not to look the enemy in the face. True it is, if we have
not our Commission signed and sealed unto us, we have just cause to fear; we
speak in our own names, and not in the name of God: we send our selves, we
are not sent of him; We are our own Messengers, to do our own Message, not
the Ambassadors of the eternal God. But when he has put his word in our
mouths, we must go to those that he has sent us, Ier. 1, 7, 8.
and whatsoever he commands us, that we must speak. So, when God had
stretched out his hand, and touched the mouth of the Prophet Jeremy, he said;
Be not affraide of their faces, for I am with thee, to deliver thee, says the
Lord. Thus he speaks to Ezekiell, Exek. 3, 8, 9.
I have made thy Face strong against their Faces, and thy Forehead hard
against their Fore-heades, I have made thy Forehead as the Adamant, and harder
then the Flint: Fear them not therefore, neither be affrayde at their looks;
for they are a Rebellious house.

Secondly, it teaches them not to loose their Authority, and so to shame
their Calling, and their Master that has put them in that Calling, bringing
themselves and their Ministry, under the subjection and slavery of others.
The Apostle by all means seeks to magnifye his Ministry, and to beautify
his Calling. Hence he says, 1 Cor. 9, 1.
Am not I an Apostle, am not I free? This reprooueth those that serve the
lusts and pleasure of others, and dare do nothing to displease such as are in
high place. Thus Aaron in the absence of Moses offended, who was at the
commandment of the people, Exo. 32, 1, 4.
when they said unto him, Make us Gods to go before us, he received their
golden earings, and fashioned it with the grauing tool, and made of it a
Molten Calfe. The like we see in Vriah the Priest, 2 Kings 16, 2, 10.
when Ahaz (who did not uprightly in the sight of the Lord, but walked in the
way of the Kings of Israel) saw the Altar that was at Damascus, he sent unto
him the pattern of the Altar, and the fashion of it, and all the Workmanship
thereof, and he made an Altar in all points, like to that which the King had
sent from Damascus. This departing from the Commandment of God, to please the
humor or honor of mighty men, must be far from us. We have a plain way
set before us, we ought to walk in it, we must not decline either to the
right hand, or to the left hand. We must not make merchandise of the word of
God, but deal faithfully with God and his people. The Prophet Micah
complains of such Prophets in his time, as flattered the people in their
sins, Mich. 2, 11.
And Prophesied unto them of Wine and of strong drink, and in such Prophets the
people delighted. The Lord charge Jeremy, Ier. 1, 17.
to trusse up his loins, to arise, and to speak to the Children of Israel
all that he commanded him, not to be affraide of their faces, least he
destroy him before them. Let us beware of such smooth tongues, that flatter
with their lips, and bring us in danger of destruction. Solomon teaches us,
Prou. 29, 5.
That a man which flattereth his Neighbor, spreads a Net for his steps;
declaring thereby, that as a Bird which is taken in the Net, is in danger of
death; so they which believe flatterers, fall into great perilles of Soul, of
Body, of Goods, of good name, of life.

Thirdly, it teaches the Ministers, to take heed they abuse not their
Authority, and turn it into tyranny, but employ it unto edification, not to
the destruction of the Church, or any member thereof. This the Apostle plainly
teaches concerning himself, 2 Cor. 10, 8
Though I should boast somewhat more of our authority, which the Lord has given
us for edification, and not for your destruction, I should have no shame. And
in another place, 2 Cor. 1, 24
We have not Dominion over your faith, but we are helpers of your joy, for by
Faith ye stand. We must remember and consider that we are under Christ: we are
his Substitutes and Lieutenants. He is the chief Shepherd of the Sheep. We
must not bear our selves 1 Pet. 5, 3.
as Lords over his heritage, but as ensamples to the flock. Christ himself
testifies, that he was among them as one that Luke 22, 27 Math. 20, 28.
served: For the son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give
his life for the ransom of many. Let us have the same mind in us, that was in
christ Jesus; let us behave our selves as Stewards, not as Lords; as Officers,
not as Princes; as Ministers, not as Usurpers; as Stewards, not as Masters of
the house.

Use 3.
Lastly, it serves for instruction of the people, that they despise not the
Ministry of the word, but always ready to hear it with reverence. For
wheresoever there is authority in the speaker, there should be fear and
reverence in the hearer. They are Ambassadors sent, not from Man, but from God;
they speak not in their own names, but in the name of God; they publish not
their own Dreams or devises, but the Doctrine of God, and therefore ought
reverently and obediently to be regarded. Thus the Prophet teaches us to
reason, Mal. 2, 7.
The people must hear the Law at his Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the
Lerd of Hoastes. True it is, they are men that bring it, but they are
Messengers sent of GOD, they are subject to the same passions that we are, but
God has put his word in their hearts, and in their mouths: and therefore,
both they and it must be received with all reverence, and entertained with the
inward obedience of the soul. Hence it is that our Savior Christ says, Luke
10, 16
He that hears you, hears me, and he that hears you, hears him that
sent me. The Prophet teaches, that their feet are beautiful that bring
glad tidings of peace, and bring glad tydinges of good things. They are said
to be worthy of double honor, and to teach the way of salvation. If a man had
lost a precious Jewel, and Rich Pearl, which was all the riches and substance
of his house, and being in this case, should meet with a man that can tell
him who robbed him of it, where it is, and how he may come to have it again,
how would he respect him, and reward him? A godly Minister is such a one unto
thee, Perk. of the Ministr.
who when Adam had lost himself, and all his posterity, and that peerlesse
Jewel of righteousness the whole wealth of our souls, can truly tell us who
did steal it away from us, and how it is to be recovered again. The Devil
is the Thief; Christ does restore it: Faith applies Christ, the Word of God
works Faith; the Minister preaches the word whereby we believe. How well
do thou account of that Physician, and how highly do thou esteem of him,
who when thy health is lost, and sickness fallen upon thee, can tell thy
disease, open the cause of it, show thee the cure and remedy of it, and restore
thee to thy former state and strength; so when thy soul is sick unto the death,
and even to damnation, the man of God can heal the deadly wound that Satan
has given, and apply a sovereign plaster for thee, made of the precious
blood of Christ.

From hence all men may learn, how to esteem Gods Ministers, and with what
affection we are to hear them. The Sheep of Christ Ioh. 10, 27.
will hear his voice and follow him. This is a notable token to know the
children of God by: to disobey the Ministers of God, is to disobey God
himself; and to despise their word, is to despise the word of God himself. Is
not the Ambassador of an earthly Prince received with great honor and
reverence? Is not his message received as undoubtedly as if the Prince himself
were present? Are not they which despise his authority as heinously punished,
and as vilely accounted of, as if they resisted and rebelled against the Kings
own person? Shall then the Messengers of the living God, the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, be received less worthily then the other, whose authority
is greater, who message is waightier, whose place is higher? It is requisite
therefore, that the people fear and reverence their Minister, or else they will
in no case honor and obey him. For where fear is not present, all honor is
absent; and whosoever scorneth to perform this duty of fear, let him be well
assured, he contemns not him, but the Lord that sent him. This fear is to
be yielded, not to his person, but to his Office. For as the Apostle exhorts
the Thessalonians to 1 These. 5, 12, 13.
acknowledge them that labored among them, and have them in singular love for
their works sake; so we ought to fear those that are set over us in the
Lord, for their worker sake. So he witnesses that the Galathians Gal. 4, 14.
received him as an Angel of God; yea more then so, they received him as Jesus
Christ himself. This was not as he was a man, but as the Minister of God: this
was not for the excellency of his person, which he acknowledges to be simple,
and testifies to be contemptible; but he was received for that excellent
message which he brought among them. Therefore Paul writing to the
Phillippians, says, Phil. 2, 12.
As ye have always obeyed me, not as in my presence only, but now much more
in my absence, so make an end of your salvation with fear and trembling. This
reprooueth all those that are stubborn and disobedient, and will not obey the
word of exhortation delivered unto them: such also, as hear not often and
constantly, but seldom and carelessely, as if they were persuaded, that they
had nothing to do with God, or God with his word: such as when they hear are
not stricken with any fear of the presence of God, or of the power of the
word, or of the truth that is delivered, so that they never can hear aright,
seeing GOD accounts those only the right Hearers, Esa. 66, 2, 5.
that tremble at his Word, and are of humble and contrite hearts.

Lastly, such as are content to hear and listen with their outward ears, but
it is no longer then they list, and no farther then their own fantasies are
fed, and their desires followed, and their humors pleased. They are willing to
hear, until their special sins be reproved: but when they find
themselves touched, or their iniquities (which they dwell in) discovered, they
grow out of patience, and begin to revile and rail at the Ministers that seek
with a good Conscience to discharge their duties. This is an evident note of a
corrupt hearer, and a plain testimony of an evil heart. We must be ready to
hear the curses of the Law, as well as the promises of the Gospel: we must
account it a benefit to be reproved our selves, as well as to hear others
reproved. A sick man would not content himself to have the Physician show
unto others their diseases, but would have his own disease discovered unto
him; so is it profitable unto us, to see our own sins, and to hear our own
corruptions revealed and manifested unto us. If we once desire to come out of
our sins and iniquities wherein we have lived; if once they become bitter
and unpleasant unto us, it will be no grief or burden, to see our selves
stripped, and laid open to the view and sight of the world. Let us therefore
with meekness of spirit submit our selves to the stroke of Gods word, and not
rage when we are reproved, as the manner of those is, that purpose to
persevere, and to continue in their sins unto the end.

Verse 9. [ Yet for your loves sake I rather beseech thee.] Here we have the
second part of the diverse reason before remembered. The former Verse, was a
preparation or entrance into the prayer or petition of Paul, and contains
the authority that he had (if he would use it) to command Philemon that which
was convenient for him to do. These words are a mild mittigation of the former;
namely, that albeit he might command him by his office, yet he would rather
entreat and beseech him thorough love. The Apostle having to do in this place
with a matter of Christian moderation and equity, wherein he might from the
Lord command with authority, does notwithstanding pray and beseech; and when
he might lawfully urge and require the practice thereof, he rather resolves
to use gentle, humble, and loving means. Doctrine 2. Gentle means are to be
used rather then severe, to persuade men to the truth.
The Doctrine arising from hence, is this; That the Servants of God, ought to
use mildness and meekness in delivering the will and message of God to his
people, rather entreating them with lenity, then commanding them with
authority, albeit they have liberty so to do. Courteous and gentle means are
first to be used, if they may prevail, rather then checking and chiding
sharply and rigorously with Offenders. We see this in Christ Jesus himself,
who did not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, he says,
Mat. 11, 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you,
for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. This appears in sundry places
of Paul's Epistles, Romans 12, 1. I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of
Christ; that ye give up your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable
unto God, which is your reasonable serving of God. So, 2 Cor. 5, 20. Now then
are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we
pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God. And in the tenth
Chapter of the same Epistle, 2 Cor. 10, 1.
I Paul my self, beseech you, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ,
which when I am present among you, am base, but am bold toward you being
absent. Thus the Apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2, 11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Pilgrims and Strangers, abstain from
fleshly lusts which fight against the soul, and have your conversation honest
among the Gentiles. Likewise the Apostle John writing to a Noble woman by birth
but more noble by Faith and Religion, says, 2 John 5.
I now beseech thee (Lady) not as writing a new Commandment unto thee, but
the same that we had from the beginning, that we love one another. Whereby we
see, that it is a duty required of us, that in delivering the word of God, and
in declaring his will, we should use mildness rather then sharpness;
gentleness, rather then roughness; beseeching rather then commanding; and
meekness of spirit, rather then threatening of judgment.

Reason 1.
Now to confirm this doctrine, sundry reasons may be rendered and produced.
First, we are bound to use those means, and to take that course, which is most
forcible and effectual. But to deal with love and lenity, and to handle our
brethren kindly and meekly, is most likely to prevail with most men. Therefore
the Apostle requires, 2 Timothy 2, 25.
that the servant of God must not strive, but must be gentle toward al men, apt
to teach, suffering the evil, instructing them with meekness that are contrary
minded, proving if God at any time will give the^ repentance, that they may
acknowledge the truth, and come to amendment, out of the snare of the devil,
etc. There is no way so available to bring evil men out of the dangers wherein
they stand, who are as it were taken prisoners, and made bondslaues to do the
Devils will, then to allure them by gentleness, to draw them by long suffering,
and to overcome them by patience.

Reason 2.
Secondly, this course well and duly observed, serves to persuade them with
whom we deal of our love and tender affection toward them. For loving and
friendly dealing, argues loving and affectionate minds, and with whomsoever
we have to do, it is a great means of prevailing, and the ready way to bend
and incline him unto that which is good, and to turn him from that which is
evil, when his persuasions are perceived to tend to the profit and benefit
of him whom we would persuade. We shall never do any good, or prevail with
our Brother, to bring him into the right way, unless he can assure his own
heart that we love him, and seek his good, and desire his Salvation. It is
Love in the Speaker, that moves the Hearer to embrace that which he
speaks, to like that which he teaches, to hate that which he reprooueth,
to avoid that which he condemns, and to practice that which he commends.
We must work this Opinion, and ground this persuasion in their hearts, that
we love them, and that all our Doctrines, Instructions, and Reproves,
proceed only from this Fountain, before we can move them to Attention,
Reverence, and Obedience, unto that which they hear delivered. Hence it is,
that the Apostle in sundry places, writing to diverse Churches, and moving
them to follow the examples and exhortations given unto them, labors to
persuade them of his unfeigned Love toward them, as it appears,
Phillippians 4, 1. Therefore, my Brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy, and
my Crown, so continue in the Lord, ye beloved.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, we are to imitate our Head and Master Christ Jesus, he used not his
Authority and Power that was in him, he dealt not roughly and severely with
his enemies, but meekely and mercifully, and most compassionately, he was
meek, and as a Lamb before his shearer. When he might according to his
mighty power in Justice have destroyed his Persecuters and enemies, Luke 23, 34
he prayed for them, he entreated pardon for them, that their sin might be
forgiven. Therefore the Apostle Peter teaches us, that we are provoked to a
patient bearing of wrongs, and suffering of trobles, by the example of Christ,
saying, 1 Pet. 2, 21.
For heerunto ye are called, for Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an
ensample, that ye should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was there
guile found in his mouth. Seeing then, that mild and merciful dealing pulls
out of the snare of the devil, opens the love of the speaker; and lastly,
makes us like to Christ, whose example is a perfect pattern of all meekness
and moderation, it follows, that it is carefully to be used of us when we
speak to the people of God, in the name of God.

Use 1.
Let us see what Uses may be raised and remembered unto us out of this
Doctrine. First, we learn that mercy and compassion, yea all tokens and
testimonies of love are to be showed toward Malefactors, even when Justice is
to be executed, and punishment inflicted, and the course of Law is to proceed
against them, that they may know it is not malice, but Justice, has brought
this fall upon the^; it is not their blood, but their good that is sought, and
the good of others. The truth hereof we see practiced in Joshua, when Achan
was apprehended, and his sin discovered, whereby he had offended God, sinned
against his express commandment, and troubled Israel, he said unto him,
Josh. 7, 19.
My son, I beseech thee, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, and show me now what thou have done, hide it not from me.
Cruelty in deed, or bitterness in word, even toward evil doers that are
already adjudged, or stand at the bar to be judged, is barbarous and
inhumain. To insult over a poor prisoner, or a condemned man that is guilty of
death, and carried to the place of execution, stands neither with an human
disposition, nor with a Christian affection, nor with Brotherly compassion.
Behold the proud and insolent behavior of the savage and beastly minded
Pharisees and Priests against our Savior Christ, mocking, spitting, buffeting,
railing, reuiling, whipping, and crucifieng him between two thieves. They were
not content to seek his life, and to shed his blood, but laded him with
contempt and all shameful calumniations. This also is the practice of their
successors the Romish Clergy, who are the followers of them in malice and
cruelty, when the faithful have been, not only conuented before them, but
condemned of them, they have embrued their hands, and defiled their garments
with their blood, which cries to the God of Heaven for judgment; neither were
they contented to feed their eyes with their torments, and to satisfy their
lusts with their sufferings, but proceeded to all extreamities of rage and
madness, railing at them, and speaking all manner of evil against them. This
abuse is sometimes too usual and common in the places of Justice and judgment,
from whence all gall and bitterness should be banished: we may hear unseemly
jests, bitter taunts, and uncharitable reproaches cast out of their mouths (as a
loathsome vomit out of the stomach) who should Remember that they sit in the
seat of God, 2 Chro. 19, 5, 19, 6.
and are to execute the Judgments of God, with whom is no iniquity, nor
respect of persons, neither receiving of reward. Iehu the King of Israel,
executing the judgments of the Lord against the house of Ahab, according to all the word of the Lord, Hosea 1, 4.
is threatened himself to be punished, because he did it with a cruel and
bloody affection; The work was good, but his heart was evil; the deed done was
righteous, but the manner of doing was corrupt; he respected not the glory of
God, but his own revenge; he did it not to serve God, but to serve himself.
This was the cause why the Lotde visited him, his house, and al Israel for it,
and revenged their blood thus shed, because he failed in the manner, though
otherwise he did that which is just and right. We must regard not only what
we do, but in what sort and manner, to what end and purpose we do it. It is
our duty to show Mercy and Love to Offenders, even in punnishing of
Offenders. We must have respect to their bodies and souls: We must admonish,
reprove, threaten, and correct, in great compassion and mercy, not in rage and
revenge to fly upon them.

Objection.
But here the question may be asked, whither a Christian man may not be angry
with them with whom he deals, being stubborn and perverse, and deal
sharply with them? Answer.
I answer, the Apostle gives direction what to do in this case, Ephesians. 4, 26.
Be angry, but sin not; let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither
give place to the Devil. If we break out suddenly into any passion, let us
speedily recall that affection, and not suffer it long to lodge with us. But
there is a godly anger, and an holy kind of indignation; there is a lawful
zeal to be commended in the servants of God, which they are to conceive
inwardly, and to utter outwardly against sin, not against their
perverseness. So it is said of Christ, Mark 3, 5.
that he looked round about him angerly, mourning also for the hardness of
their hearts. His anger was joined with pity and compassion, and it was not so
much against the men, as against their blindness. The Church of Ephesus is
commended, Revel, 2, 6.
that it hated the works of the Nicolaitans, which Christ also hates. It
hated not the Nicolaitans themselves, as they were men, but the works of the
Nicolaitans. Objection.
Again, it may be said, that the Prophet David, Psalm. 109. and in many other
places, Ps. 59, and 109
prayed for the destruction of his enemies, both their persons and posterity.
So did Eliah for fire from Heaven, to destroy the Captains that came to take
him. Answer.
I answer, we have not the same spirit that they had, and consequently have
not the same warrant. They were Prophets, and God revealed unto them that they
were obstinate enemies, so that they were enabled to judge, that their malice
and wickedness was incureable, and that they would never repent, They had an
extraordinary measure of Gods spirit, not only to see their present
condition, but to discern their future confusion; and hence it is, that they
were endued with a pure zeal of Gods Glory, and not carried with an evil
desire of Revenge, of Envy, of Hatered, and of Emulation.

Again, the imprecations of the Prophets, are prophesied of plagues to come,
but we have no such extraordinary instinct revealed unto us, to know what is
to come: wherefore, we cannot allege their examples for our imitation, we
must walk in the Kings High way, and follow the general rules of the
Scripture, to deal mildly, to put away pride and cruelty toward those that are
under us, to banish tyranny; and treading of them under our feet. This is to be
observed of all Fathers, Masters, and Governors, remembering that in Christ we
are all Brethren, that by Nature we are all of one mold and making, that (as
men) we have all one Creator. This consideration we find to have Job 32, 13,
14.
bin in Job toward those of his Family. If I did contemn the judgment of my
Servant, and of my Maid, when they did contend with me; what then shall I do
when God stands up? And when he shall visit me, what shall I answer? He that
has made me in the womb, has he not made him? Has not he alone fashioned us
in the womb? This the Apostle also Ephesians. 6, 9.
teaches, Ephesians. 6. Ye Masters do the same things unto them, putting away
threatening: and know that even your Master also is in heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him. So then, we are to deal with gentleness, not
with roughness; we are rather to seek to win others by love, then to compel
them by rigor. We must endeavor that al bitterness, and anger, and wrath,
crying, and evil speaking be put away from us: we ought to be courteous one
to another, and tenderhearted: we are not to think that any are privileged,
and freed from reproof, but we must reprove meekely and modestly, least
whilst we go about to amend them, we make them worse. It is an heavenly
Counsel given by the Apostle, Gal. 6, 1, 2.
Brethren, if a man be suddenly taken in any offense, ye which are spiritual
restore such an one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least
thou also be tempted: Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ. Where we see, he would have the faithful endeavor to reform a man
with all gentleness, when he has done amiss. We must not flatter him in his
sins, for then we encourage him, and uphold him in his wickedness, nay, we
betray him into the hands of the Devil, and by that means drown him deeper in
destruction. Whenever therefore our Brother falls into evil, it is no love
nor charity to cloak his evil doings, or to dissemble his lewdness which he
has committed, but we must have a care that he may rise again. If a man be
in the mire, or in a ditch, we will reach him our hand to help him out; much
more ought we to have pity on his soul, when we see it sinking into
perdition?

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing we are to win men rather by gentleness and love, we must
acknowledge that gteat wisdom and discretion is required in the Ministry, to
divide the word of God aright, and to be able to apply himself to every
degree and calling of men. Hence it is, that the Apostle says, writing to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5, 1, 2.
Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a father, and the younger men as
brethren, the Elder-women as Mothers, the younger as Sisters with all
pureness. There is indeed a profitable and necessary use both of rough and
tender dealing. When the people of God went out to war. Deuteronomy 20, 10
the Lord commanded them to offer conditions of peace to that City, if it
refuse to make peace they should besiege it, smite it, and destroy it. So
should we, when we execute our Office, first offer peace before we proclaim
war; first, allure by Gentleness, before we thunder out judgments; first,
exhort, before we threaten. In the material building, all the stones that are
to be fitted to the building, are not of one nature, some are soft and easy to
be hewed and hammered, others more hard and of a flintier marble disposition,
they require sharp tools, strong blows, and sturdy arms, before they can bc
brought into form, or be squared for their place which they are to hold. So it
is with the lively stones of the spiritual Temple of God, some have soft
hearts of flesh, and are of humble and contrite spirits, like the bruised reed
or the smoking flax, others have hearts hard as the Adament, and cannot
easily be brought to feel the strokes of the word of God. These are not to be
dealt withal and handled alike, but after a diverse manner. This is the
counsel of the Apostle Jude, Jude 1, 22.
Have compassion of some, in putting difference, and other save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire, and hate even that Garment which is spotted by
the flesh. This serves to reprove, first, such as use unseasonable lenity,
when Godly severity is required. Some diseases, require sharp medicines. This
is a great sin, whether it be in the family, in the common Wealth, or in the
Church. Ely heard many complaints against his sons, that they sinned against
God, and caused his people to abhor his offerings, yet he did bear with
them, and was not sharp toward them as he ought to have been, 1 Samuel 2, 23.
he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for of all this people I hear evil
reports of you: do no more, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear,
which is, that ye make the Lords people to trespass. He showed mercy, where
he should show severity, and he winked at those that were worthy to be
punished. This proceeds not from a love to our Children, but rather from a
looseness in our selves, and a carelessness of their good and salvation. This
causes vice to increase and makes sin grow in all places. The like we see
in Ahab King of Israel, when God had delivered a cruel enemy into his hand,
he spared him, 1 King, 20, 42.
and suffered him to escape out of his hands, a man whom God appointed to die,
and thereby is threatened, that his own life should redeem and ransom the
life of his enemy, and so the one pay the price of the other. The like we might
handle in Saul, who receiving a commandment to destroy Agag, and his
substance, together with the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.
he gave life to those that God would have him put to death, and showed mercy
to such as should be smitten with the sword. This negligence in punishing
offenders is too common in the common Wealth, and is a means to increase
sin, to see sin punished. It is a true saying of the wise man, Prou 20, 30
The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within
the bowels of the Belly. Thus it falls out also oftentimes in the Church.
When the incestuous person among the Corrinthians was (according to the
Ordinance of God,) to be cast out, he was suffered in the Church, and had not
the censures of the Church executed against him, 1 Cor 5, 6.
so that the Apostle tells them, that their rejoicing was not good, Know ye
not that a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump? purge out therefore the old
leaven, that ye may be a new lump. Such was the carelessness and coldness in
many of the Churches of Asia, Revel 2, and 4
they were too mild toward Heretics and evil livers, and suffered the sword
of excommunication to rust in the sheath, which should be drawn out to the
terror and fear of all stubborn and unrepentant sinners. Secondly, it
reproves such as are too sharp and rigorous, against offenders, and forget
all rules of Charity toward them. All laws must not be written with blood. The
law of God, albeit it did not stint what stripes every offender should have
that deserved stripes, yet it limiteth and restrains what number they should
not exceed, that the offender might think himself loved, not hated: all the
Corrections that God lays upon his Church come from love. True it is, the
Pastors and Ministers are to rebuke such as are fallen, but when they see
sorrow for sin, and repentance from dead works wrought in them, they should
begin to raise them up again and comfort them with the precious promises of
the Gospel, least they should be overwhelmed with despair, and be ^wallowed up
with overmuch heaviness. Our Savior has set down an order perpetually to
be observed touching offenders, Mat 18 15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him, if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother, but if he hear thee
not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three Witnesses
every word may be confirmed, etc. We must proceed slowly, and as it were with a
leaden foot against our brethen, and beware of rash and hasty judgment. The
ancient Church in former times offended this way being so austere and severe
against offenders, who for small offenses enjoined punishment for the space of
many years. This is the sin of such as are of the separation, and have
departed from our Churches, condemning our Church to be no Church, our
Ministers to be no Ministers, our sacraments to be no sacraments, refusing to
hear the word at our mouths, to pray and communicate with our people, and to
perform other religious duties with us. Thus they have noted and marked us out
with the black cole of condemnation, who deserve rather to be excommunicated
by us, had they not voluntarily excommunicated themselves from us. On the other
side, it behooves us to show compassion to them that sin of ignorance or
infirmity, and to season our admonitions and exhortations with a loving
affection, let us bear with them so long as we see any hope of amendment,
following the example of Moses, Exodus 32, 31.
who mourned and prayed for the Isralites fallen in Idolatry, and of Christ,
Luke 19, 41.
who wept over Jerusalem to make them weep for their sins, who seemed to
have no sight or feeling of them. Lastly, it reprooueth the Church of Rome, who
are very Tirants and Tormenters of the people of God, for as they have burdened
them from time to time with men's Traditions, so for every slight matter they
have thundered against them with their excommunications, and thereby made
themselves terrible to the whole world. Hence it is, that the Pope and his
Bishops threaten Princes, challenge authority to excommunicate them, to depose
them, and to discharge their subjects of subjection and allegiance. This is
cruelty joined with impiety, this is severity accompanied with Hypocrisy, this
is cursing and banning, contrary to the Christian faith, and therefore being
causeless they cannot come.

Use 3.
Thirdly, and last of all, we learn for our obedience, that whenever
entreating, beseeching, gentle, or loving dealing is used to call men home to
God and to themselves, it is their duty to yield themselves and to embrace
earnestly the mercies of God offered unto them. The sin of contempt and
contumacy is fearful, when the bountifulness of God is despised, his mercies
loathed, his patience and long suffering abused. If we will not hear when he
cries to us, Prou 1, 28.
we shall cry also in the days of our misery, and he will not hear us in our
trouble, but mock at our affliction. Our Savior remembers the Jews, that he
would often have gathered them together, as an Hen gathers her Chickens under
her wings, but they would not, and therefore their Habitation should be left
unto them desolate. First, he preached mercy, then judgment, first he
gathers, then he scatters, first he counsels, then he confounds. This
is the order which the Apostle teaches to be observed by the Lord himself, in
the first place, by patience and long suffering he calls men to repentance,
nevertheless if they will not turn unto him, but harden their hearts against
the means and Ministry that he uses to call them, he hoardeth and heapeth up
wrath for them against the day of wrath. This has been the dealing of God
with us in this Land more then fifty years, he has preached unto us by his
mercies, he has entreated us and provoked us by peace, by plenty, by patience,
by temporal blessings, by spiritual blessings, by prosperity which the
glorious Gospel of Christ has brought with it, he has planted his Vine among
us, he has looked for good fruit answearable to such great means and long
mercies. But what have we performed according to that which God has expected?
and how have we behaved our selves in respect of this bountifulness which we
have tasted and received? Surely, we become every year worse then other, Esaias
5, 4.
more barren, and less fruitful; we are not only void of good fruits, but
full of evil fruits, bearing nothing but leaves of vanity, and shows of
Hypocrisy. We cannot deny, but God (as a careful dresser of his Vineyard)
has often times been constrained to take his pruning knife into his hands,
he has scourged us by famine, and chastened us by plague and pestilence; yea,
still does visit us in sundry places, and yet though he have put us into the
furnace, and tried us with the fire of his judgments, he cannot purge out our
dross, or take away our tin, or cleanse away our corruptions from us, but
still we swerve from him, and swerve with blasphemies, with oaths, with
profaneness, with drunkenness, with whoredom, with contempt of the Gospel;
we abound with the fruits of the flesh, and works of darkness, which agree
not with that light into which we are brought. The word of God was more
reverently esteemed, better regarded, and more carefully practiced thirty; yea,
forty years agone, then it is in these declining times in which we live. We
have a long time gone backward, and not forward; we grow downward, and not
upward; we are farther from the Kingdom of Heaven, and not nearer. What then
remains for us, Heb 10, 27.
but a fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire, which shall destroy
his adversaries? If he open the Treasures of his wrath, and the storehouses of
his judgments, if he bring forth the arrows of his quiver, and draw his sword
out of his sheath, let us prepare to meet our God by unfeigned repentance, let
us forsake our sins which bring all curses and callamities upon us. If his
mercies will not move us, his judgments shall remove us out of our places. The
Fig Tree is first Luk 13, 9.
Husbanded and dug about, if the digging and dunging of it will not make it
bring forth fruit, it is appointed to be cut down. The patience of the Lord
goes before denuntiation of judgment, or execution of punishment. A Physician
never aduentureth upon a desperate Physic, but in a desperate disease. A
Surgeon applies salues and all possible remedies before he proceed to the
cutting off of Arm or Leg: So has the Lord dealt with us, and so he does
deal with us, if his word could convert us, his judgments should not overtake
us; if his mercy could turn us, his justice should not destroy us; if his love
could save us, his wrath should not condemn us.

[ Being such a one, even Paul aged, and now also a Prisoner of Jesus Christ.]
We heard in the words before, Paul's beseeching of Philemon, amplified by a
diverse reason of commanding. Now we have to consider the second part of the
sentence, which is a description of his person, generally and particularly,
which has great force to move him and instruct him. He mentions his age and
the term of his life now almost ended, together with his afflictions and
bands for Christ's sake and the Gospels, thereby to teach him, not to be ashamed
of him, or to be offended at him, but to reverence his person, and to and to
obey his word. Here then we see, that the Apostle does challenge much to be due
unto him (which he might justly do) in regard of sundry privileges of his
calling, of his age, of his sufferings and imprisonment that he sustained for
the cause of Christ. Doctrine 3. Superiors in guiftes and age, are to be
reverenced above others.
Hereby we learn, that such as God has marked out from others by age,
guiftes, or other privileges are much to be regarded and reverenced. We must
acknowledge it to be a duty belonging unto us to yield much to such as God has
distinguished and separated from the common order of men, by length of life, by
greatness of guiftes, or other worthy respects which they have received. The
Apostle teaches that the King and Magistrate are to be honored, Rom 13, 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God. And 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor 1
Pet, 17 2 13, 14.
all men, love brotherly fellowship, fear God, honor the King. Thus also he
speaks a little before, Submit your selves unto all manner Ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the superior, or unto
Governors as unto them that are sent of him, for the punnishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Touching such as are superiors
in age; it is a precept given by Moses, Leuit 19, 32
Thou shall rise up before the hoar head, and honor the person of the old man,
and dread thy God, I am the Lord. Where we see the Lord prescribes that duty
to be performed to old age, which Paul chalengeth to himself: being aged in
this place. An example hereof we have recorded in the book of Job in Elihu,
when Jobs three friends ceased to answer him, he began saying, Job 32, 6.
I am young in years, and ye are ancient, therefore I doubted, and was
afraid to show you mine opinion, for I said, the days shall speak, and the
multitude of years shall teach wisdom. Likewise touching the teachers and
Ministers of the Gospel, the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 5, 17.
The Elders that rule well, let them be had in double honor, specially they
which labor in the word and Doctrine. And in another place, Heb 13, 17. 1 These
5, 12, 13.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, acknowledge them that
labor among you and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, that ye have
them in singular love for their works sake. Lastly, to endure adversity, to
suffer imprisonment, and to be put in fetters for Christ's sake, is so far
from putting them to shame that are in Chains, and ought to be so far from
offending any, that rather it commends their person, beutifieth their
Ministry, adorneth their guiftes, magnifieth their calling, and makes their
Office more effectual, and much more to be respected, and more auailable to
edification. It is an honor to be set as an ouerseer in the Church, but it is
a greater honor to suffer in Christ's cause. Hence it is, that the Apostle
says, 2 Timothy 1, 8. Ephe 3, 13.
Be not ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, neither of me his prisoner, but
be partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God.
And Ephe, 3. 13. I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for your sakes,
which is your glory. All these Testimonies serve to confirm this truth
sufficiently and abundantly, that such as God has made any way superiors unto
us, and preferred before us in calling, in age, in guiftes, in sufferings, or
any other prerogatives, are much to be accounted off, and greatly to be
respected of us.

Reason 1.
This truth will better appear unto us, and be more deeply grounded in us, if
we mark and observe the reasons whereon it stands as upon a firm foundation
that cannot be shaken. For first, it stands with the Ordinance and
commandment of God as we see in the xx. Chapter of the book of Exodus Exodus
20, 12 Deuteronomy 5, 16. Ephe 5, 2, 3.
where the law is established, and a promise of blessing annexed. Thus the
Apostle expresses the one and the other, Ephe 6. Honor thy Father and Mother
(which is the first commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee,
and that thou may live long on earth. If this be a precept of God, that we
ought to honor those whom God has any way honored, and if the obedience unto
it be joined with our good, and that good which all men so much desire; to wit,
length of days and continuance of long life upon the earth; if we respect
either his precept, or regard our own profit, we are bound to acknowledge
those privileges of age or guiftes which he has given them, and to honor
them for them.

Reason 2.
Secondly, all superiors, in what respect soever they be placed above us and
set before us, do bear the Image of God. He has sealed them in the forehead
with his own stamp, and marked them out with the print of his own finger,
that they should resemble him. He has advanced them to be instead of fathers,
and honored them to bear a simillitude of his person. In the Magistrate is
the Image of the Dan 2, 37. Psalm 82.
power and glory of God, Dan. 2, 37. In the father, Mat 23, 9.
of his providence and authority; in the Elder, of his continuance and
eternity: in the learned man of his knowledge and wisdom. Now, wheresoever
the least and lowest title of the image of God appears, albeit it be
blemished with many infirmities, it is to be confessed and acknowledged; yea,
to be honored and reverenced.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, God will be severely revenged on all such as break his order, and
seek to confound those things which he has distinguished. The light of
nature has imprinted this Ordinance of God in all men, and the Heathen, living
in darkness and destitute of the light of the word of God and of the knoledge
of true Godliness, have established wholesome laws and sharp statutes to
that purpose, to avoid confusion, and to maintain a peaceable communion one
with another. Old age was honorable Ovid. Fastor. lib. 5. Cicero. lib. de
Senect.
among the Gentiles, so that the more white hairs they had on their heads, the
more wrinckles they had in their faces, and the less strength in their bodies:
the more were they esteemed of their equals, feared of young men, and honored
of all men. As every year did add to the time of their age, so it added
reverence to their persons. When the keepers Eccle 2, 3. 4, 5.
of the house trembled, the strong men bowed, the grinders ceased, the doors
were shut up, the lights were darkened, the Almond Tree flourished, and the
Daughters of singing were abased (all which are evident signs, not only of
old age coming toward us, and approaching near unto us, but present with us
and attending upon us) then were they most regarded, Plutar. in vita Licurg.
all other arose from their seats to honor them, no man durst utter an
unseemly word, show an vnreuerent gesture, or commit an ungodly action before
them. If then we go about to quench the light of nature, and refuse to
reverence those that God has exalted, it is no marvel if he draw them out to
shame and bring them to misery which rise up against lawful authority, or
despise such as he has honored, ouertaking them in their devises, turning
their wisdom into foolishness, and bringing upon them final confusion. We
see this in the fearful examples of Absolon, Ahitophell, Shemei, Ioab, and
such like Childen of rebellion. The son of Noah that mocked his father, Gen 9.
is cursed with an heavy and horrible curse. The Children of 2 King 2, 24
Ierico that derided and reproached the Prophet, were torn in pieces with two
Bears that came out of the Wilderness. Seeing therefore that all superiors
have the Image of God shining upon them, and seeing God on the one side
commands them to be honored, and on the other side threatens to punish such
as despise them; it follows, that such as God prefers, we must highly
regard and yield them much honor.

Use 1
The uses remain to be considered. First, we learn from hence that it is no
disgrace or disparagement to a man's modesty, when such as are bound by the law
of God and nature and by all good order, do forget to yield their superiors
their due, or (which is worse) do in pride and contempt insult over them, to
claim and challenge that which is his right. The Apostle does oftentimes
remember his place and calling to the Corrinthians, which had forgotten him and
rejected him. He puts them in mind of his Office, 1 Cor 9, 1, 2
Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?
are ye not my work in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle unto other, yet
doubtless I am unto you, for ye are the seal of my Apostleship in the Lord.
This we see likewise in Samuel, 1 Samuel 12, 2, 3.
I am old and Gray Headed, I have walked before you from my Childhood unto this
day, bear record of me before the Lord and before his anointed, whose Ox
have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I done wrong too? or
whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine
eyes therewith? and I will restore it you. We are bound to yield to every man
his due as a debt which we owe unto him, according as God has distributed his
Talents among the several degrees of men. This Christ himself teaches, Mat
22, 21
Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are
Gods. So the Apostle says, Rom 13, 7.
Rom 13, 7. Give to all men their duty, tribute, to whom ye owe tribute;
Custom, to whom Custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom ye owe honor.
Whenever therefore this Honor, or Fear, or Reverence is denied us which God
has given unto us, it is no Pride or haughtiness of heart, to challenge it,
and require it at their hands that are bound to yield it. If they will not
know us, it is lawful for us to know our selves. If they contemn us and cast
us at their feet, we must learn to magnify and make much of our Callinges
and Guiftes. This reprooueth and condemns those that dispraise and disable
themselves too much, wherein there may be as close and secret Pride, as in
them that rise up early to praise themselves. We must not deny the graces
of GOD that are in us, but acknowledge them to the praise of God, and submit
our selves to the judgment of others, that will not flatter for us for that we
have not, nor craftily conceal that which we have.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing such as excel us in Age, or any Guiftes, ought to be much
esteemed of us, and prevail very much with us: it puts all Inferiors in
mind of many good duties. First, it is required of them to praise and commend
the Guiftes of God in them, and give the glory of them to God the giver. We
must magnify them, and prefer them before all others that have not the same
Guiftes, though they be our enemies and such as hate us. We must not so much
consider their persons, how they are affected toward us, as their Guiftes, they
are the Guiftes of God, and therefore should be acknowledged and approved.
They have worthy Guiftes that we want, and yet are given for our good and
benefit. We do not see their Guiftes so defiled with infirmities and mingled
with Corruptions as our own are; all which things should help to add Grace
and Glory to the Guiftes that are in others. When Pharaoh perceived the great
Wisdom that was in Joseph, Gen 41, 43. Psalm 150, 22.
he spared not to speak of it, he shamed not to place him over all the Land
of Egypt, to make him Lord of his house, and Ruler of all his substance, that
he should bind his Princes unto his will, and teach his Ancients wisdom. So
when Nebucadnezzer saw that Daniell was endued with knowledge and understanding
from above, more then all the Astrologians and Enchaunters that were in
Babylon, he does confess them to be in him, and reverence him for them. So
ought we all to do when we hear or behold the guiftes of God in our brethren,
let us acknowledge them and praise God for them.

This reproves the common practice of those that will diminish and disgrace
their gifts, and like of nothing but that which is in themselves. Let us
beware of Pride and Envy, disdaining others, deprouing, and lessening such
inward graces of Gods spirit as are in them. If another man should not readily
acknowledge their outward guiftes wherein they glory, and reverence them for
their Parentage, Titles, and dignities, they would think themselves wronged,
and disgraced, they would be ready to cast them in the teeth with
forgetfulness of their duty. Why then should not they confess the inward
gifts and heavenly graces that appear in their brethren, which are far
more excellent then the former? Secondly, it is our duty to make profit of the
gifts of our Superiors, and take benefit by them. This is the end for which
they were given by God himself, and this is the use that we must make of them.
It is a great blessing of God, when he is gracious and bountiful unto his
people, and largely and liberally bestows his blessings upon them: we have
many examples of godliness, of mortification, of patience, of meekness, of
mercy, and many other gifts in the godly, so that we may take counsel and
comfort from them. Yea, as we are greatly to reverence these gifts in others,
so we must labor to feel them in our selves, and to keep them in the Closset
of our own hearts. It is ashame to see others religious, and to be without
Religion in our selves? To see others godly, and our selves to be without
godliness? To see so many graces in our Brethren, and we remain without
grace? This is a plain argument, that we esteem nothing at all, and make no
reckoning or account of any good guiftes in our Brethren, for as much as we are
not desirous to be partakers of them our selves. For whatsoever we regard in
others, we will labor to have and enjoy our selves.

Lastly, it behooves all young persons, to conceive a reverent opinion, and to
carry a dutiful and discreet behavior toward their elders, that are more
ancient then they in years. Old men are in stead of Fathers, 1. Tim. 5, 1.
and the Apostle would have them to be exhorted as Fathers. Again, old age is
a blessing of God, which few obtain and attain unto, in comparison of the
rest. The contempt of it, is the contempt of God, and a deriding of his Image,
as appears by the commandment expressed. Leuit. 19. When the Lord had
prescribed a reverent behavior toward aged men, he adds; Leui. 19, 32.
Thou shall dread thy God, I am the Lord: declaring thereby, that where there
is want of reverence to their persons, there is the want of the fear of God,
for he joins rising up before the Elders, and the reuerencing of God
together. Where the fear of God is not, there can be no duty performed to
men. This reprooueth the rudeness, the common and customable sausinesse that
is in young persons, that refuse to give them liberty and freedom to speak
before them. In all Companies, the younger is the readier to speak, although
he utter nothing but words of folly and of vanity. Likewise, it reprooueth
those that will not give them room and place when they come in presence. It is
indecent and uncomely in the Church or elsewhere, to see weak and feeble old
Men stand, and young Boys to sit down on their seats, without wagging,
stirring, or giving place unto them. This is directly contrary to the Law of
God; Thou shall rise up before the hore-head, and honor the person of the old
man. We may now renew the complaint of the Prophet, in regard of this
conclusion; Esaias 3, 5.
The Children presume against the ancient, and the vile against the honorable.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing we must have a great respect to such as are in gifts above us,
or in age before us, or go beyond us in both, it teaches us so to live and
behave our selves, that we may be worthy of al honor and reverence. Let such as
have good gifts, employ them to the greatest good of others. He that has
received much, must bring forth much fruit, Math. 25, 20
as the Servant that had five talents committed unto him, gained five other
talents. So old men must be grave and sober, and carry a Majesty in their
countenance, that they may after a sort resemble the Majesty of God. As gravity
and sobriety agrees to every age, so most especially to the elder age;
contrary to which, is lightness, lasciviousness, and waywardness, which make
them not honorable, but odious; not to be reverenced, but to be despised in the
eyes of the younger sort. Let them adorn their years with those virtues Tit.
2, 1, 2.
which the Apostle names. Let the elder-men be watchful, grave, temperate,
sound in the faith, in love, and in patience. If they be careful to express
these things which become wholesome doctrine, they shall manifestly show, that
their living so long in the World has not been in vain. The Wise man Prou.
20, 29.
says, The beauty of the young men is their strength, and the glory of the
aged is the gray headed; that is, Wisdom, Counsel, Experience, whereby they
are more adorned, then the young man is beautified by his bodily strength. For,
the Ornaments of the mind are to be preferred before the properties of the
body. Again, they must be examples of a godly life, and holy conversation,
that youth may stand in fear to commit any indecent and unseemly thing in
their presence. Thus Job says of himself, Job. 29, 7.
Chap. 29. When I went out of the gate, the young Men saw me, and hid
themselves. But when the Elder sort are Ringleaders aad examples of an evil
and corrupt life, there is more gravity on their heads, then piety in their
hearts; in their white hairs, then in their behavior; and so the Crown of
honor is taken from them, and they are justly contemned, despised, and
reproached of those, of whom they should be honored. For, we may see old men
so hardened in Wickedness, that if a man would find whole heaps of
wickedness, he need seek no farther, but to them. Some, by their age and
long experience, have learned nothing but craft and spightfulnesse, so as if a
man should frame himself after their example, he should have neither
faithfulness in him, nor upright dealing. Others are loose and disordered in
their whole life. Some have been given to swearing and blaspheming in their
youth, and they are not reformed; nay they are more deformed in their age.
Others, are so drenched and sapped in Covetousness and Whoredom, as that they
infect all places, and defile all persons where they come, they delight in such
rotten and filthy communication, that even young men are ashamed to hear them
spew out such ungodly and unsavory talk. Such as lead their lives as Fathers
in the Church, and adorn their age with godliness, shall not need to be
offended at these things, nor to say with the Lawyers in the Gospel, Luke 11,
45.
In saying this, thou put we to rebuke also. We are all to honor the
gray-head, and to magnify old age: For (as Solomon Prou. 16, 31.
says) Age is a Crown of Glory, when it is found in the way of
Righteousness; Whereby he means, that old age seasoned with a Godly life
and upright, brings with it as great glory, as a Crown on the head, and a
Scepter in the hand does unto a King; and therefore such old men are greatly
to be reverenced, and highly to be esteemed. But many, except they should be
honored for their Ignorance, Superstition, Frowardness, Maliciousness,
Waywardness, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Licentiousness, and Self-will,
there is nothing else to be found in them, to be learned of them, to be
gathered from them. By these foul enormities, they bring themselves into
contempt, and bring shame and reproach upon their own heads; so that no man
defameth and dishonors them so much as themselves. For, do they behave
themselves with such Stayednesse, Wisdom, and Gravity, that young men fear to
behave themselves lewdly and licentiously in their sight? Or do they show
themselves examples of good things? Nay, they serve for nothing but to corrupt
and infect youth, they be patterns, nay Patrons and Maintainers of all
filthiness and loose living. Surely, if young men mis-behaue and misgouerne
themselves, they are not to be excused, but to be reproved, because they ought
to order their lives aright, Eccles. 12, 1.
and Remember their Creator in the days of their youth; and not deserve to be
evil spoken or reported of: but Old folk, are double worthy of the shame
that men do them, if they be not honored for their Virtues. They should
learn by their long life, and old age, to grow in the knowledge of GOD, and
his Son Jesus Christ; to hate sin, to delight in righteousness, and daily
to dye unto the World, that as they bear about them a body declining and
decaying in strength, so they should be renewed in the inner man, long after
eternal life, and not nestle themselves here upon the earth, as if they
should continue for ever therein, nor pursue so greedily after the World,
when they can scarce go or creep up and down in the world. It is a testimony
of Gods great mercy toward us, when he lengthneth our life, and prolongeth our
days to the last period and power of Nature; Oh, how might we have profited
in the knowledge of Religion, in the fear of God, in the ways of godliness,
in the means of salvation, and in good example of life? If we had learned,
since we entered into Christianity, but now a little, and then a little;
here a Precept, and there a Precept; we might (in short space) have attained
to a great measure of understanding, and be daily fitted to Gods Kingdom. But
alas, such as should be old in Faith, are very Babes and Children, a thing
greatly disgraceful and reproachful to their years and condition.

The Apostle charge the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14, 20 Ephesians. 4, 14.
that they should not be Children in understanding, as concerning
maliciousness, he would have them Children, but in understanding to be of
ripe age. Whereby we see, that aged persons do quite degenerat from that which
they ought to be, when they remain void of knowledge, and destitute of
spiritual Wisdom, and suffer many that are young in years, to overtake
them, yea to over strip them, and go many degrees before them. If a man should
bind his son an Apprentise to some Science or Occupation, and when he had
served his time, should be to seek in his trade, and be never a whit the more
his Crafts-maister, in the ending of his years, then he was at the beginning,
we would think he had lost his time, and complain of the injury of the
Master, or of the carelessness of the Servant. If a Father should put his
son to School, and he always continue in the lowest Form, and never
ascend higher, we would judge great negligence to be either in the Master,
or in the Scholar. Behold the Church of God is the School of Christ, and the
best place to learn the Science of all Sciences, if we have lived long
therein, some of us twenty, some thirty, some forty years, and some longer,
and yet be no wiser in Religion, then a child of seven years old, Heb. 5, 12.
is it not ashame for us, and may we not be condemned of great negligence in
the matters of our salvation? Let us examine our selves how we have profited,
and compare our proceeding in knowledge with the length of time that God has
granted unto us. He may justly require great things of us, and challenge at
our hands much fruit, who has affoorded unto us, great means for our growth
and increasing in all good things.

Verse 10. I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my
bonds.


The order of the words.
HItherto we have spoken of the description of Paul, craving to be heard and
respected in regard of his age and office, which is the second part of the
sentence before remembered. Now, we are to observe the third point, which is
concerning Onesimus, whom he sets forth; first, by a note of relation, [ My
Son;] then by the cause, [ Whom I have begotten in my bonds.] The Apostle in
this Verse begins to enter into his suite, showing for whom he does entreat,
and afterward for what he does entreat. To his request, he annexeth diverse
reasons: first, because he begat him; that is, brought him by the preaching of
the Gospel, to the true Christian faith, and therefore he is earnest to
entreat for him. Secondly, because his Master should now find him profitable
unto him; that is, faithful, trusty, and serviceable, for so will true
Christian servants be; whereas such as are ungodly, will be unfaithful, and
such as have not the fear of God before them, cannot answer the trust that is
reposed in them for Conscience sake. Thirdly, because Paul loved Onesimus
tenderly and dearly, as his own bowelles, not as a servant, but as his son;
not only as a Brother, but as his own bowels. This is the order of the words.

The meaning of the words.
Let us breefely see the Interpretation of this Verse, and reserve the rest to
his proper place. First of all, when he calls Onesimus his son, he
means it not in respect of the natural birth and generation, but of the
spiritual and super-naturall. So that by a borrowed speech he means, one
brought to his Faith by his Ministry. Likewise when he says, [ Whom I have
begotten,] the meaning is, whom God by me did effectually call to embrace and
believe the Gospel. It is not the work of a mortal man to frame and reform
the soul unto the Image of God. He only names himself as the author of his
regeneration, which he does not to oppose himself to God, but only to show
what God does by the ministry of man. Lastly, when he adds, [ In my bonds,]
he means, when he was a prisoner, and lay in prison. This Verse according to
this exposition of the words, is thus much in effect, as if he had said,
Having thus prepared thee for that which I am to entreat from thy hands, if
now thou would know the party or person for whom it is, surely it is thy
runnagate servant Onesimus, and upon these grounds, he is my spiritual son,
for I have begotten him in the time of my captivity, to the true profession and
obedience of the Gospel.

Observations out of this Verse.
Before we come to handle the Doctrines and instructions arising out of this
verse, it shall not be amiss to set down diverse profitable observations that
may be considered. First, we see here a Rhetorical repitition of the same word,
I beseech thee being aged and a prisoner, I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus.
This redoubling of his prayer, and entreating (used also 2 Cor. 10, 1, 2.
elsewhere) shows the desire, and manifests the earnestness of his mind:
he was not cold in his suite, as if he regarded not whether he obtained it,
but prosecuted it with his whole desire and full purpose, so that he contenteth
not himself once to beseech him, but beseeches him again.

Secondly, we see, that the person of him, whom we will commend to any man,
has great force to move him, and to prevail with him, to grant unto us that
which we crave and desire at his hands. Wherefore, whosoever would be
commended unto any, must look to himself that he have in him somewhat worthy
commendation. For, as another man's mouth should praise us, and not our own; so
the matter of praise must be in our selves. A false praise, is a true
dispraise; and a wrongful commending, is a real discommending. The praise that
comes from others, must proceed from a due desert in our selves. If the
Apostle had not found a great alteration, he would never have given this
commendation to Onesimus. Thirdly, we see an example in Paul, of wonderful
humility, and lowliness of mind. See here the difference between Paul the
Apostle, and the proud Bishop of Rome. Paul beseeches where he might command;
but he commands where he has no warrant to beseech. For the Pope usurps
authority over Princes and Kings; he cursseth and banneth, he threatens
and thundereth out his excommunications. It is not so with our Apostle, for
such is his exceeding modesty and mildness of Spirit, that he abaseth
himself to be a false and fugitive servant, whom he embraces as his own
Son. What could be more reproachful, then to rob his Master, and then
to play the runnagate, that so he might run on in his evil course, and
deliver himself from punnishment? Yet we see, the Apostle is not ashamed of
him, is not ashamed to call him his Son, that Philemon might not be ashamed to
receive and to accept him as his Servant. For if he be the son of Paul, he
may be esteemed the servant of Philemon.

Fourthly, we see how effectual the sound conversion of a sinner to God
ought to be, and how forcible it should be to prevail with us, to win our
Love toward him, and cause us to perform all the duties belonging unto him.
For we may not be ashamed to account him either as a Son, or as a Brother,
whom GOD accounts for his own son and servant. We are most unworthy to be
called the sons of God, if we refuse his children to be our brethren. But if
we mark this aright, we shall find the number of those to be few, which regard
the Faith, conversion, salvation, and other spiritual blessings bestowed upon
their brethren, as they ought, and therefore testify no love, show no joy,
perform no duties, when they behold sinners converted unto God. Fifthly, we see
that the name and praise of a spiritual Father (which is proper to God alone)
is communicated to the Apostles and Ministers of God: whereas God only does
renew and regenerate us by the power of his spirit, the Ministry only is man's,
whether he be Pastor or Apostle. Our Savior teaches us, Math. 23, 9.
to call no man Father upon earth. It is no work of man (be he never so
excellent) to frame and reform the soul into the Image of God. But because we
are borne anew by Faith, and Faith comes by hearing, the Minister as the
disposer of the Mysteries of God, does under God perform the duty of a
Father. So then, seeing the word of God preached by the mouth and Ministry of
man, is the immortal seed of eternal life, it is no marvel if he be called
by the Title of a Father, from whose lips we conceive that seed, and receive
that word. Thus much is to be observed of us in general out of this verse. Now
let us come to the particular Doctrines.

[ I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, etc.] We are here to mark the scope
and purpose of the Apostle in these words. We see he uses exceeding
earnestness and importunity to have him received to his Masters favor. The
condition of Onesimus was this, he was a servant of the basest calling. For men
Servants and Maid-seruants in those days were not as they be now: Men had
them not for Wages and hire, as they that were bound to do no more then
Covenant, but they were Bondslaues, to be bought and sold in the Market, and
their Masters possessed them as Oxen and Cattle, and had power over them of
life and death. Now, albeit he were a servant of this kind and condition, and
had been besides a runnagate and a Thief, deserving grievous punishment, even
death; yet he pleads his cause being converted, with as great force and
feruency as can be expressed. Doctrine 1. The least and lowest member converted
to Christ, must not be contemned.
We learn, from this love appearing in the Apostle, that the basest person in
the Church, truly converted and brought unto Christ, should not be contemned,
but most lovingly, tenderly, and Brotherly regarded. The least and lowest
member that belongs to God, ought not to be rejected and debased, but highly
for Christ's sake to be honored and respected. We see how Christ calls unto
him all that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11, 28.
promising to ease and refresh them. Likewise he embraces the poor and
simple, as lovingly and cheerfully as the rich and wise of the world. The
Publicans and sinners are accepted of him, that were hated of the Jews. The
Woman taken in adultry, accused by the Pharisees, is exhorted by him to
repentance. The Blind man restored to his sight, John 9, 35. and 8, 11.
and cast out of the Synagogue, is sought out by Christ, and taught to believe,
and brought to be a true member of the Church. The penitent Thief hanging Luke
23, 43
upon the Cross, and hearing Christ preach, is converted to the Faith, and
received into paradise. It is not the will of Mat. 18, 14.
our heavenly Father, that one of these little ones should perish. When the
prodigal son had wasted his wealth, and his strength in riotous living, Lu.
15, 20, 24
so that necessity fell upon him, and Famine constrained him to eat of the
husks wherewith he fed his Swine, his Father received him into his favor, and
had compassion upon him: he willed him not to return back to his Harlots,
and to betake himself to his former companions, but while he was yet a far
off, he rejoiced to see him, and embraced him when he saw him, saying; This my
son was dead, but is alive again, he was lost, but he is found; and they
began to be merry. The incestuous Corinthian swept out of the Church, by the
censures thereof, 1 Cor. 5, 4. and 2 Cor. 2, 6, 7
and delivered up to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, and wandering as a stray Sheep from
the sheepe-fold, is brought again into the house of God, and into the assembly
of the faithful. The Apostle hearing of his sorrow for his sin, and of his
unfeigned repentance, says; It is sufficient unto the same man, that he was
rebuked of many, so that now contrary wise, ye ought rather to forgive him,
and comfort him, least the same should be swallowed up with overmuch
heaviness. The like we see, and might say of Mary Magdalen, who was infamous
in life, out of whom Christ cast seven devils. Of the Cananitish woman, whom
he heard and helped: of the Cripple that lay at the Poole, whom when Jesus
found in the Temple, 1 John 5, 14
he exhorted to sin no more, being now made whole, least a worse thing come
unto him. Likewise the Evangelists declare, that by the power and love of
Christ, Math 11, 5.
the blind had their sight restored, the Leapers were cleansed, the dead were
raised, the halt walked, the sick were healed, and the poor received the
Gospel. So the Apostle wills 1 Timothy 6, 1.
servants that are under the yoke, to account their Masters worthy of all
honor, that the name of God and his Doctrine be not evil spoken of. All these
places of Scripture, serve to teach us, that such as are of meanest account,
and least estimation, being converted to the Faith, and belonging to Christ,
are greatly to be regarded, and entirely to be beloved.

Reason 1.
This shall not seem any thing strange unto us, if we mark the Reasons
whereupon it is grounded. For first, those that are least esteemed, and are of
lowest condition, were bought with as great and high a price as others, and
were redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the
dear and precious blood of Christ. Rich and poor, high and low, great and
small, had all one price paid for their ransom. This is the reason Math: 18,
10 11.
urged by Christ, See that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say
unto you, that in Heaven their Angels always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven: for the son of man is come to save that which was lost.
If then, the least be redeemed by his death, and saved by faith in him, as well
as the greatest; it follows, that al should be regarded, none contemned; all
loved, none despised. Hence it is also, that the Apostle charge those that
are strong, to receive unto them Romans 14, 1, 3, 15.
the weaker sort, and not to despise them whom God has received and for whom
Christ has dyed.

Reason 2.
Secondly, there is no respect of persons with God. He does not esteem men for
accidental things; as for poverty, or riches; for honor, or dishonor. The
poor, the fatherless, the widow, the stranger, the servant, are as dear to
him, and as greatly respected of him, as those that are set in high places, and
are honored with great callings. When we speak of a person in our talk and
communication, me mean some man, or some woman; but the Scripture means a
more special thing, to wit; the outward quality or condition of man, which may
purchase him grace or disgrace, favor or disfauor. When God will call us to his
truth, and bestow his graces upon us, it is done according to his holy will and
good pleasure; he is not moved to it by the outward appearance and condition of
the person, he respects not Country, or sex, or birth, or riches, or
poverty, or Nobility, or wisdom, or learning, or friends. This is it which
the Apostle teaches, Gal. 3, 27, 28
Al ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, there is neither Jew,
nor Grecian; there is neither bond nor free; there is neither male nor female;
for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And to the same purpose Peter speaks,
Acts 10, 34, 35.
Of a truth I perceive that God is no accepter of persons, but in every Nation
he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. Seeing
then, God accepts the person of no man, he would have no man rejected for the
meannesse of his person.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, they shall receive with others the same recompense of reward, the same
kingdom of heaven, the same measure of glory. The differences that now are in
this life, shall cease. As there is now the same precious faith, so then there
shall be the same precious felicity. The poorest members of Christ have the
same spiritual graces that are necessary to salvation, and therefore shall be
partakers of the same inheritance. This the Apostle James sets down, chap.
2. James 2, 5.
Harken my beloved Brethren, has not GOD chosen the poor of this world, that
they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to
them that love him? He has not prepared and provided one place of glory for
those that are Rich, and another place for those that are poor; he has not
left one inheritance for the Noble, and another for the unnoble; but as they
have one Faith to apprehend Christ, so they shall have one glory to be like
unto Christ. The Lord Jesus himself testifies this, John 14, 2
In my Fathers house are many mansion places, if it were not so, I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you. If then, we consider these points,
that the lowest in the Church, and the most unworthy to be of the Church, are
bought with one and the same price, that God accepts and respects no man's
person, and that they shall receive with others an eternal weight of glory and
immortality, we may conclude this as a necessary truth, that we ought not to
be ashamed of any, though of the lowest sort, and poorest estate, and meanest
condition, to whom God has imparted and vouchsafed this mercy to believe in
Christ, and to be a member of his body, and to be in the number of true
believers.

Use 1
The Doctrine being made evident, the Uses will be as apparent. First, seeing
we are bound to love the lowest in the Church that belong to Christ, we learn
that our affections must be carried most earnestly, and in the greatest
measure to those that have the greatest measure of heavenly graces, not
regarding Riches, or Kindred, or outward respects, before the other. It is a
sound and sanctified love that is wrought in us toward those that are
faithful. The Apostle in this place, was so far from being ashamed of
Onesimus converted to Christ, and gained to the Gospel, though he were a
Servant, and had been a Thief and a Runnagate, that he glories in his Faith,
rejoices in his Conversion, accounts him as his Son, and respects him as
his own bowelles. This affection no less then fatherly toward him, he
expresses afterward, Verse 16, 17
Receive him, not now as a Servant, but above a servant, even as a Brother
beloved, specially to me, how much more then unto thee, both in the Flesh, and
in the Lord? If therefore thou count our things common, receive him as my self.
He saw in this man being a Proselite, newly converted to the Faith, such fruits
of sanctification, as seals of his conversion, that he loved him most dearly,
and sought by all means to procure favor for him with his Master. Whatsoever
the former life of men has been, when once they make Conscience of their
ways, beginning to lead an holy life, and to blot out the infamy and reproach
of their conversation led in the time of their ignorance, it is our duty to
begin to love them as entirely as our Brethren in Christ, and as children with
us of the same Father.

The practice hereof we see in Christ our Savior, and have this instruction
given us from his own mouth, Matthew 12. when it was told him, as he was
preaching his word to the multitude that came to hear him, that his Mother and
Brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him, he answered, Math 12, 48
Who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? And he stretched forth his hand
toward his Disciples, and said, Behold my Mother and my Brethren: for
whosoever shall do my Fathers will which is in heaven, the same is my Brother,
and Sister, and Mother. To this purpose the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 16, 1.
All my delight is in the Saints that are upon the earth. The Godly must be
most dear unto us, and we are bound to be kind to them, as to our Kin. For if
they ought to be unto every one of us, as the Mother and brethren, yea as the
flesh and members of Christ, they ought not to be neglected or contemned, but
to be cherished. Hereby 1 John 3, 14.
we shall know that we are translated from death to life, if we love the
brethren. On the other side, we ought to mourn and lament for such as remain
in ignorance of God, lie under the dominion of sin, and continue in the
profaneness and abominations of their youth. It is noted by the Prophet, Psalm
1^9, 136 Luk ^9. 41. Phil 3, 18.
that his eyes gushed out with rivers of waters because they kept not the law
of God. Christ Jesus mourned for the hardness of heart that appeared in his
hearnrs, he wept for Jerusalem when he came near unto it. Righteous Lot was
vexed day by day, when he beheld the unclean conversation of the sinful
Sodomites. The Apostle told the Phillippians of vain walkers, and that with
tears, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ. We see by common and
daily experience, when any of our friends and familiars are dead or lie at the
point of death, a natural affection toward them causes us to weep and lament
for them, and draws oftentimes from us abundance of tears; how much more
ought it to go near us, and make us sob and sigh from the very depth and
bottom of our hearts to see our brethren lie dead in sin, and as it were
rotting in the Grave of their corruptions, or else to walk in the paths of
death that bring with it certain destruction and eternal damnation. If a man
should come into a field where he should behold thousands slain with the
sword, wallowing in their blood, and others having received their deaths wound
to languish in pain and to strive and struggle for life, who would not account
it a lamentable show and most pitiful sight? But thus is it with us, and this
is the condition of many thousands that glory that they abide in health, and
yet are most dangerously sick and diseased; that think they are alive, and
yet behold they are a company of dead carcasses, that boast they are far from
the Gates of death, and yet (alas) they lie gaping and gasping for breath
which is ready to be gone? If there be in us any life of Gods spirit, or any
love of Godliness, it cannot but grieve our souls to behold the desolations
that are in the earth, Revel 3, 2. 1 Timothy 5, 6. Mat 8 22.
and the languishing of many ready to die; nay, which are already dead in
sin, and stink in the nostrils of God and man. For as a man having escaped
shipwreck and gotten into an Haven and Harbor, reioyseth in his own safety,
and comfort himself in his deliverance, but when he behouldeth the misery
of his brother suffering shipwreck and cast away by the violence of the
storms and Tempests that beat upon his bark, which drown both it and him in
the Seas, he cannot but greatly be grieved, and exceedingly perplexed. So ought
it to be with us, howsoever the escaping from the filthiness of the world, and
the uniting of us with Christ our head, does breed in us matter of great joy,
and may worthily cause us to rejoice, yet when we see the bondage of our
brethren under 1 Pet 2, 19.
sin, and the ruins into which they are come, it cannot but work in us
great anguish of spirit. If we perceive them to wander out of the way and to go
astray from the simplicity of the Gospel and from the fold of Christ and
fellowship of the faithful, it is our part to turn them back and to gather
them home. For how Math 18, 12.
think ye? If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray,
does he not leave ninety and nine, and go into the Mountains, and seek that
which is gone astray? and if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he
reioyseth more of that sheep, then of the ninety and nine which went not
astray, so is it not the will of your father which is in Heaven, that one of
these little ones should perish. This love toward the lowest that are converted
to the faith and coupled to Christ, reproves two sorts of men. First, such as
are ashamed of the poor Saints, who being without the comfort of friends,
but not without contempt of the world, are not regarded or esteemed. He that
despises his poor brother redeemed with the blood of Christ, would also
despise and despite Christ himself if he walked upon the earth. He that
honors not a faithful man of low degree, does dishonor the faith it self
and reprocheth the Gospel that he professes; yea, he despises the Church,
and shameth such as are members of it. This the Apostle James teaches, Iam 2,
2.
If there come into your company a man with a Gold Ring and in goodly apparel,
and there come in also apoore man in vile raiment, and ye have a respect to him
that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a goodly
place: and say unto the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my
Footstool. Are ye not partial in your selves, and become Judges of evil
thoughts? The needy servants of God and poor afflicted Saints are ashamed and
blamed of the world, they are scorned and scoffed at by the ungodly: shall we
then, that are of the same Religion, profession, and communion, join hand in
hand with them, and contemn the faithful that deserve to be honored; thereby
adding more sorrow to their affliction, and doubling the misery that is upon
them. For it must needs lie heavy upon them and even oppress them with
anguish, to find this measure at our hands, of whom they looked for comfort
and counsel. This appears in the saying of the Prophet, Psalm 55, 12.
Surely mine enemy did not defame me, for I could have borne it, neither did
mine adversary exalt himself against me, for I would have hid me from him, but
it was thou (O man) even my companion, my guide, and my familiar. It is made a
note and mark whereby we may try our selves whether we belong to the Church of
God, and shall be received into the Kingdom of glory, Psalm 15, 4.
that a vile person is contemned in their eyes, but they honor them that fear
the Lord. But the practice of many men is directly contrary, who as they are of
this world, they magnify and make much of the ungodly, but tread and trample
under their feet the Children of God, as if they were a thing of no value. The
Apostle blames the Corinthians, and notes it as a blot and blemish in them, 1
Cor 11, 22
that they put the poor to shame, separating themselves from them, and
refusing to partake the supper of the Lord with them.

Secondly, it reproves such as contemn those that have once sinned and fallen
into gross and grievous sins, and albeit they be come out of the mire in
which they wallowed, and renounce the wickedness in which they walked, yet
they always remember them to their reproach, and speak of them to their
infamy. But when once their sins become bitter unto them, and they have given
good Testimony of their unfeigned repentance, we must not be unmerciful and
without compassion toward them, Gal 6, 1, 2.
but rather restore them with the spirit of meekness, considering our selves,
least we also be tempted. The former failings in faith or obedience are not to
be objected, or they rejected with reproach after repentance. God remembers
their sins no more, and therefore we ought to forgive and forget them. They
that truly turn unto God, and repent of their sins from the bottom of their
hearts, have blotted out the stain of it before men, and must be esteemed of
us, as if they had not fallen or offended. For even as the Prophet teaches,
Ezekiel 18, 21, 24.
that if the Righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commit iniquity,
all the righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned, but in the
transgression that he has committed, and in the sin that he has sinned, in
them he shall die: so if the wicked shall return from all his sins that he
has committed, and keep all the statutes of God, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live and shall not die, all his transgressions that
he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him, but in his
righteousness that he has done he shall live. Sin indeed brings a wound
with it, but when once repentance comes, the wound is cured, and the scarre
is healed, and the remembrance of it is abolished, for God will blot it out of
his book of remembrance.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing every member of Christ must be much esteemed, be he never so
mean, it teaches us not to have the religion of God and the faith of Christ
in acceptatio^ of persons. We must esteem of the faith that is grounded on our
Lord Jesus Christ simply, according to the excellency and sincerity thereof,
and not regard it, in one more, and in an other less, according to the
condition of one above another in outward things. This corrupt opinion and
deceitful judgment is reproved by the Apostle James in his Epistle Iam 2, 1.
Chap. 2. My brethren have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect
of persons. Where he teaches, that the profession of the faith ought to be
esteemed with a single eye and a simple affection, and that partial affection
of one before another is to be avoided. Objection.
But may we not prefer one before another, and is it unlawful to have
respect of degrees among men? may I not honor a wicked man with honor due to
him, and set up the ungodly in higher place above the Godly? Answer.
yes, in outward respects every one is to be advanced and reverenced according
to his calling without respect of his Godliness or ungodliness; of his
Religion or superstition; of his faith or infidelity. For to whomsoever God
has given pre-eminence, it is our duty to yield them obedience. A wicked
father is to be honored no less then a Godly, an hard Master is to be feared
no less then a gentle, a wicked Prince is to be served no less then a
faithful. It is Gods Ordinance that has lifted them up above others. The
purpose of the Apostle is not to take away, no not from evil men their
external dignity, or to draw others to deny them duty, but his meaning is,
that we ought not to measure the soundness of faith, or the truth of Religion,
by outward prerogatives, or to conclude that such have a right profession and
true belief, because they have Riches, and are men of authority; and the faith
of others contemned, because they are poor in goods, few in number, weak in
strength, low in degree, base in birth, and mean in all outward things, which
are greatly accounted off in the world. This reproves such as stand upon men's
outward persons, and make the quallity and condition of the outward appearance
a rule to try and examine their faith and Religion. These are such as build
upon the Sand, and set their house upon a slight and slender foundation, which
is soon shaken and suddenly falls to the ground. These are such as measure
the matters of faith by the deceitful line of men's persons. Hence it is, that
if a man persuade his brother that he houldeth an error, and move him to
embrace the truth, though he be convinced by the Testimony of the Prophets and
Apostles, yet he will readily reply and answer; you are not learned, you are
no Scholar, you have not been at the University, other great men are of
another mind, who are before you in age, above you in knowledge, and beyond you
in judgment. Exhort a man in these days to hear the word with all
diligence, and to attend unto it with all carfulness, as to the Ordinance of
God, and the ordinary means to work in us salvation, John 8.
tell him that he that is of God must hear Gods word, Iam 1, 19.
show him that every man should be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to
wrath, 1 Pet 2, 2.
convince his conscience that he must desire the sincere milk of the word that
he might grow thereby, he is wise in his own conceit to shift off all these
instructions, and to deceive himself: saying, If this were so needful and
necessary a duty, we should not have so many great men, and rich men, neglect
the word: They like not this so much preaching and preciseness, we see such
are great Clearks and profound Divines do preach seldom, some once or twice a
year, others once a month, why cannot we be content to follow them? They know
their duty they read the Scriptures, they are deep learned men, they would
preach oftener, if it were required of us to hear oftener? These are they that
build upon men, and think to excuse themselves by other men's corrupt examples.
These are they that look only to others, and rejoice to follow a multitude to
do evil. These are they that are like to the Pharisees mentioned in the
Gospel, who said to their Officers sent out to apprehend Christ, returning
empty again, John 7, 47.
Are ye also deceived? do any of the Rulers believe in him, or of the
Pharisees? but this people which know not the Law are cursed. We must not, hang
upon the pleasure of men, though they be great in the world, noble in birth,
rich in wealth, high in calling, many in number, mighty in strength, glorious
in account and reputation of others. We must consider, not so much whether
great and learned men like and approve of it, as whether it be agreeable to the
truth of the word of God or not. One man defending a truth is to be preferred
before an hundredth others, holding and upholding an error or heresy, and we
are rather to believe Luther. lib contra Henr. Octa. Panormitan. Tit de elect
can. Significasti.
a poor and silly man grounding himself upon the scriptures, before a
thousand Doctors building upon humane Traditions and unwritten verities. If
these men that are blind themselves, and look upon all things through other
men's spectacles, had lived in the days of Eliah, Micaiah, and Jeremy, when the
truth of God was so often contradicted and ouerswaied by multitudes of men, 1
King 18, 19, and 22, 6.
when for one true Prophet of God there were five hundredth false Prophets, whom
would they have believed? whom would they have received? whom would they have
condemned? It would have gone hard with the truth and been evil spoken off by
the evil mouths and malicious tongues of these partial Judges. They would
have said, Eliah is but one, the Prophets against him are many, are not they
liker to see the truth then he? Thus the faith of Christ and pure Religion is
not waighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, nor measured with a just Ephah
and a true Hin, but with false waights and deceitful balances, which are an
abomination unto the Lord. In all causes and questions that rise, the word of
God must judge.

Use 3.
Thirdly, this gives comfort and contentment to the meanest and smallest of
Gods Saints, and puts them in remembrance not to be discomforted and out of
heart for their mean calling or for their low estate, for they are nothing the
less regarded of God or to be esteemed of his Church. They have as great an
interest in all Gods blessings, as the richest sort, and many times a greater;
they have as great a portion in Christ, as the mightiest men, and many times a
greater. For God Luk 1, 52, 53.
has put down the mighty from their seats and exalted them of low degree, he
has filled the hungry with good things, and sent away the rich empty. What
grace of God, what means of salvation, is hidden from these poor little ones,
so accounted off by the men of this world? They have interest in the word and
Sacraments, they have free access to come into the glorious presence of God,
to pray unto him, and to pour out their supplications before him, as well as
they that swell with riches and abound in earthly things. When God had made a
covenant with Abraham, and planted his Church in his family, he gave
Circumcision as a sign and seal thereof, not only to Abraham, but to all his
house, and commanded him to Circumcise Gen 17, 26, 27.
not only himself and his seed, but all the men of his household, both borne
in his house, and bought with money of the stranger. Whereby we see, that the
lowest of his servants and bondmen that belonged unto him, have as great right
to the Covenant, and as good a Title to the promises of God as he had; in
as much as they were assured by the commandment of God, that the visible sign
that was in their flesh was not in vain. The like we see in the Apostle
writing to the Corinthians, 1 Cor 10, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Moreover brethren, I would not have you ignorant, that all our fathers were
under that Cloud, and all passed through that Sea, and were all baptized unto
Moses in that Cloud and in that Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the
spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ. This people was
a great body standing of many members, some of them were the Elders of the
people, and the heads of the families, others were of the lower sort and of
inferior degree, yet they had alike privilege in the Sacraments, and the
Apostle five times remembers that all of them were partakers of them. This is
it that 1 Cor 7, 21. 22.
made him say in another place, Art thou called being a setuant? Care not for
it; for he that is called in the Lord being a servant, is the Lords freeman;
likewise also, he that is called being free, is Christ's servant. We see this in
the members of our natural bodies, some members are more high and honorable
then others, yet none are contemned. We have a care, not only of the head and
heart, of the hands and lively parts, but of the least and smallest that belong
to the body; 1 Cor 12, 22 23, 24, 25.
Yea, much rather those Members of the body which seem to be more feeble are
necessary: and upon those Members of the Body which we think most dishonest,
put we more honesty on, and our uncomely parts have more comeliness on: for
our comely parts need it not, but GOD has tempered the body together, and
has given the more Honor to that part which lacked, least there should be
any division in the body, but that the Members should have the same care one
for another. So ought none that belong to Christ Jesus to be neglected. He
contemns Christ himself, whosoever contemns the least member that
belongs unto him. This Christ our Savior shows, Math. 18, 6.
Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him ehat a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the Sea. As this causes contentment in the poor, so it
works Humility in the rich, considering that their Honor, Wealth,
Authority, and such like privileges of the flesh, cannot commend the more to
God, or to the Saints, but their soundness in Faith, and sincerity in life,
according to the saying of the Apostle James, Iam. 1, 9, 10
Let the Brother of low degree, rejoice in that he is exalted. Again, He that
is rich in that he is made low, for as the flower of the grass shall be vanish
away. The poorest man that is of base account and reckoning in the World, has
as great and as good a Title to Christ, as the greatest men that be. They have
not so great a portion in outward blessings, but they have as great a part in
Heavenly Graces. He that has Christ is a Rich man, he brings with him all
things else; for in him are hid, all treasures which we are bound to seek
after. He that wants Christ, Revel. 3, 17.
is a poor beggar, if he had his house full of Silver and Gold, and possessed
Mountains of Pearls and precious Stones. The Apostle teaches, Gal. 3, 29.
that If we be Christ's, then we are Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise; so,
that the poorest person that is in the Church, if he believe in Christ, is in
the place of Abraham, and succeeds him in the inheritance of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which is a greater Honor and preferment unto them, then the want of
outward benefits can bring abasement. This is a most worthy and excellent
comfort, whereof we shall be assured, if we walk in the steps of faithful
Abraham, if we repent and believe in Christ, and walk worthy of our calling.

[ I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus.] The party for whom the Apostle
entreats, is in these words both named and described. He is described, first
by relation, when he calls him His Son; secondly, by the means and manner
how he is his son, by a spiritual generation, through the immortal seed of
the Gospel, and through the ministry of the word in the time of his restraint
and imprisonment at Rome. Touching the former point, which is the Title given
unto Onesimus, he esteems him as his Son, and therefore accounts
himself as his Father. If then Onesimus be his son, the Apostle must needs
be his Father; and if Paul be his Father, he must needs be his son. For the
Father and the Son have mutual reference one to another, and cannot consist one
without the other. Doctrine 2. The same affection that is between the Father
and the Son, ought to be between the Minister and the people.
We learn from this name given unto Onesimus converted to the Faith, that
there ought to be the same affection between the Pastor and the people, which
is between the Father and the Son. The same love that is between Parents
and their Childeren, ought to be between the Shepherd and his flock,
between the Steward and the household, between the Master and the Scholar,
between the Minister and the people, between him that wins, and them that
are won to the Faith of the Gospel. The Apostle Paul writing to Timothy and
Titus, calls them his 1 Timothy 1, 2. and 2 Timothy 1, 2. and Titus 1, 4.
natural and beloved sons, according to the common Faith, because he had
begotten them by the seed of the Gospel to be the Children of God, without
which new birth, they could not belong to his kingdom. So, when the King of
Israel came to the Prophet Elisha, who lay sick in his bed, he wept upon his
face, and said, 2 Kin. 13, 14.
O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen of the same.
Likewise, John writing unto his beloved Gaius, declares that he rejoiced
greatly when the brethren came and testified how he walked in the truth, and
adds; 3 John 4.
I have no greater joy then these, to hear that my sons walk in verity. And
Paul writing to the Corinthians, touches this at large, 1 Cor. 4, 14, 15.
I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved children I admonish
you; for though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not
many fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. To
this purpose he also speaks to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2, 7, 8, 11, 12.
We were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her children: Thus
being affectioned toward you, our good will was to have dealt unto you, not
the Gospel of GOD only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto
us. And afterward in the same Chapter, Ye know how that we exhorted you, and
comforted, and besought every one of you (as a Father his children) that ye
would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his kingdom and glory.
These allegations are so many witnesses of this doctrine, teaching that it is a
most tender affection of Love and compassion that ought to be between him that
teaches, and them that are taught in the word.

Reason 1.
This will farther appear by the Reasons whereby it is confirmed unto our
Consciences. First, the Ministers of God give as a being in Christ, and
consequently to be the children of God, which is the best being and birth that
can be bestowed upon us, the word of God being the precious and immortal seed,
and they by teaching and applying it, are the Instruments, whereby through Gods
blessing we are begotten to be newborn babes in Christ, and of the children
of men, or rather the children of the Devil, are made the sons and daughters of
almighty God. Hence it is, that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4, 15.
In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. And Peter in his
first Epistle shows, 1 Pet. 1, 23.
That we are borne again, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of
God, who lives and endures for ever. So then, by their Ministry we are made
alive, that before were dead; we are made sons that before were enemies; we
are made Citizens that before were strangers; we are made heirs, that before
were Aliants.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the Ministers of the Gospel are as our Mothers, and do conceive us
in their womb, travel with us in pain, and bring us forth as with labor of
Childbed, to fashion us in grace, and to perfect us in Christ. We know the
Sorrows, the Pains, the Passions, and the perilles of a Woman's travail to be
exceeding great: so the measure of the Ministerial pains and labor is
marvelous great, 2 Cor. 11, 23
which the Apostle expresses, 2 Cor. 11, 23. He endured labors abundantly,
stripes vnmeasurably, imprisonment plenteously, the danger of death
continually. Eliah, being raised up of God to restore Religion, to pull down
Idolatry, to destroy Baals Priests, and to set himself against the enemies of
God, was at length so worn with care, so wasted with sorrows, and so wearied
in this business, 1 King. 19, 4.
that he desired the Lord to take him out of the world, saying; It is now
enough, O Lord, take my soul, for I am no better then my Fathers.

The pains and perplexity of the Prophet Esaias, made him cry out alowde with
great anguish of spirit, Esaias.
My leunnesse, my leaunesse. So Jeremy cries out, Ier. 4, 19,
My belly, my belly, I am pained at the very heart, mine heart is troubled
within me; declaring thereby, that his gripings and greefes in his Ministry
were so great, that they were like the pains of a vehement Colicke. Likewise
the Apostle, being careful to bring back the Galathians to the truth of the
Gospel which they had forsaken, says; Gal. 4, 19
My little children, of whom I travel in birth again, till Christ be formed
in you; meaning, that he endured much trouble, and sustained great pains, to
fit them and frame them to Gods kingdom. Seeing then, the Ministers of Christ
be as spiritual Fathers and Mothers; Fathers to beget us, and Mothers to bear
us, and bring us forth, we may conclvde, that the Pastors and people have as
near a conjunction between them, as Parents and their children.

But because somewhat may be objected against this truth, we will remove those
doubts, and take away those Objections, before we proceed any further, or
handle the Uses that are to be learned of us. Objection 1.
First, our Savior says, Math. 23, 9. Call no man your Father upon the
earth, Mat. 23, 9, 10
for there is but one your Father, which is in heaven: Be not called Doctors,
for one is your Doctor, even Christ. If then, God only be our Father, and no
man is to be called by this name, either we must account the Ministers Gods,
which were blasphemy; or debar and deny them this Title, which were contrary
unto other Scriptures. Answer.
I answer, Christ does not in these words forbid the denomination, but
restrain the ambition of men, as appears by the conclusion of the words,
Verse 12. Whosoever will exalt himself shall be brought low, and whosoever
will humble himself shall be exalted. Hence it is, that the Apostle calls
himself 1 Timothy 2, 7, 1 Cor. 4, 15.
as well the Doctor of the Gentiles, as the Father of the Corinthians. It is
one thing to have the name, and another thing greedily to hunt after it, and
proudly to challenge it to our selves. Besides, touching the fountain of our
first birth, and the foundation of our faith and regeneration; he is our only
Father, we ascribe it to no man upon the earth. But even as touching our
natural being, he has ordained subordinate causes as his Instruments and
fellow-workers, to beget us, and bring us into this world, and to give us life,
Exodus 20, 12.
whom he does honor with the titles of Fathers and Mother. So touching our new
birth, although it be the sole work of the spirit, and therefore proper to
God, yet because he works it by the word and Sacraments, the preaching and
dispensation whereof, he has committed to the Ministers, and appointed to be
conveyed to men by their means, he does communicate to them the appellation
of Fathers, as those whom he uses, to bring us and beget us unto God. So then,
Paul so gives himself the name of Father, as that he neither robs God, nor
takes from him the least jot of the honor that is due to his name. For it is a
common rule, that they are not contrary, which are subordinate. When one is
under another, and inferiorly ordered and ordained to another, there is a good
agreement between them. God is the choice cause, Paul is the Isntrumental.

Objection 2.
Again, the Apostle depresseth and derogateth from the Ministry, and says,
1 Cor, 3, 6, 7
I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. So then, neither
is he thar planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives
the increase. How then does it come to pass, that he does there so much
debase them, and here so greatly honor them, as to make them fellow workers,
yea, fellow-fathers with God? He may seem to be unconstant as a Reed shaken
with the wind, and to lift up and cast down at his own pleasure. Answer.
I answer, the contrariety is not in the words of the Apostle, the difference
is in the persons with whom he deals, and to whom he writes. So there
seems a contradiction between Paul and James, in the matters of Faith and
Good-works, Romans 3, 20. James 2, 24. Gal. 2, 16.
Paul says, We are not justified by works; James, says, We are justified by
Works; Paul says, We are not justified but by Faith; James says, We are
not justified by Faith only. Here is a show of dissension, but it is only in
show, not in truth: for then, in one of them should be no truth. The Reason
why they use a different order of teaching, is the diversity of the Scholars,
which they instructed, and the contrary affection of such as they taught and
informed. Paul had to do with Iusticiaries that sought to be justified partly
by faith, and partly by works; partly by Christ, and partly by themselves;
partly by somewhat in another, and partly by somewhat in themselves; partly by
the merits of another, and partly by their own strength and merits. James had
not to do with such persons, but with Libertines and loose livers, which
confessed in words free Justification thorough Faith in Christ, yet they were
deceived and had not learned, that all those that are justified, are also
sanctified, that all that are in Christ, are become new Creatures, that they
are borne anew, and walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, and
therefore thought works needless and fruitless. Thus Paul dealt in this
place. If at any time he saw so much honor given to the Ministers, as that
Gods honor was diminished, or any way obscured, and so he robbed of his
glory; then he pulled down their estimation, that God might have his right,
and be unto us all in all. But if on the other side, they were debased and
disgraced (as in these days they are) whereby the word also was abhorred, and
God, the Author of it, and the ordainer of them dishonored; they ought to have
their due, they are to magnify their office, and to be esteemed as the
Ministers of Christ. As for example, when we have to deal either with the
Anabaptists, that wait for revelations, and utterly reject the Ministry and
Ministers of the word, or with those profane Atheists of our time, who
contemn them, and count them idle and of no use, and so have no regard of them,
or respect unto them: we are to show in what an high calling God has seated
them. He says of them, Math. 10, 20
It is not you that speak, but the spirit in you. He says of them, He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me. He says of
them, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose sins ye retain,
they are retained. This serves to stop the mouths of carnal men, and
allows us to know our selves, when the world will not know us, or
acknowledge us. But when we have to deal with those of the Church of Rome, who
make their Pope a God on earth, and set their Cardinals and Clergy above the
word, we are to be taught what the Ministry is of it self, being separated from
the spirit of God; an empty sound without force, and a bare Instrument without
effect in the hand of the workman, that can do nothing of it self, but as it
is used and applied by the worke-man. Thus much of the remoouing of such
Objections, as might hinder the use and profit of this Doctrine.

Use 1.
Now let us come to consider the Uses, which are either general, belonging
jointly both to the Pastors and people; or special, belonging to either of
them. First, seeing the Minister and people ought to love as Father and Son,
it teaches them to cut off all occasions of discord and division, and to
nourish love and mutual concord one with another. It may be many occasions
may arise, which if by wisdom they be not smothered and suppressed in the
beginning, they are as little sparks that quickly break out into a flame, and
the flame suffered to continue consumes al things that are near unto it. We
must show our selves ready to bring water to quench this fire. We must stop the
Floodgates, that the streams of contention do not ouer-flow, and in the end
drown us as in the deep waters. It is a deceitful snare, and wonderful
subtilty of Satan, to cast matters of dissension between the Minister and
people (as it were a bone to gnaw upon) that so though the word be among them,
yet that it may by that means be with less fruit and profit with them. Well
does this enemy of mankind know, that where there is hatred to the person,
there can be no love to his preaching: and where there is desire of contention,
there can be no hope of edification. For whom the people hate, they regard not
to hear; and where there is no liking to the man, there will follow a loathing
of his Ministry. We see this in the example of Ahab toward Eliah and Micaiah, 1
Kin. 21, 19 20. and 22, 7, 8.
whom he hated to the death, and professes his enmity toward them, and
therefore despised the word that came from their mouths. When Eliah reproved
him for killing of Naboth, and taking possession of the Vineyard, he said,
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? So when Iehoshaphat asked, if there were not
a Prophet of the Lord that they might enquire of him, Ahab who had sold
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, answered; There is yet
one man, Michaiah the Son of Imlah, by whom we may ask counsel of the Lord,
but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good unto me, but evil. Where we
see, he hated the Prophet, and therefore abhorred his prophecy, and regarded
not to have him in his presence. We may behold this in the example of the
Scribes and Pharisees toward Paul, they could not abide him nor his doctrine,
so that he was employed principally among the Gentiles. On the other side, as
the people love the Ministers from the heart, so for the most part they profit
by them. The Apostle gives this Testimony of the Galathians, that they loved
him exceedingly, and therefore regarded his Doctrine accordingly, Gal. 4, 14, 15
The trial of me which was in my flesh ye despised not, neither abhorred; but
ye received me as an Angel of GOD, yea, as Christ Jesus: what was then your
felicity? For I bear ye record, that if it had bin possible, ye would have
plucked out your own eyes, and have given them unto me. Hence it is, that
Christ and his Apostles labor to plant this truth, and to settle this
persuasion in the hearts of those whom they taught, that they were dearly
beloved to them. When the Disciples were afraid at Christ's words, he answered
again and said unto them, Mark 10, 24
Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the
kingdom of God. So the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esaias 8, 18.
Behold, I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are as signs and as
wonders in Israel.

Thus do the Apostles write in this manner to the Churches, calling them
beloved brethren, and dear children. As we have loving words in our mouths,
so we should have loving affections in our hearts. It is a pitiful sight, and
lamentable condition, when the Pastor in any place sets himself against the
people, and the people against the Pastor; when they that should love together
as Father and Son, do wrangle together as Cats and Dogs, and are ever snarling
and biting one of another. If a private house be divided against it self, it
cannot stand; so, if a particular Church, be in a bitter mutiny, it runs to
ruin, and is miserably torn in pieces. It is a great praise of that
congregation, where they are at peace and unity, join together in the word and
Sacraments, and sing the Psalms and songs of God, to his endless praise. It
is a comfortable thing, when the people rejoice in their Minister, and the
Minister in his people: when the people desire and delight in the company of
their Minister, and the Minister in the company of his people, and so take
comfort in the sweet society one of another. This reproves those, that upon
every slight occasion, for every slender profit, yea for every toy and trifle,
follow suits of Law, and bring actions of trespass one against another,
whereby they trouble not only their neighbors at home, but the Country
abroad. These have forgotten the words of Abraham to Lot, when a debate arose
among their Heard-men, Genesis 13, 8.
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me, neither between
mine Heard-men, and thine Heard-men, for we are Brethren. It is therefore a
great shame and reproach to hear of such iarres and civil wars as are in many
parishes. It is a plain argument that there is little love between them, and
less good wrought among them. The Minister accounts them not as his Sons
and Daughters, he seeks not to win them to the faith, he esteems them not
as his Crown in the day of the Lord. On the other side, the people do not
reverence their Minister as their father, but hate him as their enemy. God is
not among such Ministers and people, but is gone far from them, and they are
departed far from him. God is 1 Ioh. 4, 16, 12.
love, and they that dwell in love, dwell in God, and God in them. If we love
one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us. The Devil is
the Father and fountain of all debate and hatred, James 4. 16.
For where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil
works. How then can we otherwise think, but that Satan bears rule among
them, and possesses the chief hold of their hearts, seeing so small tokens
of love, and so great fruits of the Old man, nay of the old Serpent, appear
among them? Wherefore, to return thither from whence we began, we must remember
the amiable names given to the Pastor and people, they must consider they are
as Father and Son, nearly coupled and joined together, and thereby stir up
themselves, and admonish one another of their duties, to open their hearts in
love, and again to shut them up, that hatred have no entrance into them, hnd
that malice do not abide in them.

Use 2.
Secondly, these most loving Titles applied to the Minister and people, show
the duties required of Pastors toward their charge, and teach them to love them
as their children, to tender their good, to exhort them to lay up for
themselves spiritual riches. Great is the love of Parents toward their
Children. If the Child be sick or wayward, they do not cast him out of
doors, or withdraw their affections from him. Hence it is, that Christ when he
saw the people scattered abroad, and dispersed here and there as Sheep
without a Shepherd, Math. 9 36.
He had compassion upon them, and showed great love toward them. We see how
Christ applies this to the Conscience of Peter, and John 21, 15, 16.
wills him to try his love toward him, by feeding his Sheep and Lambs,
thereby assuring him, that if he persuaded himself to love Christ Jesus, and
yet was not careful to teach his people, he deceived himself, and lied to the
Holy Ghost, who would find him out in his sin. This serves to reprove
sundry corruptions, and to meet with many abuses in the Ministers, that make
them unworthy of the name of Fathers, and testify that their hearts are empty
of this unfeigned love, that ought to be in them toward Gods people, whom
they should affect as dear Children. First, What Non-residency is.
it condemns the wilful and ordinary absence of the Pastor from his flock
that is committed to his care and charge, whereby the duties of teaching, and
example of life, in his own person are neglected. True it is, there may just
and lawful causes of the Pastors absence sometimes fall out, so that the
Church be not endamaged, but as far as is possible be sufficiently provided
for: as sickness Council. Mogunt. Can. 25. August: epist. 138. Tripart. hist.
lib 6. cap. 22.
of body, whereby he is restrained; Church affairs, whereby he is hindered;
Persecution, whereby he is enforced to fly; Private affairs, whereby he is
necessarily constrained for a time to be absent: but a wilful, long, and
continued Non-residency from that particular Congregation enjoined him to feed,
is evidently convinced by many Reasons grounded upon the word of God, and the
practice of the Church of Christ. The Scriptures of the old and new Testament,
do directly forbid it. The Lord says by his Prophet Esaias, Esaias 61, 6. Ezekiel.
44, 8. Zac. 11, 16, 17
I have set Watchmen upon the walls, O Jerusalem, which all the day, and all
the night continually shall not cease; ye that are mindful of the Lord, keep
not silence, and give him no rest, till he repair, and till he set up
Jerusalem the praise of the world. The Prophet Ezekiell is plentiful in this
argument, who speaking of unfaithful Levites, says; Ye have not kept the
ordinances of mine holy things, but you your selves have set others to take the
charge of my Sanctuary. So the Prophet Zachary sets down this as a great
judgment of the Lord, I will raise up a Shepherd in the Land, which shall not
look for the thnig that is lost, nor seek the tender Lambs, nor heal that
which is hurt, nor feed that which stands up; but he shall eat the flesh
of the fat, and tear their Claws in pieces. It is noted of Solomon, 1 Kings
6, 10 1 Chro. 28, 11, 12, 13, 19.
when he builded the Temple to be the place of preaching and Prayer, (which
he did according to the word of God) he also builded Houses and Chambers round
about the Temple, and joined unto it, to teach the Priests and Levites that
they should be near unto their charges.

For this cause also it is expressed; 1 Sa. 1, 9, 12
That Eli the Priest of God, sat at the door of the Tabernacle, to espy the
manners, and to answer the doubts of those that came and resorted unto him.
And the Apostle Paul expressing the Priests function, says; 1 Cor. 9, 13.
They did minister about the holy things, and did wait at the altar: He
Prosedreuontes.
uses a word of great force and strength, that binds them to a continual
residency and sitting at their charge. If we come to the New Testament, we
shall see sundry directions, importing and implying the Pastors presence with
his people. The Apostle speaking to the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20. 28, 29.
says; Take heed unto your selves, and to all the Flock, whereof the holy
Ghost has made you Ouer-seers, to feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood: for I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. The Apostle Peter
likewise exhorts the Elders, 1 Pet 5, 2, 3
Feed the Flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. The
Apostle to the Hebrews warns the Church, Heb. 1 3, 17.
To obey them that have the ouer-sight of them, and submit themselves, for they
watch for their Souls, as they that must give accounts. It is a great wonder,
that negligent Pastors reading these places, and considering these charges laid
upon their shoulders, can so easily shake them off, or so slightly pass them
over, or so soon forget them. They may seem more then sufficient to convince
them of want of love, of abundance of covetousness, of excess of idleness,
of hardness of heart, of contempt of the word, which they should teach to
others. A great and heavy judgment of God is upon them, that can pass over
this duty without fear and trembling, that can see neither the danger of
their own souls, nor the danger of the peoples Souls through want of
instruction.

Again, the Titles given to the Ministers under the Gospel, as also to the
Prophets and Priests under the Law, do urge diligence, faithfulness, and
careful attendance; and consequently, the personal presence of the Pastor.
They are called, Ephe. 4, 11.
Shepherds, Ezekiel. 33.
Watchmen, Luke 12, 42.
Stewards, Heb. 13, 17.
Captains, 1 Cor. 3, 9.
Builders, 2 Cor. 5, 12.
Ambassadors, and such like; so that, though they teach oftentimes by
themselves, and continually and constantly by others, they are not excused. The
office of the Minister is set forth in the Picture of a Shepherd, who, by
reason of the multitude of ravenous Wolus and other hurtful Beasts, keeps
watch day and night over his flock. He is a Watchman set in his Watchtower
to discry the enemy, and to give warning of the danger. He is a Steward to
provide for the Family, and to give them their portion of meat in due season.
He is a Captain of the Lords Host, to lead them into the obedience of
godliness, and to go before them in example of life. He is a Builder, to
frame them and fit them to be stones in the Lords building. He is an
Ambassador, to deliver the will of him that sent him, and to speak being
called, as the words of God. These comparisons, as they serve to teach
diligence and continuance in preaching, so they are forcible to press him to
attend upon his charge, that attends upon him.

Thirdly, the Apostle speaking of the office of the Minister, says; 2 Cor. 2,
16.
Who is sufficient for these things? When he has done all he can, and
employed himself to the utmost of his power, yet he shall come far short of
his duty: how much more, when he is ordinarily absent from his charge, which
requires his ordinary presence?

Fourthly, it is against the order of Nature, the rule of reason, and the law
of Justice, to take wages for that work which he does not perform; and to
eat where he does not labor. It is a great wrong and injury done to those
that labor in feeding the Flock, to be denied to eat of the Milk of the
Flock: to do the service, and another to receive the reward: to take the
Corn, and to give others the Straw: to sow spiritual things, and to be
deprived of temporal things: to bear the burden, and to endure the heat of
the day, and other to come and take away the penny and price for which they
couenanted. It is a kind of theft to eat without labor, and to feed
themselves without taking pains.

Fifthly, the danger is very great, that grows both to the Pastors and people,
by this sin of absence and want of attendance. For if any of the Souls which
belong unto their charge do perrish through their negligence, and starve
through want of food, they shall be arraigned as guilty of their death and
destruction. The Prophet Ezekell sets down the threatening of God, Ezekiel. 33,
8.
When I shall say unto the wicked! O wicked man, thou shall dye the death, if
thou do not speak and admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked man shall
dye for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. Heereunto
accords the saying of Christ; Math. 15, 14
If the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. The loss of the
Ierom. epist. ad Furiam.
flock, is the reproach of the Shepherd: and the peoples destruction, shall
be the Pastors confusion. And when the Pastor is absent, the people will soon
decline, from zeal to coldness, fall from virtue to vice, turn from the
worship of God to Idolatry, revolt from the works of piety, to damnable
security. Let a man withold his hand, and cease from sowing good seed, or
vnder-sow his ground by sparing his Corn, Thistles and Weeds will spring up
in stead thereof. Let a man have food withdrawn from him, and abstain from
nourishment that feeds the body, he shall be filled with wind, and fall into
weakness. When Moses was absent from the Children of Istaell but forty days,
while he was talking with God in the Mountain, Exodus 32, 1.
they committed horrible Idolatry, and turned the glory of God into the
similitude of a Calfe that eats hay. Iehoash the King of Judah 2 King. 12, 2,
3. 2 Chro. 24, 17
did that which was good in the sight of the Lord, all his time that Iehoiada
the Priest was with him, and taught him: but after his death, both, King, and
Princes, and people, left the house of the Lord God of their Fathers, and
erected Groves, and served Idols, so that wrath came upon them, because of this
their trespass. This also experience taught the Apostle in the Church of the
Galathians: while he was present, Gal. 4, 18, 20.
they kept the Faith, they turned neither to the right hand nor to the left,
they did cleave to the Doctrine of Christ's Gospel: but when he was gone, the
false Apostles entered, and took occasion by his absence, to sow Tares among
the Wheat, and to corrupt the truth with Leaven of false Doctrine. When the
Shepherd is gone, the Wolves may safely enter into the Sheepefold, not sparing
the Flock. When the Watchman is gone or fallen asleep, the Enemy may enter
and sack the City. When the Husbandman that sowed good seed in his field is
departed, Math. 13 25
the envious man came and sowed Cockle and Darnell among the Corn. While the
people have the presence and residence of their faithful Pastor to feed them,
and to go in and out before them, both in Doctrine and example, yet such is the
weakness of Flesh, the corruption of Nature, the strength of sin, the subtilty
of the Enemy, the vanity of the world, the inconstancy of humane things, that
they are ready to fall and to give over; albeit I say that he be with the^, and
conversant among them, and remain in the midst of them? If then much evil be
done while the Ouer-seers are present, much more will be committed while they
are absent, while there is none to stay them, while the Bridle is cast in their
own necks. Thus Moses proves that the people would corrupt themselves, and
turn from the right way after his death, because they had been rebellious and
stiff-necked he being alive. Deuteronomy. 31, 27, 29. I Deuteronomy. 33.
know thy rebellion and thy stiffe-necke: behold, I being yet alive with you
this day, ye are rebellious against the Lord: how much more then after my death?

Sixthly, the necessity of having the presence of the Pastor continually to
call upon the people, appears herein, because the danger of the Wolf is
continual, and therefore the use of the Shepherd is continual. The Apostle
tells the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20, 29.
That he knows this, that aftcr his departing, grievous Wolves would enter in
among them, not sparing the Flock. Besides, Satan is busy in tempting,
subtle in undermining, crafty in deceiving, malicious in spoiling, and cruel
in destroying: he compasses the earth too and and fro, and walks up and
down in it. Now, the more diligent the spiritual enemy is, the more violent
and watchful ought the Pastor to be. If the good man of the House knew at
what hour the Thief would come to rob and to steal, doubtless he would
watch, and not suffer his house to be broken down. Hence it is that Peter
says; Be sober and watch, 1 Pet. 5, 8
for your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he
may devour. And surely this is the cause, that in some places the people are
defiled with all abominations; in other places they are perverted and seduced
by Jesuits and Seminary Priests, and in all places grow cold and careless in
Religion, because they want means to guide them and stay them in the right
way, they have not zealous Pastors to stir them up to godliness, and to
drive away the Wolf far from them.

Seventhly, it is of evil report, a note of covetousness, or evil suspicion
of it, and gives great offense to the Church of God. For where there is an
unnecessary absence of the Minister from his cure and charge, he gives
occasion to suspect, that he rather desires to feed upon them, then to feed
them: to seek theirs, then them: to prey upon them, then to pray with them:
to possess their goods, then to win their Souls. We are commanded to abstain
from all appearance of evil. And the Apostle approoueth his Ministry to the
consciences of the Corinthians by this, 2 Cor. 12, 14
That he sought not theirs, but them.

Eighthly, the inconvenience is great that comes by this absence, it is the
cause of a Vagrant, in-sufficient, idle, and reproachful Ministry, and an
evident occasion of keeping out of sufficient men and able Workmen, both able
and apt to teach, and of impouerishing such as are already entered. This is the
cause of many wandering Levites, and of sundry that sit idle for want of
employment.

Lastly, this ordinary absence is against the Statutes of Princes, and the
decrees of Counsels, holden not only in the most pure times, but in the most
palpable times, even as it were at midnight, when the whole earth was
ouer-shaddowed with darkness. These appointed Conci. Antioch can. 17. Conc.
Sardi c. 14. Can si quis vult did. 39. Conc. Calsid. can. 10. Conc. Trid.
sess. 7. ca. 8.
many Cannons and Constitutions, charging the Minister to be resident in Gods
Tabernacle, not to be absent from his Parish, least he loose that excellent
Talent which God has bestowed upon him: appointing that no man should be
ordained Minister of two Churches, but limiting him to remain in that, unto
which he was first called. If any be called to another charge, let him simply
give over the former, and claim no interest in it. If any be otherwise, he
shall be prohibited from the Lords Table, and be excommunicated.

Hitherto we have showed the necessity of the Pastors presence, and opened the
reasons whereby it is confirmed and strengthened. Now it remains to answer
such objections Objections brought to justify the Pastors absence.
as are brought, to justify the ordinary absence from the charge which he
has taken upon him. There are many things brought and alleged to warrant
this absence. Solomon teaches, that the Sluggard is wiser in his own conceit,
then seven men that can render a reason. The causes that are pretended to
excuse and defend the Pastors absence, are taken partly from the holy
Scripture, and partly from natural reason. Objection 1.
First, they say it was lawful and lawfully practiced in Epaphras, who was the
Minister of the Colossians; yea, a faithful Minister, yet absent from that
Church. Col. 1, 7. and 4, 12. The like might be said of Epaphroditus absent
from the Phillippians. Answer.
I answer, first it does not appear plainly and directly, that they were the
Pastors of those Churches; rather it seems they were Evangelists, that went
from place to place, and always seconded the labors of the Apostles. For it
is to be thought that Archippus Col. 4.
was the Pastor of the Colossians, who is charged to look to his Ministry
that he had received in the Lord, that he fulfill it. Secondly, their absence
was not wilful and ordinary, but they were employed by the necessary occasions
of the Church, chosen and enjoined to dispatch the business thereof.

Objection 2.
Again, they object that he which preaches the Gospel, must live of the
Gospel. 1 Cor. 9. but without joining Living to Living, as it were house to
house, all cannot live by reason of the smalnesse and slenderness of the
living, therefore it is tolerable in some. Answer.
I answer, the want of sufficient provision, cannot bring with it a
sufficient tolleration. It does no more warrant the Act, then to do evil, that
Romans 3, 8.
good may come thereof, whose damnation is just. If there be a rouing Ministry
among us, and a wandering up and down of such as offer their service for ten
shekles of Silver, and a suit of apparel, and an ordinary allowance of meat
and drink: it belongs to the Magistrate to reform this disorder, and to
redress this mischief. Thus it was among the Jews in the Old Testament: but
this misery and calamity fell upon them, Judge. 19, 1.
when there was no King in Israel. Secondly, it is better to take some other
lawful means in such poverty of the Church, as to labor with the hands as
Act. 20, and 1 Thessalonians. 3, 8.
Paul did, or to practice some other laudable science, which will be without
offense to God or Man.

Objection 3
It is in his power to root up, that did plant: it belongs to him to pull
down, that did build: he can destroy, that does preserve. But the positive Law
of man appointed them their circuit and bounds, and consequently may order
them as it thinks, and may give leave of absence.

Answer.
I answer, that Magistrates may not abrogate and abolish Laws constituted
and conformed according to Gods Laws. Again, the division of Parishes is not
from men, but of God. For when the Scripture Act. 24, 23, and Tit. 1, 5. and 1
Cor. 12, 40.
wills Elders to be chosen for every Church, and that these assemblies
should be with the greatest conuenience of order and comeliness; it is
plain, that thereby is prescribed, a division of national Churches into
particular Congregations. For this cause Paul left Titus in Creta, that he
should continue to redress the things that remain, and should ordain Elders
in every City. So the Apostles ordained Elders by election in every Church.

Objection 4.
Again, it may be said, a man may have two Livings, being by Law united,
Therefore before they be united. Answer.
I answer, if the union be such, that there may be but one body, and one
competent and commodious resort thereof together in one place, so as one
Pastor may fitly instruct them, and lead them out and in, in the duties of
Religion, in the sanctification of the Sabbath, in the practice of holiness,
and in example of life: then it follows, that albeit it be lawful to make
this conjunction, yet it is not proved lawful before the union. It is lawful,
being made one Congregation, one assembly, one Church, which is unlawful so
long as it remains divided, and makes two Congregations, two assemblies, two
Churches. For the Minister may conveniently teach them together, whom he cannot
possibly teach asunder; as the Schoole-maister may teach the Scholars that
belong to one School, but not those that belong to diverse.

Objection 5.
Moreover, if it be unlawful, then especially in this point, and for this
cause, because he receives maintenance where he does not labor. But it is
lawful to take wages, where there is no work done, as appears 2. Cor. 11,
8. Where Paul says; I robbed other Churches, and took Wages of you to do
you service. Answer.
I answer, the place is to be understood of extraordinary Ministers, and of
extraordinary occasions, when, and where, no settled and sufficient maintenance
is established, and therefore does not prove the matter in question. And where
as according to our division of Parishes, lands, are occupied by Forrainers and
Strangers; and consequently, Tithes and duties taken of them, without any
feeding of them, it was ordained to establish a certain, known, and definite
maintenance, and besides the Minister not failing in his calling, they may be
partakers of his labor.

Objection 6.
Furthermore, it is objected, that Pastors are not tied to particular places,
but are discharged by a general teaching. It skilleth not where they teach, so
they be not idle. They are Ministers of the Church of England, and therefore
may preach in any part of the Land, and are blameless. Therefore there is no
unlawful non-residency. For God has ordained (says the 1 Cor. 9, 14
Apostle) That they which Preach the Gospel, may live of the Gospel. Answer.
I answer, they are not only Ministers of England, but of such a particular
Congregation, and have their maintenance of such a particular Church, and
therefore are bound to employ their labor in that particular place. He that
has not a particular charge and Church to care for, will care indeed for no
Church as he ought to care. For if that which is Arist polit. lib. 2.
cared for of all, is cared for of none: then he that has but a general care,
of one place no more then of another, commonly neglects all. When God sent
Jonah the Prophet to Niniue, Ion. 1, 2, 3.
he sinned in going to Tarshish. If he had preached never so duly and
diligently in that City, when God called him to another, he had not discharged
the duty of a good Prophet. Besides, whereas they say they are Ministers of
England, and therefore suffices to preach in any corner or quarter of the
Land: they may as well say they are Ministers of Europe, and consequently may
preach in any part of Europe, and be discharged in conscience of any farther
duty to be required of them. Nay, some are so shameless, as they dare openly
avouch, that they are as much bound to the Church of Jerusalem, if they might
have access thereunto, as to that people that called them, and do maintain
them. Verily, this argues little learning, and less conscience. For this were
to change a Pastor into an Apostle, a limited office into an unlimited, and as
great a wonder as to bring all the world into the circuit and compass of a
little Town. And we see it is directly against the order of the Scripture,
which calls them Ministers of such and such a particular Church; Acts 20, 17.
Phil. 1, 1. Reave. 2, and 3.
as of Ephesus, of Pergamus, of Sardi, and the rest. So when general teaching
Math. 28, 20
is Apostolical, particular is 1 Pet. 5. 2. Heb. 13, 17.
Pastoral, which is limited to a certain place. Again, it is a thing in it
self unreasonable, and to the people injurious, that they should receive
their Wages in one place, and perform their service in another place: that one
should give them their hire, and another have the profit of their pains. Would
not a man think he had wrong done him, if he hyring a servant, another should
take the labor of his hands? Or should that servant be excused, who having
wages paid him by his Master, should apply himself in another man's work? Or,
when a man hireth a shepherd to look to his sheep, will he not complain if
they be neglected, and another man's sheep fed and attended? Or, can such a
shepherd think his duty discharged, albeit he be never so diligent and
watching in looking to the sheep of another? A Shepherd has a particular
Flock to attend, which he must watch: a Servant must dispatch his work that
has hired him. Thus it ought to be with every faithful Minister, he has his
special ground to Till, his proper house to build, his Flock to feed, his
City to watch, his Army to lead, and may not wander out of the bounds and
borders limited unto him.

Objection 7
Others allege in excuse of this absence, that many of them give necessary
attendance upon their Lords and their Families, and being their Household
Chaplains, and so doing service to great persons, are forced to be absent
from their Cures. Answer.
I answer, this sauoureth of covetousness, or of ambition, or rather of both.
They have covetous hearts, and aspiring minds. If they have peculiar charges
of their own, Who compelled them to be other men's Chaplains? Or if they be to
attend upon their Lords, who compelled them to take the charge of Souls? It
was an usual thing among the godly Kings of Judah, to have their Prophets at
their elbowes to teach them, to stir them up to good things, and to keep
them from falling into sin. The Prophet David had Gad the Seer belonging unto
him, 1 Samuel 22, 5 2 Samuel 24, 11
who was with him in his banishment, and was as his Counselor, he was
retained both in prosperity and adversity with him. And it is a commendable
thing, not only in Princes, but in men of State and high place, when they
entertain such for a love of the truth, to instruct them and their families in
the knowledge of godliness: when they esteem them as the Ministers of God,
and give them (not single, but) that double honor which Gods word allows
them: and when they can be content to hear the Law at their mouths, and
submit themselves to the obedience of that which is spoken unto them in the
Name of the Lord. Yea, such as are so entertained, may highly advance Gods
glory, and do great good with such great men, and in such great Families, if
they regard to do good service to God, rather then to themselves; if they do
not flatter to please men, but deal carefully and conscionably in their
places. But such as are of high calling, may have attendance and sufficient
service done unto them by others, that are without Cures, and have no charge of
souls committed unto them: and as they are willing to entertain them, so they
are able to maintain them, that they shall not live of the Churches which they
do not instruct.

Objection 8.
Lastly, they pretend that they teach commonly by themselves, but continually
by their substitutes. They come often among their people, and teach them by
Curates which they have set in their places: and therefore they sin not by
Non-residency. Answer.
I answer, this often teaching is not sufficient, where continual
watchfulness is required. The Lord never said unto him [ Teach often:] but
preach the word in season, and out of season. He is accursed that does the
work of the Lord negligently. Iere. 48, 10. Diligence is required, where
danger is feared. The flocks that are in danger of the Wolf, Genesis 31, 40 Luke
2, 8. Esaias 62. 6.
are watched day and night. The Enemy is always at hand, and watches his
advantage by the absence of the Pastor. If they could covenant and agree with
the adversary, never to assault their charges, but at cettaine times and
seasons of the year, and bargain with him not to meddle in their absence,
they had some good pretense for their negligence, and might be ready to meet
him when he comes to tempt and seduce their people.

Again, they cannot be discharged by a Deputy, where they are to perform
personal duty: neither are they freed from blame by other men's gifts, where
they are to practice their own gifts. These are like to the Priests, Number. 7,
9. and 2 Samuel 6, 3.
who being commanded to bear the Arc upon their own Shoulders, did set it
upon a Cart, and draw it with Oxen. So ought the Ministers to feed their
Flocks themselves, and not put them to be fed of others. Some Damasus epist.
4.
compare such foolish and idle Pastors that put over their charges to others,
unto Harlots, which so soon as they have brought forth their Children, by and
by commit them to be kept and nourished of others, that they may sooner give
themselves to their lusts again. Others resemble them to a Espenc. lib. 3.
digress. ad 1. Timoth.
man that does marry a Wife, and being himself unapt for generation, or
unwilling to give due benevolence, is content she become fruitful, and made
the Mother of many Children by another Father: so is he accounted and presumed
to be as vain a man, who being espoused and married to a Church (as a man to
his Wife) does use the help of others in getting spiritual Children unto God.
Christ Jesus is the Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5, 4.
the chief and great Shepherd of the Sheep, all other Pastors are but his
Servants and Substitutes: and therefore themselves being his Deputies, they
cannot make a Deputy, no more then one Servant discharge himself by another.
So then, we must know, that they can no more be said to preach the Word, that
preach by others; then to be resident, that are resident by others: or to be
godly that lead a godly life by others; and thus they may be saved by others,
and themselves go to Hell. But as every man is bound to live godly himself,
so is every Pastor bound to preach in his own person. This appears under
the comparisons and similitudes of Builders, Captains, Ambassadors, Stewards,
and Shepherds, which we spoke of before. When a man has made choice of a
skillful and cunning Builder to build his house, the Worke-man has not done
his duty, if he put it out to be finished by another. When a Prince has made
choice of a General to lead his Army against the Enemy, he may not send
another in his room, and himself sit idle at home, but his allegiance
binds him to go in his own person. The like we might say of the rest. Thus
we have seen at large, that the love between the Pastor and people
overthrows the ordinary absence, without just and conscionable causes the one
from the other, so that if the Minister would assure his own heart that he
loves the sheep which he has taken upon him to teach, he must show it by
feeding them with the wholesome and heavenly pastures of the word of God.

Secondly, it reprooueth such as outwardly are in sheep clothing, but
inwardly are ravening Wolves unto the Flock; not careful Pastors, not loving
Parents, but such as have no provision, no store, no food, no Bread of Life to
break unto them, but seek to starve and famish them through want of Milk and
meat to put in their mouths. If they be resident and remain with them, and
yet do not instruct them, and preach unto them, it is all one as if they were
absent from them. If there be meat and drink in the house, and none set upon
the Table or given to the Children, they may dye and perish for hunger.

These idle Drones are no better then Murderers and Man-slayers; nay,
Soule-slayers, which is the greatest and most bloody Murder. For as the
Steward that should feed the bodies of such as are in the Family, and pineth
them to death, is a Murderer: and the Nurse, that undertakes the nourishing
of the Child, and yet either through daintiness or idleness, or wilfulness,
will not draw out the breast, but suffers the Child to languish and perish,
is a Murderer of the Child: so such as are Stewards of Gods house, and Nurses
of Gods people, yet feed not their Souls, but starve them to death, are
Bloud-suckers and Murderers in the highest degree. They are worse then the
Canibals that live upon blood: for these live upon the souls of men, and carry
them headlong to Hell. The Lord complains in the Prophet, Hos. 4, 6.
That the people perish through want of knowledge. Such as are blindely led,
do fall into the Ditch with their blind Leaders. The blood of such as perish
in their ignorance through want of teaching, Ezekiel. 3, 18.
shall be required at the Watch-mans hand. The Prophet David having the Water
of the well of Bethlehem (that he longed and lusted to taste) brought unto him,
2 Samuel 23, 17
yet would not drink thereof when he had it, but poured it for an offering
unto the Lord, because it was the blood of the men that went in ieopardy of
their lives. O that these men would consider of their sin, and had a feeling
of their iniquity, that they eat and drink the blood of Men, and maintain
themselves by the destruction of their souls. Suppose he lead an unblameable
life, give good example to others, keep hospitality, fill their bellies, make
peace among his Neighbors, be able privately to exhort and comfort them, and
to perform other common works of Charity: yet he has not discharged the duty
of a Minister, unless he preach unto them diligently and faithfully, and
divide the word of truth aright.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing the Minister and people ought to be as Father and Son, this
shows the duty of the people that are under their Ministry, that they regard
their Ministers as their Parents, honoring them, yielding them due recompense,
esteeming them as Fellow-workers with God, to beget them to Christ, to turn
them to Salvation, to nourish them up, and continue them in the estate of
Christ. Nay, we should account of them (if it be possible) more then of
natural Parents. Of our Parents we have received only to be; Of our
Ministers we have received to be well. Of our Parents we have taken our first
birth: of our Ministers we have obtained our second birth. Of our Parents we
have been brought into the World by Generation: of our Ministers we have bin
brought into the Church by Regeneration. Our first begetting was to death: our
second or new birth, is to Life and Salvation. By the first birth we are
Heirs of Wrath: by the second we are made the Sons of God. So then, if it be
better for us to be borne again of Water and the Holy Ghost, John 1, 13.
which cannot proceed from the will of the flesh, nor from the will of Man,
but of God: we ought to esteem of those that are Instruments of our
Regeneration, as dearly and tenderly as if they were our Parents, and to say
with the Apostle; Romans 10, 15
How beautiful are the Feet of them which bring glad tidings of pcace, and
bring glad tidings of good things? Hence it is that he speaks to the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 5, 12
We beseech you Brethren, that ye acknowledge them that labor among you, and
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, that ye have them in singular love
for their works sake.

The fifth Commandment calls and comprehends, all Pastors under the Name
of Parents, to teach us to know those that have begotten us unto the Lord, and
to note the time, the means, and the person that has brought that blessing
upon us. It has been an old and ancient custom, for men to celebrate their
birthday, Math. 14, 6.
as we see in Herod, who usually made a great Feast at it: much more ought
thou to make thy New Birth day, wherein thou was borne again and made the
Child of God, a day of solemnity never to be forgotten, and to rejoice therein
above all things and times in the World. This reprooueth those, that regard
not to hear them, nor care to attend to their Doctrine. For as God condemns
the absence of the Pastor from his own people; so he reprooueth the absence
of the people from their own Pastor. Some hold of Paul, some of Cephas, some
of Apollos, and delight more in the gifts of a Stranger, then in the
Ministry of him whom the Lord has placed over them. Objection.
But may we hear none but our own Pastors? What if they be unapt to teach,
and unable to instruct? Answer.
I answer, we may hear others, and prove many Spirits, but we ought not
willingly to be absent from our own assemblies, where our presence and
company is especially required. I am no Patron of unpreaching Prelates, I wish
them either reformed, or removed: either amended or deprived. If a man want
food at home, he may lawfully ask Bread and take relief abroad: but when a
man is plentifully stored, or at least, competently and conveniently provided
for at home, it is a shame to take the Bread that is appointed for others. Be
it that other Pastors have greater guiftes of learning, of zeal, of
utterance, then our own: yet we are bound to hear them, to pray for them, to
attend upon them, as they attend upon us. He has commanded every Prou. 5, 15.
Man to eat his own Bread, and to drink the Water of his own Cesterne,
contenting himself with his own estate, not envying the better estate of
another.

We see how mercifully the Lord deals with those of the lower and poorer
sort, who have little and the same homely provision of fare, in comparison of
others that are full fed, and fare deliciously every day, and are charged with
many Children to bring up; yet Deuteronomy. 8, 2 Dan. 1, 13, 15.
both they and their children are as healthful in body, and as strong in their
Limbs, as comely in countenance, and as well graced in their outward persons,
as they that abound in Wealth, and their Cups ouer-flow in all the dainties
and delicacies of the World. So we may be well assured, that the Lord will much
more provide for our Souls, and bless that provision that he has appointed
for us, albeit it be but mean and simple. When a man is sick in body, he will
prefer that Physician which knows best the state of his body, who is most
likely to do him most good, although perhaps some other be better learned and
deeper skilled. Thus ought it to be with us, our own Pastor, which is the
Physician of our Souls, knows best our estate, sees whereof we have need,
understands the Nature of our disease; and consequently, is best able to
restore us to health again. He that has more learning, may profit by him that
has less, may profit (I say) even in knowledge. For the Lord speaking by the
mouth of his Minister, whom he has in some measure furnished with gifts,
many times teaches the wise by the simple, and the great learned man, by him
that is inferior to himself. The Lord Jesus John 1, 29.
was oftentimes present at the Sermons of John. The Prophets that were
extraordinarily called, disdained not the Ministry of the Priests, Hag. 2,
11, 12.
but were content to learn the law of them. This is the Lords doing, to
advance his own glory, and to humble the highest Teachers of the Church. The
Apostle hoped to profi^ by the Romans, as Romans 1, 12.
they should by him. Every Congregation or Parish, should consist of so many
Christians as can meet at one assembly.

The Apostles directed by the Spirit of God, were the Authors of this division
and distinction; who having converted many to the Gospel, separated them, and
ordained them Elders, not only according to the number of their Cities,
Reasons why the people should attend their own Pastors.
but also according to their several multitudes, which are called Churches.
For even as God has distributed the Civil State of the World into Kingdoms,
Provinces, Shires, Cities, and other Dominions, and has ranged them into
several meetings: so he has divided his Church into certain and several
assemblies, for the better ordering and edifying of them: and therefore the
distinction of particular Churches, is not of humane invention, but of divine
institution.

Hence it may be concluded and inferred, that one Pastor cannot be over all
assemblies, nor all assemblies under one Pastor. Every Shepherd must have his
own Flock, and every Flock must know his own Shepherd. There is a near
band and mutual conjunction between these two. The Minister is charged with
his own people by the ordinance of God, he must attend the Flock committed to
his care and Cure, over which the Lord has made him Watchman and Ouer-seer.
This is the knot that tyeth the people fast to their own Pastor. Every one in
the Civil State knows his own City, and to what company he and his whole
house does belong. Every Company in the City, knows to what jurisdiction he
belongs. So it ought to be in the Church of Christ, every particular
Christian should be annexed unto one certain assembly, and be there enrolled
as a member of that society, to live under the Ministry and government
thereof. For where shall we rather hope to receive good, then under that
Ministry which the Lord has set over us? Or from whom rather shall we expect
the blessing of God, then from him whose labors he has promised to bless?
Hence it is that the Apostle says; Heb. 13, 17
Obey them that have the ouer-sight of you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your Souls as they that must give accounts, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Here he
adds many reasons, as it were upon an heap, to urge us to this duty. If they
watch for our Souls, we also ought to wait upon them: If that they must
render an account for our Souls, we must also render an account of their
labors bestowed upon us. If they must do it with joy, and not with grief, we
are charged by our obedience to the Gospel, and by submitting our selves to
the Ministry of our own Pastors, to Minister all comfort, and give them
cause of rejoicing in their labors. But if we sever our selves from them, and
refuse their Ministry; we grieve them, not comfort them: we discourage them,
not encourage them: we afflict them, not rejoice them. It is therefore a most
vain pretense, and great folly of such as being reproved for their
negligence, in resorting to their own Pastors; answer, that they can profit
more by another, they can be edifyed better by hearing in another place,
whereas peradventure, they regard not to hear any man, and contemn the
Gospel, out of whose mouth soever it proceed and be uttered. Besides, we have
greatest hope of receiving blessing from our own Pastor, and every member of
the same assembly, must seek the Lord, and serve him in the place appointed
unto us for that purpose, and therefore we ought not to withdraw our selves
from thence, where our presence is required. If God have put the word of 2 Cor.
5, 15.
Reconciliation into his mouth, to say unto us in the Name of the Lord, be ye
reconciled unto God, and have made an Ambassador to speak in his Name, who is
he that shall overrule the ordinance and counsel of God, or refuse to submit
himself unto his most holy and merciful assignement? Secondly, this
conuinceth and reprooueth those, that contemn, deride, scorn, abase, abuse,
and revile their Ministers.

These are ungodly and ungracious Children, that thus behave themselves toward
their spiritual Fathers, and bereave themselves of the blessings that belong
to such as obey their Parents. These are like to curssed Cham, that mocked his
Father, and heard an horrible curse denounced against him, which took effect
afterward in his season: or to those malicious Children, 2 King. 2, 24
which mocked the Prophet, scorned him and his calling, and brought upon
themselves the judgments of God. If we follow their sin, let us look for
their end; if we walk in their ways, we must be assured of their wages: and
if we imitate their deeds, we shall be partakers of their destruction. How
many are there among us, that are grown to that hight of sin, that they
regard not the doctrine that is delivered, but set themselves against the
Minister that does deliver it? These men are grown to be shameless and
impudent, that regard not the means of salvation, nor esteem of the ordinance
of God, nor desire to hear of their sins. These have stiff necks and hard
hearts, they are come to sit down in the seat of the Scorners, and they shall
have the reward of Scorners. And let all such as will know nothing else, learn
this as a certain rule gathered out of a continual Tenor of the Scriptures,
and the constant course of Gods judgments, that when once they begin to make
a mock of sin, and of the means that should recover them out of their
sin, then wrath is not far from them, but is near unto them. The more
presumptuous and secure they are, the nearer to destruction. We see this in the
people of Israel. 2. Chron. 36. 16. When once they began to dally with God;
nay, with their own souls, 2 Chronicles. 36 16.
and mocked the Messengers that the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them,
rising early and late (for he had compassion on his people, and on his
habitation) he brought upon them the King of the Caldeans, who spared neither
young man nor Virgin, neither ancient nor aged, God gave all into his hands.
This is a fearful example of his judgments, that fell upon this people for
their contempt of the word, and misusing the Messengers that were sent unto
them; to teach all men to beware, and be warned of falling into the same sin,
and return betimes, that (if it be possible) his plagues may be prevented by
timely repentance. Few that run thus far look back again, to say, what
have we done? When the measure of sin is perfected, the time of judgment is
hastened. Howbeit God is able to touch and to turn their hearts; and his word
before contemned, if now it be believed, is able to save their Souls.

[ Whom I have begotten in my bonds.] Before we heard how the Apostle calls
Onesimus his Son. In these words he expresses how he became his Son;
namely, that by his Ministry he begat him to God, and turned him to believe
the Gospel. He sets down the force and efficacy of the Ministry of the
word, and shows, that it is not an empty sound, and an idle noise of wast
words vanished in the air without fruit or profit, as foolish and frantic
Spirits do blasphemously report, but is an effectual instrument, whereby God
works the Regeneration, Conversion, and Salvation of Men. Hereby we learn,
Doctrine 3. The preaching of the word is the means of regeneration.
that men are regenerated and borne anew by the Ministry of the Word to be
the Children of God, and Coheires with Christ of eternal life, God working by
the means of his word, and by the Ministry of his Servants, whereby he
conueyeth it unto us, his Spirit being the powerful Applyer, Blesser, and
Effectour of this new birth. So the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4, 15.
In Christ Jesus through the Gospel I have begotten you. The Prophet Jeremy
teaches, That his Ier. 23, 29.
Word is like a fire, and like an Hammer that breaks the Stones. It is able
to burn up and consume our corruption, and to mollify our stony hearts, that
we may have hearts of Flesh. This the Apostle Peter speaks; 1 Pet. 1, 23, 25.
We are borne again, not of Mortal, but of immortal Seed, by the word of
God which endures for ever, and this is the word which is preached among you.
In like manner James says; Iam. 1, 18.
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be as the
first Fruits of his Creatures.

To conclude, Elihu setting down diverse means that God has, and uses to
instruct Man, and to draw him out of sin unto himself, makes this one, and
one of the principal; Job. 33, 23, 24.
If there be a Messenger with him, or an Interpretour, one of a thousand, to
declare unto man his righteousness, then will he have mercy upon him, and will
say; Deliver him that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a
reconciliation. These testimonies, both of the Prophets and Apostles, are
plain to prove, that the word preached is the ordinary Isntrumental cause of
our conversion and regeneration, and the means that God has sanctified to
bring us to be members of the Church, and Heirs of Salvation.

Reason 1.
The Reasons are very plain to confirm this point of Doctrine. First, the
word is of a most powerful and piercing Nature, it is hotter then the fire, it
is stronger then the Hammer, it is sharper then the Sword, it is sweeter then
the Honey, it is purer then the Gold: it is better then the Pearls: more
nourishable then meat, more forceable then the Leaven, more profitable then
the Rain, more comfortable then the Dew that falls upon the Herbs. It is
able to make a Blind man see; a Crooked man, straight; a Bond man, free; a
poor man, rich; a sick man, whole; nay, a dead man, it is able to make alive
again. This is a great work, it is a wonderful Miracle that God works in
the time of the Gospel. We are borne dead in sins Ephe. 2, 1.
and trespasses, without Faith, without Repentance, without Grace, without God,
without Hope, without Sanctification, without Salvation: but the Word of God is
able to bring restoring of sight to the blind, deliverance to the Captive,
liberty to the bruised, healing to the broken hearted, and life to the dead.
This is noted, as the end of Paul's calling and sending to Preach the Gospel;
Act. 16, 18.
To open their Eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus.

Thus also the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews writes; Heb. 4, 12.
The word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any
two-edged sword, and enters through, even unto the dividing asunder of the
soul and the spirit, of the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. If any ask the question how it has this
power? I answer, not by any inherent quality in it self, nor by any force it
receives from man that preaches it, but from the Supernatural power of God,
Gal. 2. and Psalm. 19, 7, 8, 13
who is mighty in the hearts of men, rejoicing the heart, converting the Soul,
giving wisdom to the simple, granting light unto the eyes, and keeping from
presumptuous sins by it.

Reason 2.
Secondly, that way whereby God works Faith in us, by the same means he
begins our new birth, and makes us his own Children. But the ordinary
means to work Faith in us, is the preaching of the word; For how shall they
To. 10, 14 17
call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in
him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher?
And how shall they Preach, except they be sent? So then Faith is by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. We see hereby, that Faith is the cause and
beginning of repentance: we see also that Faith is wrought by the word, and
therefore by necessary consequence, repentance must come by the word. Here are
three things offered to our considerations; the Word, Faith, and Regeneration.
Regeneration is a fruit of Faith: Faith is an effect of the Word; the Word is
preached by the Minister. Now, it is a true rule, Causa causae, est causa
causati
that the cause of the cause, is also the cause of the effect, and therefore
the preaching of the Word being the cause of Faith, which causes Repentance
and Regeneration, must also needs be the cause of Repentance, and of
Regeneration.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, it is the ordinance of God to work this good work of Regeneration
in us, because we cannot by our wisdom, or any natural gifts in our selves
(though most esteemed in our own eyes, and greatly magnified by others)
attain sanctification of life, or believe unto salvation. This the Apostle
testifies. 1 Cor. 1. and makes this the reason why God will save us by the
hearing of Faith preached; 1 Cor. 1, 21.
Seeing the World by it own wisdom, knew not God in the wisdom of God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. There
is a double knowledge of God, and a double way to know him: one, Natural, the
other Spiritual. Natural, by the sight of the Creatures, by the view of the
world, by beholding the heavens, Psalm. 19, 1. Romans 1, 19.
which declare the glory of God, whereby the eternity, the Majesty, the power,
the wisdom, the greatness, the goodness of God do appear. Spiritual, by
hearing and harkening unto the word of God, which not only bears witness to
those essential properties of God, more sufficiently and fully then the
former, but sets down distinctly the Trinity of the persons, and the mercy
of God toward the elect, promised and performed unto them for Christ's sake.
Natural reason is blind in the matters of God, and though it may serve to make
us without excuse, it cannot suffice to bring us to salvation without a farther
and better guide. So then, the Lord, to make the wisdom of the World
foolishness, and to gain glory to his own Name, and to show that he has
vouchsafed that grace and mercy to us which he denied to the wisest among the
Gentiles, that were learned and skillful in all humane knowledge, but were
utterly ignorant of his Word, has raised up to us a light which they never
saw, and made us to hear the sound of a voice which they never heard. Seeing
therefore the word preached is of so great force, that it causes Faith in us,
which all the wisdom of the World could never work: it follows, that this
word of God, is the ordinary cause or Instrument of our conversion and
salvation.

This is so plain, and so pregnant a truth, that it is greatly to be wondered,
that any should stumble or stagger at it, and that all do not submit
themselves unto it. Objections brought to prove preaching not to be the
ordinary means to beget faith.
But because doubts arise, and Objections are made against this point and
principle, plainly proved, and firmly established by reasons out of the
Scripture; let us see what they are, and how they may be answered. Objection 1.
First of all, it is objected, that there are other means effectual, to work
Faith, and to bring to Repentance: as affliction, or private admonition.
Touching affliction, such as lived in Idolatry, in ignorance, in uncleanness,
that favored wholly of the flesh, and nothing at all of the spirit, have bin
brought to confess and forsake their sins, and to humble themselves under
the mighty hand of God; some being afflicted in body 2 Chronicles.
as Manasseth: others, troubled in Conscience, feeling the wound of the spirit,
and groaning under the stroke of Gods judgments, Acts 9, 6.
as Paul in his conversion, have by this means had Faith and Repentance given
unto them. And touching private exhortation, it is made auayleable to turn us
to God. Hence it is, that the Apostle teaching that a believing Husband may
with a safe Conscience use the company of an unbelieving Wife, and a believing
Wife use the company of an unbelieving husband, so that the one ought not
depart from the other: he uses this Reason, 1 Cor, 7, 12, 13, 16.
For what know thou, O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or what
know thou (O Man) whether thou shall save thy Wife? So the Apostle Peter
setting down the wives duty toward her husband, says 1 Pet. 3, 1
Let their wives be subject to their Husbands, that even they which obey not
the word, may without the word be won by the conversation of their wives.
Where we see, that some are won to the Faith, without the preaching of the
word. Answer.
I answer, it is true that God blesses and sanctifies many means beside the
preaching of the word, to the good of his Children, as Meditation, Conference,
private instruction, Prayer, fear of Hell, and such like. Notwithstanding,
many that are converted to God, are deceived in the means and instrument of
their conversion. For, albeit such as are afflicted are brought to know
themselves, and to acknowledge the damnable estate wherein they stood, yet it
is not the affliction it self that wrought their conversion. The trouble that
they sustained and endured, whether it were in body, or in mind, or in both,
was sent by the goodness of God upon them, to bring them to a love of the
word, who before loathed it, and made no account or reckning of it. This is it
which the Apostle teaches, Romans 3, 20.
That by the Law comes the knowledge of sin. So affliction may lay before
us the knowledge of our sins, but it cannot take them away: it may show us our
wound, but it cannot help us, and heal us: it may cast us down, but it cannot
raise us up: it may be a Schoole-maister to bring us to Christ, but it cannot
make us partakers of Christ. It is like a sharp Needle, which does not, nor
cannot sow the cloth, but it is necessary to prepare the way for the thread; or
it is like an eating or a fretting corrasiue which cannot cure, but yet it is
profitable to make the way for the healing medicine. So the afflictions that
God lays upon us, may bring us to the sight and knowledge of our sins, and
to the consideration of the miseries which we deserve, and to the feeling of
the flashes of hell fire: but they cannot work Faith in us, nor assure us of
pardon, nor apply to us the promise of God touching the remission of sins. It
makes a good beginning, but it cannot bring the work to perfection. The like
may be said of private admonition, and a godly conversation, which the
Apostles teach may be means of salvation to others: it is not spoken to lessen
or weaken the authority or efficacy of public preaching, as if it were not
the ordinary means to conceive, nourish, and increase faith in us; neither is
it simply to be understood that they are able to convert the soul, but only
that they are good occasions, fit inducements, and profitable helps to draw
us and allure us to a liking, and loving, and longing after faith. For when a
man that is not a Christian, but an Infidel, beholds the holy, pure, and
chaste conversation of his Wife after her calling to the knowledge of the truth,
and her subjection and obedience toward himself, he may be moved to embrace
the Christian Religion, whereof he sees such worthy fruits. We have a notable
example heerof, in Ioh. 4, 39. 42
the woman of Samaria, who persuading the men of the City to go out and hear
Christ, they said unto her after they had heard his preaching, Now we
believe, not because of thy saying, for we have herd him our selves, and know
that this is indeed that Christ the Savior of the world. The exhortation of
this woman prevailed with them to hear Christ, and by their hearing they were
converted: she was the cause of their hearing, their hearing was the cause of
their believing; she was the Instrument that brought them to Christ, and he
wrought Faith in them, when they were brought unto him.

Objection 2.
Secondly, it is said that reading is preaching, and therefore it is a
sufficient means of salvation. To this purpose they quote, Acts 21. Moses of
old time has in every City them that preach him, seeing he is read in the
Synagogue every Saboth day. Lo (say they) he is preached when he is read,
therefore the bare reading must needs be preaching; yea, some add it is better
then preaching, because when they hear the Scriptures read, they know it is
the word of God; but when they hear preaching, it is men's exposition and
interpretation, and they know not whether it be true or false, sound or
unsound, right or wrong. Answer.
I answer, this objection falls of it self, and it is overthrown by that,
whereby it is sought to be strengthened. For if reading be preaching, then
reading cannot be better then preaching, inasmuch as nothing can be better or
worse then it self. It is not denied but the word (Preaching) may in a general
sense include not only the reading of the word Mark 1, 45. and 5 20. and 7. 36
but any other way of declaring and publishing the power, truth, glory, and
works of God, Romans 2, 20, 21. Psalm. 19, 1, 2. but then it is not used as we
take the word in the state of the question. For we mean by preaching the
expounding of the Scripture, according to the proportion of faith, and applying
thereof according to the capacity of the hearers. And thus they are set down
in the place alleged before, as two distinct things, one accompanying and
following the other, according to the ordinance of God, and practice of the
servants of God. Hence it is, that the Apostle gives this as a duty and
direction belonging to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4, 13.
Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to Doctrine. So
it is said in the book of Nehemiah, Nehe. 8, 7, 8.
The Levites caused the people to understand the Law, and the people stood in
their place, and they read in the Book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave
the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. Likewise when Christ came
to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and went into the Synagogue on the
Saboth day, he stood up, He opened the Book, Luke 4, 17.
and read the Scripture: then he closed the Book, he sat down, the eyes of
all of them were fastened on him, and he began to preach unto them. Thus also
we see, that when the Apostle Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, he
excused himself that he could not come to preach unto them, Romans 1, 11, 15,
14.
For he longed to see them that he might bestow some spiritual gift among
them, and acknowledged himself a debtor to the Grecians, and to the
Barbarians, to the Wisemen, and unto the unwise, so that as much as lay in him,
he was ready to preach the Gospel to them also that were at Rome. Whereby we
see, that preaching and hearing are not wtiting and reading: and therefore, as
the Apostle when he wrote, did not preach, so the people when they read, did
not hear.

Moreover, if we should reason a little farther with such as prefer simple
reading before sound preaching, how do they know that the word which they
hear read, is the word of God? For the Scipture inspired of God is the
Originals, the Hebrew of the old Testament, the Greek of the new Testament,
in other tongues it speaks not but by an interpreter; for from these two
tongues and languages the Scriptures were turned and translated by men, into
the French by Frenchmen, into the Dutch by Dutchmen, into the English by
Englishmen, and so of all other Nations. So that when we read, or hear read
the Scriptures in our own tongues, we read and hear read the translations of
men: as when this word is preached we hear the expositions and interpretations
of men. And hence it is, that the translations; even the best translations
which are among us, may be amended and corrected, according as it pleases God
to give greater sight, and better insight into those learned Languages, and as
time discovers the wantes and imperfections of them. But the Scriptures
themselves are free from all error, no weakness can be discovered in them,
they cannot be made better by the judgment of men, or by length of time. For all Gods works are pure and perfect, and no man can control any thing in
them. If this be true (may some say) that the translations of the Scriptures
are in some sort the work of man, how shall the people know when they have and
hear the word of God, and when they have and hear the word of man? This may
seem to leave them in a maze and mammering, and to hang their Faith upon the
will of men, that they shall not know what to believe. I answer, they must
have in all doubts that arise, and in all Controversies that do trouble them,
they must have (I say) recourse to their faithful and learned Pastors, whose
care over them, and love unto them, may give them hope that their senses are
exercised in the wise discerning between good and evil. Whereby, by the way
we may see, the necessity of having Pastors and Teachers, able to teach, to
convince, to correct, to instruct, to comfort, to resolve such doubts and
demands as are moved unto them. Besides, the people of God have for their
direction, both the help of comparing one place of Scripture with another, and
the assistance of the spirit, to lead them unto all truth that shall be
necessary for them to salvation.

Moreover, if we should demand of these men that are wise in their own eyes,
how they know the word read to be the holy Scripture, what will they answer?
Will they say, by the authority of the Church, or by the testimony of the
spirit? But whatsoever they speak, they must speak against themselves. If they
say by the Church, the Church also sets forth the preaching of the Gospel,
and charge us to hear the same at the mouth of the Minister. Will they say
by the Spirit? the same Spirit will lead them into all truth, and open their
hearts to attend the preaching Ministry, if they be led by the spirit of God.
Wherefore to conclude, and to return to the former objection, such as hold
reading to be preaching, or better then preaching, are either such as are
Idoll-Shepheardes that cannot preach, or idle Shepherds that will not preach,
or ignorant people that cannot judge, or carnal Gospellers, that regard not to
hear, or such conceited sluggards, as live under a reading Ministry. These are
they that condemn the Priests and Prophets, nay Christ and his Apostles of
want of wisdom and discretion, to choose the best means; or of ignorance to
know and understand what is most profitable; or of malice and envy, to hide
from them that which is most profitable, or of malice and envy to hide from
them that which is most available for their souls health. For, if reading be
better, they are to be blamed that use the worse, and refuse the better.
Surely, they would never have preached at all, if the naked reading had been
as effectual. Moreover, the reading Minister by this reason, should be the
best Minister, and reading, a better gift then preaching; yea, every child
might be a better Minister then he that preaches the word. And then, what
should we do with Universities and Schools of Learning, which are the Nurses
and Seminaries of the Church, to train up able men, and to furnish them with
gifts of knowledge. But the guiftes which Christ bestowed for the edification
of his Church, when he ascended on high, and led Captivity Captive, Ephesians.
4, 11, 12, 13.
are all preaching gifts. The want of gifts which the Prophets complain to
have been in the guides of the people, Esaias 56, 10.
was not of reading and reciting the words out of the book, but the gifts of
preaching and expounding the Scriptures. Hence it is, that God rejects those
that be ignorant, as unfit and unable Instruments of salvation, Hosea 4, 6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, because thou have refused
knowledge; I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me. And in
another place, Mal. 2, 7.
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at
his Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of hoasts. Lastly, the
preaching of the word is acknowledged and confessed to be the only Esaias 49,
22. 2 Chronicles. 15, 3.
essential mark of the Church, so that it alone is of force to work faith and
salvation.

Objection 3
Thirdly, if reading of the Scriptures be not an ordinary means to work Faith
in Christ, and Repentance from dead works, as well as the lively preaching of
them, it will follow that the Ministers themselves want the ordinary means,
because they by reading do furnish themselves to preach to others, but seldom
do hear others preach. Answer.
I answer, they want not the ordinary means from their own preaching,
though they have no other, though they hear no other. They have faith before
they enter into that calling, but it is confirmed by their own Ministry. Hence
it is, that the Apostle moving Timothy to give himself to reading, to be
diligent in exhortation, to plant sound Doctrine, and to increase in such
guiftes as were bestowed upon him, adds, 1 Timothy, 4, 16
Take heed to thy self, and unto learning: continue therein, for in doing
thus, thou shall save both thy self, and them that hear thee. Where we see, he
shows that his Ministry should be a means not only to save others, but to
save himself. And there is no faithful Minister, but in reproving, he
reproves himself; in teaching, he teaches himself; in threatening, he
threatens himself; in comforting, he comfort himself; in strengthening
others, he strengthens himself; yea, he finds and feels his own
Ministry as forcible and powerful to his own soul, as ever he perceived the
Ministry of another. The threatninges of God denounced by his own mouth in the
name of GOD, have made him shake: the consolations that he has pronounced,
have entered into his soul, and refreshed his bowels. And of this we have from
time to time to our own comfort, a blessed experience. Besides, if the Lord
would bless other ways and means to the Minister, who is necessarily
restrained by the commandment of God, and the discharge of his calling from
the hearing of others, what is that to the people, who are charged to hear the
Law from their mouths, and no way hindered from the performance of this duty?
so that they must follow the way that God has left unto them, that is; to
attend to the ordinance which he has chalked out unto them.

Objection 4.
Fourthly, it may be said, that Christ appointed reading to be an ordinary
means to beget Faith, when he sends out his Apostles into the world, to
Math. 28, 14
teach all Nations, which includes a commandment to teach them by writing,
as well as by word, and consequently implies, that the people should be
taught as well by reading their writings, as by hearing their preachings to
come unto faith. Hereupon it is, that Christ wills the people to search John
5, 39. and 20, 31. Luke 16.
the Scripture, because in them they thought to have eternal life, and they
did testify of him. And the Apostle John says, These things are written that
ye might believe, that Jesus is that Christ, that son of God, and that in
believing ye might have life through his name. So Abraham said to the rich
man, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Answer.
I answer, the commandment given to the Apostles, concerns principally the
preaching of the Gospel by word of mouth, and lively voice uttered in the
hearing of the nations, and therefore some of them wrote more, some of them
less, some of them nothing at all. But if the commandment had been as
general for writing as for preaching, none of the Apostles would have omitted
it, nor could have stayed their pens without a manifest breach of their own
duty, and Gods commandment. Now, so far as their writing was one kind of
teaching, and included in that word, the meaning is for confirmation and
preservation of that truth which they delivered and preached among them. Thus
the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15, 1, 2
I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, which ye have also
received, and wherein ye continue, and whereby ye are saved, if ye keep in
memory after what manner I preached unto you, except ye have believed in vain.
Likewise writing to the Romans, Romans 15, 14 15.
I my self am persuaded of you (my Brethren) that ye also are full of
goodness, and filled with all knowledge, and are able to admonish one another:
nevertheless, I have somewhat boldly after a sort, written unto you as one that
puts you in remembrance, thorough the grace that is given me of God. So the
Apostle John says, 1 John 2, 21
I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth, but because ye
know it, and that no lie is of the truth. Whereby we see, that they wrote to
those to whom before they had preached, to confirm them in the truth, which
they had embraced and received. They did not write to them that were wholly
ignorant of the truth, and had never heard the Gospel: but to such as they
had taught, to the end that either standing in it, they might be established,
or being fallen from it, they might be recovered and reclaimed. Thus he
commends 1 These. 3, 12
the Thessalonians, because they had kept all the ordinances and traditions
received from him; and thus he tells the Galathians, Galath. 1, 6.
That he maruailed much, that they were so soon removed away unto another
Gospel, from him that had called them in the grace of Christ. It remains
therefore, to answer such testimonies as are alleged to justify the
sufficiency of reading, and to make it an ordinary means of salvation.

Touching the place, John 5. commanding the searching of the scriptures, Christ
Jesus in the same refers them to the Scriptures or word written to correct
their judgments touching himself, his person, and offices. For, whereas they
believed not the Sermons of Christ, and the Lord Jesus could not safely refer
them to the chair of the Scribes and Pharisees, who were grossly deceived,
and maliciously blinded in that Mystery, there remained only the reading and
searching of the Scriptures, that thereby they might learn the truth of his
Sermons.

Again, where the Apostle says, These things were written that ye might
believe, John 20. it is to be understood of the Miracles of Christ, wrought for
confirmation of his Doctrine, and for strengthening of faith, as appears in
the words immediately going before, John 20, 30.
Many other signs also did Jesus in the presence of his Diseiples, which are
not written in this Book. And that this is the true and right end of Miracles,
apeareth by the Apostle to the Hebrews, where he shows, that the Gospel
began first to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him, Heb. 2, 4.
God bearing witness thereto, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse
Miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will.

Lastly, where it is said, They have the Books of Moses, and the writings of
the Prophets, let them hear them, Luke 16. This is the sum of all our
Sermons and preachings, we preach nothing out of the Law and the Prophets, but
both Moses and the Prophets, must be expounded and applied. The Eunuch Act. 8,
30, 31
sitting in his Chariot, had Moses and the Prophets, and read them as he sat;
yet when Phillip came to him, and asked, Understand thou what thou read?
He answered, How can I without a guide? Furthermore, the reading of the
Scriptures, is not here opposed against the preaching of them, but against
Visions and Apparitions of the dead, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 8, 19, 20
When they shall say unto you, Enquire of them that have a spirit of
divination, and at the Soothsayers which whisper and murmr, should not a
people enquire at their God? From the living to the dead? To the Law, and to
the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them.

Objection 5.
Fifthly, if the word preached be the ordinary means of bringing us unto
sanctification, and so to salvation; then where it is not, there is not
ordinarily salvation, and consequently no Church visible, where no Minister is.
Heerby we shall condemn many particular Congregations to be no visible
churches, because they want the public preaching of the word. Answer.
I answer, let this be supposed which is not granted, yet in such assemblies
many may appertain and belong to the Church Catholic. Secondly, the
reputation of the Church, holds them to be visible assemblies, which we are
not lightly to esteem or pass over, notwithstanding the want of a preaching
ministry, both because they have the use of the word, the administration of
the Sacraments, and the exercise of Prayer, which no doubt are auayleable,
where more cannot be attained: and because the wants of the Minister, having an
outward calling, brings not a nullity to a Church. Thus no doubt it was in
Israel, when they were without a Priest to teach them, even then God reserved
unto himself seven thousand that bowed not the knee to Baal. Thus Christ
himself teaches, that when the Laborers were few, Mat. 9, 37. yet the Harvest
was great. Thus it was in many of the Jewish Synagogues, that were dispersed
here and there among the Nations, Acts 13, 15.
where they had the Lecture of the Law and the Prophets: and when Paul and
Barnabas entted into the Synagogue on the Saboth day, the Rulers of the same
sent unto them, and said; Ye men and Brethren, if ye have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on. Whereby it may be gathered, that unless
the Apostles had com at that present, the assembly had bin dismissed without
preaching. When Zechariah the Priest, was stricken Luke 1, 23.
dumb by the hand of God, so that he could not speak to the people, yet he
continued the time of his course, and the people were present at his
ministration. The Priests under the law were oftentimes unlearned and
insufficient, yet were they not therefore no priests at al, neither did the
people refuse the service of the tabernacle, being done with their unwashed
hands. So ought we to do in the want of a preaching ministry, when we cannot
have all that we would, or that we should have, we must be contented to take
what they can give, and what we cannot have at home, we must seek abroad, or
rather with David, 2 Sa. 6, 3, 10.
We must seek with all care and endeavor with all our power to bring home the
Ark of the Lord unto our own dwellings. And in the mean season, we may pray
with them, we may hear them read the word of God, and we may receive the
Sacraments at their hands. This is not spoken to defend ignorant Ministers,
who are unworthy of the places which they hold, but to show that we are not to
separate for every want and blemish in the Church, but rather to tolerate that
which we are by no means able to redress.

Objection 6
Lastly, it may be said, that Sermons written by the Minister, and read to the
people, may breed Faith and Repentance in us, and therefore much more the
Sermons of the Prophets and Apostles. Answer.
I answer breefely, first of our Sermons written, and then of the Sermons of
the Prophets and Apostles written, and then read to the hearers, or by the
hearers. First, touching our Sermons written, if they be the right dividing of
the word, and proceed from the gifts of the Minister, enforced thereunto by
weakness and infirmity, they are to be held a preaching, and may work a
faith. This is not spoken to be a Patron of idleness, of ignorance, of
negligence, of carelessness, but it is spoken to support the weak, to move
them to call upon God to strengthen them, and to persuade the people not to
despise their ministry. Secondly, touching the Sermons recorded and read in
the Scriptures preached by the Prophets and Apostles, they are not rehearsed at
large as they were delivered, but summarily set down, with intent to be
divided and opened by the Ministers of the Church. So then the comparison
holds not, from the Sermons of the Ministers that are read to the Sermons in
Scripture, because there we have not whole Sermons, but only the chief points
and principal heads, and as it were the contents of them set down unto us.
Thus we have run over the objections that are alleged against this doctrine,
and answered them particularly, that no starting hole might be left unto them
that impugn it. For the enemies of this truth, are such as take themselves to
be wise, and will not easily receive satisfaction, Plutaran Pericle.
like unto him that was so skillful in wrestling, or rather in wrangling, that
though he received a fall, yet he would persuade the wrastler that cast him,
and the people that beheld him, that he was the Conqueror.

Use 1
Having now cleared the doubts that were brought against this principle which
now we have taught, and ouer-maistered the enemies thereof, stripping them out
of their armor wherein they trusted, and turning them out of their shifts
whereof they boasted, let us com to make use of this point. First, seeing the
preaching of the word is the Isntrumental cause of our regeneration, we learn
for the increasing of our Faith, that the preaching Ministry is necessary to
salvation. No Sons without it are begotten unto God. Regeneration is a most
needful grace of Gods spirit, whereof if we be destitute, it had been
better for us that we had never been borne. Thou must be conceived of another
seed, thou must have another Father, thou must feel in thee another byrrh
then that which is Natural, thou must find another change, and a new
disposition in thy heart, mind, affections, and conversation, before thou
can turn from sin to righteousness, and come from hell to heaven. This
the Apostle John teaches, 1 John 3, 9. John 3, 3^.
Whosoever is borne of God sins not, but his seed remains in him, neither
can he sin, because he is borne of GOD. This is the point wherein Christ
instructs Nicodemus, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except that a Man be
borne of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD.

This regeneration making a beginning, and giving us an entrance into the
kingdom of God, cannot be attained without the hearing of Gods word preached;
and the word it self cannot be published without a preacher, so that
Preachers are the sovereign means appointed of God to work Faith, Repentance,
and salvation in all his children. To this purpose Solomon speaks in the
Proverbs, Prou. 29, 18
Where there is no vision, the people decay; but he that keeps the Law is
blessed. This necessity of the preaching of Gods holy word, and our necessary
attending upon it, as upon the ordinance of God, offers to our
considerations, these three points: First, the misery of those that want it:
Secondly, the fearful condition of al such as have it, and yet contemn it;
that enjoy it, and yet make no account of it; that live under it, and yet will
not submit themselves unto it: Lastly, the blessed estate of such as have this
means and profit by it.

Touching the first, we may behold the wretched case of those that are without
the preaching of the word; they live in blindness and darkness, they walk in
places of continual danger, and yet cannot see their way, they live without
the ordinary means of life and salvation, and so without hope to come to
repentance, without which there can be no salvation. This is the estate of
Jews, of Turks, and Infidels, that are deprived of the comfortable use of the
word, and they that live in corners where the sound thereof is not heard. These
want the bread of life, and therefore must needs starve and perish. They have
not the words John 6, 68. Romans 1, 16.
of eternal life, which are the power of God to salvation, and therefore are
near to destruction. For it is the manner of gods dealing August de bono
persevere.
to deny unto men the means whereby they should believe, when he has no
purpose that they should believe, and he withdrawes from them the instrument
whereby they should be converted, when he does not purpose and intend their
conversion. It was a fearful curse when God said to his Apostles, Math. 10,
5. Acts 16, 6, 7.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the City of the Samaritans
enter ye not. Likewise, when they had gone through Phrygia, and the Region of
Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia;
then came they to Mysia, and sought to go into Bithynia, but the spirit
suffered them not. So when God vouchsafes not this mercy unto us, to wit; the
Ministry of his word; it is a fearful sign of his heavy indignation, and as
much in effect, as if the Lord should say, I will not have them converted, I
have no purpose to bring them to salvation.

This is it which is spoken concerning Israel by the Prophet, 2 Chr. 15, 3.
Now for a long season Israel has been without the true God, and without a
Priest to teach, and without Law. And to the same purpose Amos speaks, Amos
8, 11, 12, 13.
Behold, the days come says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the
Land, not a famine for Bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word
of the Lord: and they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even
unto the East, shall they runue too and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and
shall not find it, in that day shall the young Virgins, and the young men
perrish for thirst. O that we could consider of these things, and lay before
our eyes what danger it is to want the preaching of the word, that thereby we
might be moved to pity the desolations of so many of our poor Brethren, and
to fear the taking of it away for our unthankfulness from our selves, and to
magnify the unspeakable mercy of God toward us, while we do enjoy it. Great
are the plagues, and horrible are the ruins of the Church in many places. Oh,
that we had hearts to mourn for it, and to pray to the Lord of the harvest, to
thrust forth Laborers into his harvest.

Secondly, it teaches the fearful condition of such as contemn this
ordinance of God, and think it too base for them to seek salvation by it. It
is very strange, that so plain a point as this, should be so proudly gainsayed
and resisted. These carnal men will not give the Lord of heaven leave to
apoint how and by what means he will save us. Shall flesh and blood presume
thus far, and advance it self against his Creator? If we will be saved, we
must seek salvation, as it is left us to seek, and not after our own fancy.
When God has said, Give attendance to my word; will thou answer, I will not
attend, and yet have salvation as well as if thou did attend? Take heed
thou do not deceive thy self and thine own soul, and in the end find thy
self frustrate of thy salvation. How men will shift off these duties, I know
not, because I know not their hearts; but this I know, and this I would have
them know and understand, that as there is a God that will be worshipped after
his own will, and not according to our natural wit; so this must be our
wisdom, to submit our conceits and immaginations to his heavenly pleasure.
It is the first point in Christian Religion, to be learned, to account thy
self a Fool, that thou may be wise in Christ, and to throw down all thy
Natural parts at his feet, that thou may seek true and Heavenly Wisdom
of him. Thou must account thy self stark blind, and able to perceive nothing
aright in the matters of God, and in the means of thy salvation, to the end
thou may recover sight, and see thy way wherein in thou ought to walk.
Hence it is, that the Prophet says, Psalm. 119, 18 27, 34.
Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law: Make me to understand
the way of thy Precepts, and I will meditate in thy wondrous works; Give me
understanding, and I will keep thy Law, yea I will keep it with my whole
heart. Where he acknowledges his eyes to be closed, his ears to be stopped,
his mind to be darkened, his heart to be hardened by nature, before Grace and
Mercy come and make the way plain before him, whereby our eyes shall be
opened, out ears boared, our minds enlightened, our hearts softened, and our
selves prepared to hearken to the voice of God speaking unto us. Objection.
But is not God able to save us without the Ministers preaching, and the
peoples hearing? Are not all things possible to him? Is he bound and tied to
his own means? Is not he free to work as it pleases him? Answer.
I answer, he is not tied, he is free, he is able to save without preaching,
yea without reading, without the Sacraments, without Prayer. Will thou from
hence conclude against reading of the Scriptures, against receiving of the
Sacraments, against joining in Prayer? The question is not of the power of God,
but of his will; not what he is able to do, but what he has promised us to do;
not what he is tied to, but what he has bound us to seek. He is able to
preserve our life without Bread, without food; but he that presumes upon this
power, and abuses his providence, and neglects to seek his nourishment at
his hands, must look to perish: So we deny not but God is able to save us
without preaching, but he has not made us any promise to obtain life any
otherwise then as we seek the Law at the mouths of his Ministers, that bring
glad tidings of good things. He was able to preserve his three servants in the
hot fiery furnace, and did preserve them; yet he that will voluntarily and
violently cast himself into the fire, shall feel the smart of his own folly,
and the danger of tempting God. Let us not therefore think our selves wiser
then God, least our wisdom in the end be turned into folly, our presumption
into despair, our dallying with the word, into destruction. Thirdly, we are
put in mind by this means of our regeneration, to acknowledge the happy estate
and condition of that Nation, of that people, of that parish, to whom God has
vouchsafed the preaching of his word, because it is a sure pledge and proof of
his love toward them, and a manifest argument and testimony that he has a
Church there to be gathered, a people to be converted, and many souls to be
saved. For even as God withholdeth the means of salvation from those that he
does not determine to save, 1 King. 17, 1.
As he stays the heavens from raining upon the earth when he will bring a
famine, so when he will show mercy, he will send the means plentifully. It was
a great mercy to the Jews, when Christ called his Disciples, Math. 10, 6.
and bad them Go and preach to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, that the
kingdom of heaven was at hand. It was a great blessing intended to the
Macedonians, when a vision appeared to Paul in the night, Acts 19, 6, 10 and
18, 10, 11.
There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come into Macedonia,
and help us: whereby Paul was assured, that the Lord had called him to preach
the Gospel unto them.

It was a great favor bestowed upon the Corinthians, when the Lord said to
Paul, Fear not, but speak, and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee, and no
man shall lay hands on thee to hurt thee, for I have much people in this City,
so he continued there a year and six months, and taught the word of God among
them. Where the Lord tells his servant, that he had people there, whom he
meant to save, and therefore he sent them his word to save them; yea, he had
much people there to save; and therefore the Apostle must bestow much time and
diligence among them, to bring them to salvation. When God would preserve Moses
out of the waters that might have drowned him, he sent Exodus 2, 5.
Pharaohs daughter to the River, to take up the Child, and to provide for
it, who brought him up at her own cost. So when God will save a people from
their sins, and make them partakers of his Kingdom, he offers unto them
the means, he sends his word, he gives guiftes unto his Ministers, he
touches their hearts with a Conscience of their duties, and causes them to
preach unto them, that so they might be converted and saved. If God have thus
blessed us, and bestowed this mercy upon us, which he has denied to many
places and persons, Amos 4, 7.
causing it to rain upon one City, and not upon another City, so that one
piece was rained upon, and the piece vvhereupon it rained not, withered. Let
us therefore acknowledge this goodness, and walk worthy of this benefit,
least the Gospel be removed from us, and given unto another Nation, that will
bring forth the fruits of it. When the Gospel was offered unto the Jews,
Acts 18, 6.
and they resisted and blasphemed, the Apostle shook his raiment, and said
unto them; Your blood be upon your own head, I am clean, from henceforth will
I go unto the Gentiles. It had been better for us we had never had the word
preached among us, then to have it offered, and we not regard it. It shall be
easier for the Turks and Sarazens in the day of judgment, then for us; for if
they shall be condemned, that never had the truth of God among them, and knew
not what the preaching of it means; much more justly shall we perish, that
have had the Gospel taught in our streets, and brought unto our doors, and
Christ Jesus described in our sight and among us crucified. Let us therefore
take heed that the Gospel be not the savor of death to death unto us, and
that Christ be not a rock of offense to stumble at, least if we fall on him,
he grind us to pieces, and to powder.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing the word preached is the means whereby we are regenerated,
it teaches the Minister to be careful to exercise his duty with faithfulness
and serviceableness to Christ and his Church. Hereby he shall deliver his own
soul, gain glory to God, and turn many unto righteousness. This made the
Apostle say, 1 Timothy 4, 15, 16. and 1 Cor. 4 1. and 2 Cor. 4, 5, 6.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
servants for Jesus sake. The Lord Jesus himself went about all Cities and
Towns preaching the Gospel, and healing the sick. The Apostle Paul says of
himself, 1 Cor. 6, 19.
A necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel.
And thus he exhorts the Elders of Ephesus, Take heed unto your selves, and
to all the flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has made you Ouer-seers, to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood, Acts 20, 28.
It is his duty to be well studied in the word of God, and to exercise himself
carefully in the reading thereof, that he may be able to declare the same unto
the people. He must be as a plentiful Storehouse of all necessary provision,
that they may resort to him, and seek the Law at his mouth: For how shall he
be able to teach another, that which he himself has not learned? Or how
shall he deliver that which himself never received? Neither is it enough for
him to seek knowledge himself, and to keep continually in his study, till he
become (as Greenh. part 4. Sermon 4.
one says) as a Tun that will not sound being full when one knocks upon it:
but he must come forth, and preach the word of God, and deliver wholesome
doctrine, and declare by feeding the flock of Christ that he loves his
Master, and the Master of the Sheep, whose servant he professes himself to
be. This is it which the Apostle Peter teaches, 1 Pet. 5, 2, 3, 4
Feed the flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the
flock: and when that chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible crown of glory. If we do not thus labor, but loyter in the
Lords Vineyard, we cannot assure our selves to be the Ministers of the Lord,
but robbers and spoylers, nay murderers and man-slayers, who do not only eat
the sins of the people, and fill our bellies with the sweat of other men's
brows, but make a prey of their souls, and expose them to be destroyed and
devoured of their enemies. When the great day of the Lord shall come, and the
great Shepherd of the Sheep shall appear, and a great account of our
Stewardshippe shall be taken of us, we shall bear the burden, not only of
our own sins, but of all the sins of the people, and every soul
belonging unto our charge (that has perrished thorough our own negligence)
shall be laid to our charge, and his blood be required at our hands, and so
shall become horrible Reprobates in Hell, to be tormented with everlasting pains.
For even as the holy man speaking of this calling, teaches that a faithful
messenger of God, and interpreter of his will is but as one of a thousand, that
though they be many that undertake the office, yet the number is few and rare
that make Conscience of their duty to God and his people: so on the other
side, few of this many shall be saved, but be cast as notable devils into hell,
and draw with them thousands into destruction. Neither is it sufficient for the
Ministers discharge, if he teach sildom, or now and then, as at every quarter
day when he comes to reckon with them, or once a month to avoid the Law, but
he must watch, and teach, and feed his flock continually, 2 Timothy 4, 1, 2
And preach the word in season, and out of season. The greatest labor shall
have the greatest reward. They Dan. 12, 3.
that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever.
Every 1 Cor. 3, 8.
man shall have his wages according to his work. They that employed their
Masters money Mat. 25, 30.
and gained by it, are accounted good and faithful servants, but the idle and
loytering servant that would do nothing, but hid his talent that was given unto
him, was cast into utter darkness, and rewarded according to his deserts. Let
us therefore labor to have a clear conscience toward God and man. The more
pains we take, the greater shall be our comfort; the more diligently we sow,
the more plentiful shall be our harvest. If we be painful in our callings, and
diligent in teaching the people, Co^. 3, 1, 2.
We shall not need, as some other, Epistles of re-commendation unto them, or
Letters of re commendation from them: for they shall be our Epistle written in
our hearts which is understood and read of all men. And concerning those
committed to us to feed, we see by experience that they cannot live without
food, they cannot grow and prosper without a daily supply, so their souls
cannot live unto God a spiritual life, unless they be often fed, and
plentifully nourished by the milk of Gods word. When Paul took his leave to
depart from Ephesus, he propounds before the Elders his own example, Acts
20, 31.
Remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one
both night and day with tears. This faithfulness is to be found in us, as our
comfort in this life, and our crown in the life to come, always proving when
God will give faith and repentance never to be repented of. We know not the
times and seasons that God has kept in his own hand. If he touch not the
heart at one time, and leave a blessing behind him, he may touch it, and frame
it unto obedience at another time. It behooves us therefore, to use the means
to sow unto them spiritual things, and to commit the success of our labors
unto God, 1 Cor. 3, 6, 7
seeing Paul planteth, and Apollos waters, but it is GOD that gives the
increase.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing the word preached, is the ordinary means of our regeneration,
it teaches the people to look to their feet when they enter into the house of
God, and to take heed how they hear. It is not left to their own choice
whether they will hear or not, no more then it is to ye Minister whether he will
preach or not. It is required of them, that they reverence them, obey their
Doctrine, love them, provide for them, pray for them, and in all things esteem
of them as the messengers of Christ, as the Ministers of the word, and as the
overseers of the Church, yea it stands them upon, to hear the word at their
mouths, to account of it as the means of their salvation. It is great
ignorance and impiety to desire any other means to have faith, then that which
he has appointed for us. It is the great mercy and goodness of God to appoint
mortal men subject to sin and al infirmities as we are, at whose hands we may
be fed, at whose mouths we may be taught, and with whom we may talk
familiarly, and yet by their simple Ministry may have as good assurance of
salvation in this life, and of glory in the life to come, as if the Lord
himself should speak from heaven. For, the word of God is as the gate of
heaven, and he has committed the Keys thereof to his faithful Stewardes,
Math. 16, 19
That whatsoever they bind on earth, should be bound in heaven; and whatsoever
they loose on earth, should be loosed in heaven. True it is, many foolish and
faithless men persuade themselves, that they should repent and believe the
Gospel, if they might hear God himself speak, or if one came from the dead
to tell them what they should do to be saved. When Caine had conceived malice
and murder in his heart, and intended to kill his Brother, Genesis 4, 6.
the Lord spoke unto him, set his sins in order before him, and threatened
judgment against him unless he repented; but did he repent at the voice of
God, and turn unto him with all his heart? No, he fell from evil to worse,
and added one sin unto another, till he had filled up the measure of them.
All the Israelites heard the Law of God in the wilderness, and saw his
wonderful works that he showed among them, yet they believed not, neither
ceased to murmr and rebel against him. Judas one of the twelve was reproved
of Christ for his treason; so were the Scribes and Pharisees for their
hypocrisy, yet none of them repented, or at the least many of them repented
not at his preaching unto them; wherefore, it is not the hearing of the voice
of God can give us repentance, it is his changing of our hearts, and renewing
of us in the inner man, that casts us into a new mould, and works in us a
new birth. When Christ Jesus was nailed upon the Cross, they said, Math. 27,
42.
He saved others, but he cannot save himself: if he be the King of Israel,
let him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe in him. But if he
had come down at this taunt cast out upon him, would they, or could they have
believed? Or could Christ have been the true Messiah, if he had descended,
seeing it was the end of his coming into the world that he might suffer, Esaias
53 7. Psalm. 22, 17. and 69, 21.
and fulfill the things that were foretold by the Prophets? Or would they not
rather have said he was some couzener or Coniurer, some Impostor or deceiuer,
as often before they had falsely and blasphemously charged him? Or had they
faith in their own power to believe when they would, and to receive him to be
the Savior of the world? These carnal men do resemble and reason like unto
the Scribes and Pharisees, If God would descend from heaven (as they would have
Christ come down from the Cross) then they would immediately believe, then
they would no longer lie in their sins. But if God should with his dreadful
and terrible voice speak unto us, we were not able to appear before him, nor
to abide the hearing of it, but should be swallowed up with fear, and stand
amazed as dead men.

When God spoke unto the Children of Israel in the Mount, they fled from
him, and could not endure his presence, they stood a far off, and cried unto
Moses, Ex. 20, 18, 19.
Talk thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God talk with us, least we
die. Shall we then in the foolishness and pride of our own hearts challenge the
Lord to come forth unto us, and presume to settle our selves to enter talk
and communication with him, when the earth quaketh at his voice, and trembles
under him? When the Mountains are removed before him, Esaias 6, 2.
and the Angels cover their faces from him? If we will not believe the preachers
of the word, nor content our selves with this ordinance of God, but would
have either revelation from Heaven, or the presence of God, or the person of
Christ, or the glory of an Angel, or the appearaunce of the dead, or we know
not what, we shall never be partakers of the benefits of Christ, we shall
never receive to believe, we shall never have the grace of regeneration
bestowed upon us. God has not left us to the preaching of Angels, but to the
Ministry of men. If we will not yield obedience to the voice of God speaking
to us in his Ministers, we would not regard his own immediate voice thundering
down upon us, nor believe if a damned soul or ghost shall come out of hell to
preach unto us. If we will not believe Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16, 31.
we would not believe, though one came unto us from the dead. Wherefore let us
leave this vanity, and in a conscience to God, and obedience to his ordinance,
in a love to our own souls, and desire of our own salvation, let us every one
be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath.

Now, to the end we may hear aright, Three things required to be good hearers
of the word of God.
three things are required of us; Preparation, Attention, and Meditation,
joined with practice. Preparation before we hear; Attention in the time of
hearing; Meditation and practice, after our hearing. When Christ had propounded
the parable of the Sower and the seed, in the end he gathered from thence this
note, and draws this conclusion and admonition; Luke 8, 18.
Take heed how ye hear. For some present themselves to the Ministry of the
Word, for form and fashion, for company and custom, without conscience;
others think it enough to be present, howsoever they be affected in the
hearing, or moved after the hearing. It is therefore necessary that we should
be prepared before we come: Now to this preparation, three things are
necessary; Faith, Fear, and Desire: first, we must have Faith, without which,
the Word is as a dead Letter without life, and as an empty sound without power:
and if we do not give credit unto it, Heb. 6, 4, 2.
it cannot profit the hearers. Secondly, we must come with fear, that we may
fear God in his word, and avoid the breach of it. For the Lord has Esaias 66, 2.
respect unto them that are of humble and contrite hearts, and tremble at his
word. We must set our selves Act. 10, 33.
in the presence of God, and hear as if we saw him present before us, and so
receive the word as from Christ himself, the Teacher of his Church.

Thirdly, we must come with good stomachs, as unto a feast prepared for us, we
must hunger and thirst after the word to feed our empty Souls, desiring it,
and longing after it, as does the dry ground after the Dew of heaven, and the
shewers of Rain. This the Apostle Peter teaches; 1 Pet. 2, 2.
Desire the sincere Milk of the word of God, that ye may grow thereby. He
that thinks himself full before he come to the Lords house, is no fit Guest
to be partakers of his dainty fare. In hearing the word, we must be attentive,
and intentive to that which we hear. As we are present in body, so we must be
present in mind. God opened the heart of Lydia, to attend to those things that
were delivered by Paul. This is very profitable Three benefits of attention.
many ways, and helps as a Sovereign remedy against the rouing cogitations
of the mind, against the entertaining of other actions of another Nature, and
against the loathsomeness and weariness, that for the most part accompanyeth
the most holy things of God. First, we are subject to inconstancy and lenity
of mind, our hearts are ready to wander and go astray from the present work
in hand, and oftentimes are carried away from the best matters, so that we
neither remember where we are, nor consider what we do, nor endeavor to profit
as we ought.

Secondly, it avails against those deceits and destructions, whereby we
entertain other actions of piety, which withdraw us from the present occasion
and duty of hearing required of us. For some think they do God good service,
when they offer unto him no bettet then a will worship, which is abominable
before him. Hence it is, that many think it enough to be present with the
assembly, and regard not how they be occupied, so that whlie the Congregation
is employed one way, they are employed another, and while it performs a
public action, they are exercised in some private devotion: as for example,
when the Church is hearing, they are praying: or when the Church is praying,
they are reading. This is to offer the Sacrifice Eccle. 4, 17.
of Fools. For the public actions of the Church, must be publicly attended
of all the assembly, and there is neither time nor place unto any thing that
is private or proper to one, or to few. For the Minister being a a public
person, is always either the mouth of God, or the mouth of the the people: the
mouth of God to speak unto us from him, and to deliver the word in his name;
the mouth of the people and Congregation, to speak unto the Lord for us, so
that the action is common to the whole Church. So then, it cannot stand with
the rules of the word, and the comely order that God has left to his Church,
that in the time of public prayer, of hearing the preaching, of receiving the
Sacraments, of singing of Psalms, any should exercise and busy themselves
otherwise, then as the whole assembly does, in their private reading, or in
private prayer, or in private meditation, thereby seuering themselves in
devotion and action from their brethren, with whom they have joined themselves
in bodily presence. Our Savior Christ speaking of private Prayer, gives this
direction; Math. 6, 6.
When thou prayest, enter into thy Chamber, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray unto thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly. For it is a manifest contempt of the ordinance of
God, a disdaining of our Brethren, and a dividing of our selves from the
Communion of Saints, to worship God in public place alone by our selves, and
it were better for us to hearken, then to wander; and to use our ears then our
eyes. Thirdly, this earnest attention helps against the common disease of
weariness and irkesomenesse of hearing, whereby it falls out, that we sit in
our Seats as men placed upon Thorns; impatient, discontent, moving hither
and thither, and angry that we are detained so long from that which we more
desire. If we would examine our own hearts, how earnest oftentimes we are,
and not in following our own vanities and idle pastimes (to note them with no
worse Title) that we can spend whole days and nights in them without
tediousness: it might worthily make us ashamed, not to be able to stay and
abide an hour or two in the house of God, for the increase of our Faith, and
the furthering of our salvation.

Hence it is, that we make such have to be gone, and think every minute and
moment of time an hour, till we depart: we abide not the Prayer after the
Sermon, to crave of God his blessing upon our hearing, which as it is a
necessary part of the Ministers duty, so the people with all reverence and
humility ought to join therein. For he that will not wait and stay to crave
the blessing of God, does carry home with him to his house, the curse of God,
and never profits by that which he has heard. After our hearing, is required
Meditation and practice of that which we have heard, that we may be bettered
in judgment, in knowledge, in affection. We should be careful Psalm. 119, 11
24.
to remember it, to ponder upon it, to lay it up in our hearts, and to frame
all our doings by it. There is a double use and benefit of Meditation. It
serves us against the negligence and security of those, that hold the Word no
longer in the mind, then the sound is in the ears, and remember the
instructions no longer, then they abide in the Church, like riuen and rotten
Vessels, that leake and let out the liquor as fast as they received it. For
they are no sooner dismissed, and risen from their seats, but their hearts are
strayed, and their tongues applied after earthly; nay, after profane things,
according to their several affections and vain delights.

Again, it helps more deeply to imprint in our minds, and engraue in our
memories, that Doctrine which we have heard, and it furthereth us in a wise and
profitable application of every point taught unto our selves. He proves the
best Scholar that thinks often upon his Lesson, after he has had it. And
touching practice, which is the end of our hearing, preparation, attention, and
meditation, Christ himself has said; Luke 11, 28. James 1, 22. Psa. 119, 105
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. Likewise the
Apostle James, pronounces those only to be blessed, Which are not forgetful
hearers, but doers of the word. So then it is plain, that the end of hearing
is not vain speculation, or a bare knowledge of the will of God, but a care to
obey it and perform it. For which cause the word is called a light for our
paths, and a Lantern for our steps, to the end we should walk in it, and
live by it, and seek direction from it.

Use 4.
Lastly, this Doctrine gives good direction to such as have authority, either
to ordain and appoint fit persons, or to present them to certain places. For
seeing the regeneration of man is wrought by the preaching of the Word, it
teaches the ouer-seers of the Church to look to their office, and to take
heed that they do not rashly lay their hands upon ignorant and vn-sufficient
persons, or such as are scandalous and loose Livers, and then thrust them upon
the people to look to their Souls, which are not worthy to feed their
Cattle, or to wipe their shoes. The Apostle gives this rule to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5, 22
Lay hands suddenly on no Man, neither be partaker of other men's sins, keep
thy self pure. Moreover, he would not 1 Timothy 3, 10
have the Deacons to have the office of attending on the poor, unless they
were first tried and examined, and after trial approved, let them (says he)
first be proved, then let them Minister, if they be found blameless: therefore
much rather ought the Ministers themselves to be proved, before they be
approved, as the calling is higher, and the danger greater, if they be found
unfaithful and unworthy. They must not be carried away by friendship or
favor, or Letters of commendation, but approved only of such as are apt to
teach, and unblameable in life. The Apostle gives this as an unchangeable rule
never to be broken, 1 Timothy 3, 2. 3. and Tit. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9.
A Bishop must be unreprovable, apt to teach, not given to Wine, no striker,
not given to filthy lucre, etc. For when an unfit man contrary to this order,
is put into the Ministry, he is as much to be reproved that does admit him, as
he that does present him, and as he that is represented and admitted, seeing he
makes himself partaker of his sins. But to pass this over, let us come to
such as are Patrones, and have the bestowing of Church-liuings, it stands
them upon to make choice of all Teachers, that may bring the people to Faith
and repentance, least it come to pass through their means that the people be
untaught, and least the Prophet complain of them, as he did of the chief
Rulers and Leaders after their return from Captivity, when every one sought
their own private profits and pleasures, but had no time, or at least would
spare no leisure to provide for the setting up of the Temple of God; Hag. 1, 4.
Is it time for your selves to dwell in your Fielde-houses, and this House lie
wast? This offense and abuse, comes from three chief heads, and issues from
three Fountains, for it proceeds partly from ignorance; partly from
carelessness; and partly from covetousness. By ignorance, when they know not
what care is committed unto them, and what trust is reposed in them. By
negligence, when they feel not the greatness of the sin, nor consider the
injury offered to others, but suffer themselves to be drawn and overcome by
affection, or kindred, or other men's suites, to bestow sufficient places upon
vn-sufficient persons. By covetousness, when they reserve a portion or pension
to themselves, and when they so pare it and share it from the incumbent, that
they sequester the greatest benefit of the Benefice for themselves, Judge 17.
and bestow ten Shekles and a suit of apparel by the year to another, to
bear the name and to serve the Cure. These bestow as much upon their
Horse-keeper to keep their Horses; as upon the Minister that has the charge
of Souls. If ignorance be the cause. I would in the Name of God, and in
reverence to their high places and callings, crave liberty to use a word of
Exhortation unto them, to beseech them to give me leave to put them in mind,
and to be content to learn how they came by this right and authority to be put
into their hands. After that the bounds and limits were assigned to every
Parish, and several Churches were appointed for several Ministers, and Lands
and livings bestowed for their maintenance, to the end that every one should
keep his own, and no man to intrude upon the right of another, nor rob the
Church of that which was given, there were certain temporal men chosen,
Marcil patau. desens. pac. part. 2. cap. 14.
either by godly Kings, or by such as had endowed those Churches and given
them Lands, to be Patrones of those Churches, who might be able and ready to
defend the Church rightes and privileges, to the end the Pastors themselves
should with more conuenience and less encumbrance, apply their vocations. It
was thought unfit for them to follow suites of Law, whereby their studies might
be distracted, and so the people should not be instructed: and besides, those
holy men, resembling Christ, and employed in the service of the Church, would
not be contentious in the law to strive with any: whereby we see they are
called Patrones, because they were appointed by the first Doners, to defend the
right of the Donation against all Intruders and Incroachers upon their gifts,
and to protect the Church-liuings from the injuries and insolences of covetous
and contentious men. They were not appointed by the first institution to bestow
Church-liuings (as now they do) but to patronize the right of the Lands
consecrated to the Church. Afterward, they were allowed to nominate the
Minister, that the burden that lay upon them might be the better borne, and
that the trouble might be eased with some honor. Seeing therefore they have as
men of trust, the right of Patronage and presentation put into their hands, and
may not only defend the place, but name the person, let them be careful to
discharge the trust that is reposed in them, and show themselves worthy of that
power and privilege committed unto them. Again, let them consider that it is
a great calling and of great importance, and therefore great gifts are
required for the execution of it. It has annexed unto it the charge of Souls,
and therefore is not slightly to be passed over.

Ignorance shall excuse no man, Luke 12, 48
He that knows not his Masters will, shall be beaten with fewer stripes:
but wilful ignorance of such as do not know, nor will not know, is a double
sin. This is not spoken with any malice or hatred to their persons, but in a
desire of their good, and a love to the people, so that we say no otherwise of
such Patrones, then Christ did of his persecutours; Luke 23, 34
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. If negligence and
carelessness be the cause of this offering of unworthy persons to be the
Ouer-seers of the Church, then Babbin. Preface before Com.
I crave humbly and heartily the wise consideration of these profitable
Meditations. The Lord threatens to the Watchman death, that warns not his
hearers, Eze. 3, 17, 18
and says, he will require their blood at his hand. If then God have made me,
or the people has chosen me, or the Church has suffered me to be a Patron, I
ought thus to reason: If I negligently place such a one, as for want of ability
cannot, or for want of conscience, will not give warning, and admonish the
wicked of their sins, can I want my portion in the wrath of the Lord that is
threatened against all such defaults? Christ Jesus teaches, that it is a sign
of love John 21, 15
to him in the Minister to feed his Sheep, to feed his Lambs: if then I be
a Patron of any place, I must think that it is a token and witness of my
love to Christ, if I cause his Sheep and Lambs to be fed. And if it be want
of love in the Minister, when he does not feed, but fleese the Sheep; when he
does not teach, but starve them; is it not so in me, if through my sluggishnes
and sin it so come to pass? It is a great sin to lay hands rashly to admit
any into the ministry, and thereby to give that worthy calling to an unworthy
man: and is it no offense in me being Patron, to bestow the Living upon such
a one? If he be to be blamed that gives institution and induction, he cannot
be excused that gives the presentation. It is noted by the Evangelist; Math.
9, 36.
that when Christ saw a great multitude of people gathered together from all
quarters, he had compassion upon them, because they were as Sheep without a
Shepherd.

The word used in that place, is of great force, derived of a word that
sigfieth the Entrals, the Bowels, and inward parts; expressing thereby, as it
were an aching of his head, or a yerning of his Bowels, to see so pitiful a
sight, so doleful a spectacle. If then there belong unto me the right of a
Patronage, and presentation to any Living, I must thus consider, if I be led by
the Spirit of Christ, or have any zeal of his glory, or care of the salvation
of his people in me. I must show mercy and compassion to those Souls that are
so dearly bought and purchased, even by the precious blood of Christ. If we
have an house to build, we will not admit of every Workman that offers his
help, or is commended to us by others, or will labor best cheap: but we will
make choice of the most expert and sufficient. And shall we then choose or
commend to the building of the Spiritual house of God, every Cobbler and
Bungler, insufficient persons; 1 Kin. 12 31
either Ieroboams Priests, that were of the lowest of the people, 1 Samuel 2, 17.
or such as Elies Sons, who were the leudest of all the people? When the
Tabernacle of God was to be builded, they took not tag and rag from among the
refuse of the Congregation, Exodus 31, 3.
but such as were filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding,
in knowledge, and in all workmanship. If covetousness be the cause of placing
such blind guids, which is as great an ouer-sight, as to set a blind man to be
a Watchman, or a dumb man to be a Messenger, or a Lame man to be a Post, or a
deaf man to be a Judge: we must observe, that the Lord compiaineth in the
Prophet; Mal. 3, 8.
that he was spoiled and robbed when the Tithes and offerings were taken away
from the true use, and from the right Owners, and therefore would visit it with
a grievous plague and heavy judgment. The Jews in the Gospel allege it unto
Christ, as an Argument of love to them and their Nation, that the Centurian,
whose Servant was sick, Luke 7, 5.
had built them a Synagogue: so that on the otherside, they would have branded
him with the note of hating them and their Nation, if he had spoiled the
Synagogue, or taken away the privileges belonging unto it. The Prophet David
(as we heard before) would not drink 1 Chronicles. 11 16.
of the Water of Bethleem, because it was gotten with the danger of some few
men's Temporal lives: Ought not this to teach a great conscience to every one,
to take heed that he do not eat and drink that which hazzardeth the Souls
and bodies of many of their Brethren, and to make them afraid to cloth
themselves and their families, by leaving the people naked to their enemies, to
be a pray unto them, and to be destroyed by them? It is noted as a thing worthy
of note and memory Possid. in vita August. 10. 24.
in the life of S. Austine, that he sharply rebuked and reproved a Gentleman
in his time, for re-calling and taking away his own gift, which before he had
given to the maintenance of his Church: how much more would he have been
offended if he had lived in our days (wherein many are as friendly and
favorable to the Ministry, as the East wind is to the fruits of the earth)
and how much more severely would he have censured those Caterpillars and
Cormorants, that take away by injurious customs and corruptions the
maintenance of the Church, which neither they nor their Fathers have given? The
ancient Romans by the light of Nature (as Liuy Decad. 5. lib. 2
testifies) disliked and checked Qu. Fuluius Flaccus, because he had uncovered
a part of Iunoes Temple, to cover another Temple of Fortune with the same
Tiles; they told him that Pirrhus or Hanniball would not have done the like,
and that it had bin too much for him to have done it to a private Citizens
house, being a place far inferior to a Temple, and in conclusion, forced and
compelled him to send home those Tiles again, by a public decree of the
Senate. Let those things be duly waied, and make these men ashamed to come
behind the Heathen, who did more to their Idols, then they will do for the
honor of the true God. If they be not hewn out of Oaks, and have hearts of
Flint, let them open their eyes and behold the oppressions of the Church, and
the pulling away in whole or in part, the provision appointed for the Pastor,
whereby it comes to pass, that many places want the preaching of the Word,
and many Souls perrish for the want thereof.

When the 1 Samuel 6, 3.
Philistims sent home God's Ark from them, they sent it not back empty, they
returned it not without a gift. When Zaccheus repented of his injurious
dealing, Luke 19, 8.
he offered to restore foure-folde. If these Church-pollers, who have robbed
the Church, and enriched themselves with the spoils thereof, will not restore
that which they have wrongfully taken, and make up the breaches which they have
wastfully made, being without the fear of God, and any fruit of true
Religion, they shall in the end receive judgment according to their works,
and in the mean season, their own consciences shall sting and torment them.
It goes indeed hard with the poor Church that is oppressed, and it groneth
and sigheth under the burden of her oppression: yet in the end, when the Lord
cheefe-Iustice of Heaven and Earth shall pronounce sentence against them, it
shall be known that they, who oppress others, do August. epist. 211.
more hurt themselves, then those whom they oppress; in as much as the sorrow
and smart of the oppressed have an end, but the woe and torment of the
oppressor shall be everlasting, because he heapeth unto himself wrath,
against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.

11 Which in times past was to thee unprofitable, but now very profitable, both
to thee and to me.

12 Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him; that is, mine own
Bowels.


The order of the Words.
HItherto we have heard the chief matter of this Epistle propounded and
amplified: Now let us see how it is proved and confirmed. The matter handled,
is; that Onesimus should be received and entertained again by his Master.
This is first strengthened, and then concluded. To effect his purpose, Paul
draws diverse reasons; some taken from Onesimus; others, from the Apostle
himself. From Onesimus in the eleauenth verse, because he should find him very
profitable and serviceable, which is amplified by the contrary, albeit he have
been unprofitable and unthrifty unto thee. The reason may be thus framed; If
he will prove profitable unto thee, then thou ought to receive him, least
thou be found an enemy to thine own profit: But he will prove profitable unto
thee, Receive him therefore.


This has included in it, the force of a close and secret Objection. Objection.
For Philemon might object, I have found him hurtful: why then should I
receive into my House as a member of my Family, that Servant which will cause
more harm, then bring profit: I have had experience of the damage that he has
done me, what homage he will do me, I know not. Answer.
To this the Apostle makes a double answer; first, by granting, then by
correcting that which he had granted, and both ways, by comparing the time
past with the time present; the time before he embraced Religion, with the time
of his conversion: as if he should say; true it is, and I grant he was once
vnprofible to thee, for while he was unfaithful to God, he could do no
faithful service unto thee: but why do thou urge the time of his ignorance?
And why do thou consider so much what he has been? For now he is become a
new man, he has tasted of the true Religion, he has learned to know God, to
know himself, to know thee, and to know me. To know God, his merciful
Creator; to know himself, a wretched Sinner; to know thee, his loving
Master; to know me, his spiritual Father; whereas in former times he was
ignorant of all these. As he regarded not to know God, so he could not regard
thy good: but now thou shall receive a new Onesimus, a new Servant, a new man,
the same in substance, but renewed in quality, and altered from the Crown of
the head to the sole of the foot. He was not before so unprofitable, but now
thou shall find him as profitable unto thee, as I have found him both diligent
and dutiful unto me, in my bonds and imprisonment.

The reasons taken from the Apostle himself, are of two sorts: first, from his
action of sending him: secondly, from the Communion and fellowship which Paul
had with Philemon. The first, touching his present sending of his Servant
back, is propounded, and then the objections that might be alleged, are
prevented. The reason may thus be concluded; If I have sent him back again,
then thou ought to receive him at my hands. But I have sent him back again
unto thee, Verse 12. Receive him therefore.


The meaning of the words.
This is the reason: the preventing of the Objections is in the three Verses
following, which come afterward to be considered.

This is the order of the words, it remains breefly to unfold the meaning
and Interpretation of the^. When he says of Onesimus; That he was in times
past unprofitable: he means in the time of his ignorance, before his
conversion, before his calling by the preaching of the Gospel, and before he
came to the knowledge and understanding of true Religion. By [ Vnprofitable] we
must understand, lewd, untrusty, unfaithful, stubborn, dissolute, and every
way carnal. Again, when he says [ But now] he means since his conversion,
and since a new birth was wrought in him, he is made [ Profitable] that is;
honest, helpful, dutiful, faithful, serviceable, so that he opposes and
compares the State and condition of Regenerate Onesimus, with the State and
condition of unregenerate Onesimus, and makes the one contrary to the other.
When he wills Philemon to receive him, he means to grace and favor,
forgiving and forgetting his former faults and bad dealing. Lastly, when he
calls Onesimus his own Bowels; he means as dear to him, as his own
Bowels; who, although he were a poor Slave and abject Servant by calling, and
a Fugitive and Runna-grate by his former condition, yet now greatly beloved of
the Apostle, even as himself. As if he should say; If thou love me, account
of him no other-wise then thou do of me, entertain him as mine own heart,
receive him as my Son, and as if he were begotten of mine own bowels.

Diverse points to be observed
In these two Verses, containing two reasons, to persuade Philemon to receive
his Servant, being made much better by his departure from him, we are to
observe diverse points, worthy of our diligent observation, and of our
careful consideration. First, we are to mark, how the Apostle, speaking of
the offense of Onesimus, and of his former State before his conversion, does
mittigate the greatness of his sin, by the mildness of the word. For
whereas he might have called him, a Thief, a Rogue, and a Runna-gate, he
does allay it, and express it under a gentler Name, (as we shall see better
afterward) to teach us, that when we have to do with Sinners that are converted
unto Christ truly, and have repented of their sins unfeignedly, we should
deal favorably with them, we should not rack and stretch their offenses, but
after a sort, cover them with the cloak of charity, and bury them in the Grave
of forgetfulness. Secondly, we may observe how the Apostle speaking of his
Conversion and Regeneration, does set it out to the full, not only that
Philemon should be persuaded, but that Onesimus might be comforted. Wherefore
he does not only say that he was become profitable, but very profitable, or
exceeding profitable. And he adds; not only very profitable to Philemon, but
to himself, even to them both; whereof Paul had experience already, Philemon
should have hereafter: which teaches us to use all good and loving means, to
strengthen such as are newly converted, and to remember for their comfort and
encouragement, such good things as appear to have been in them, not to
diminish or lessen them, but fully to express and declare them to others, that
God may be glorified in their calling, and they themselves may be strengthened
in all well doing.

Thirdly, we see in the strength of the first reason, that men are greatly
moved to do any thing by hope of receiving profit and commodity. It is an
Argument not only to induce profane and ungodly men to commit wickedness,
but to persuade the godly and faithful to follow holiness of life. Whatsoever
is offered unto us under the Title of profit, does carry with it a certain
force and power to lead us to the practice of it: whereby we ought to learn,
that in moving men to well doing, we may lawfully lay before them the hope of
Heaven, and assurance of profit; yea, all men for their better encouragement in
the works of godliness, may have respect to the profit of their labor, and
the recompense of reward. True it is, the glory of God, and the discharge of
our duty, ought to be the principal means to move us, but the consideration
of our own profit should not be neglected. Hence it is that the Apostle Tit.
3, 8, 9.
moving all that have believed, to be careful to show forth good works,
adds; These things are good and profitable unto men: on the other side,
remoouing them from foolish questions, and Genealogies, and contentions, and
brawlings about the Law: he concludes, for they are unprofitable and vain. So
the Apostle declaring the wonderful Faith of Moses, who refused to be called
the Son of Heb. 11, 26.
Pharoahs Daughter, chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God,
and esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Aegipt,
shows, that he had respect to the recompense of the reward.

Fourthly, Paul's sending is made a reason for Philemons receiving, and he
concludes, that he is to be received of his Master, because he is sent
back by Paul himself. For seeing Onesimus returned not of his own accord,
or through compulsion of others, or through danger of law, or through fear of
punishment, but by the purpose and appointment of Paul, and came not again
empty, but laden with letters of commendation; it serves highly to set forth
the matter. To present himself in this sort before his Master, by the
direction and advise of Paul, was more then if he had returned of his own
head, and it was more effectual to move Philemon to receive him: which
teaches us, that the author and perswader of any journey or embassage, does
serve greatly to commend the journey, and to set forth the embassage it self;
and therefore a message sent from a faithful and good man, is not lightly to
be passed over, or rashly to be contemned, or irreverently to be received of
him to whom it is sent.

Lastly, we are to observe the tender and inward affection of Paul toward
Onesimus, who was as dear unto him as his own bowels, and therefore would
have him so received and respected, as he would receive and respect his own
bowels. Where we see, that together with his petition, he bewraieth and
discloseth his affection toward him for whom he makes request. This teaches
us, partly, that to the end our request and commendation may take place, and
work in him whom we beseech and entreat, we ought to show our love, and make
manifest our dear affection for him, in the manner of making of our suit and
supplication; and partly, that whosoever is truly turned unto God, and
repents of his sins from the bottom of his heart, ought to be dearly
beloved of us; yea, albeit he were a Servant, a Fugitive, and one stained with
much wickedness. For a sound conversion of the heart, does blot out all
reproach from the penitent, and raseth out of our minds all remembrance of
former offenses, as if they had never been committed. These are the general
observations: now let us descend to the particular doctrines.

[ Which in times past was to thee unprofitable, but now very profitable, both
to thee and to me.] We heard before, that in these words one Argument is
included, to persuade Philemon to receive his Servant, which is, because
howsoever he had been unprofitable, now he was turned to be most profitable.
In which Words the Apostle makes an allusion, to name Onesimus, which in the
original signifies profitable. It is an usual and common thing in the
Prophets, to allude to the Names of Men and Women, of Cities and Countries,
and from thence to draw some profitable consideration and conclusion, that
thereby they may move to some virtue, or condeme some vice, or give warning of
some judgment, or set forth some mercy of God. The like it were easy to show
in the New Testament. So in this place, the Apostle putting Philemon in hope of
receiving profit by him, alludeth to the Name of Onesimus, that is profitable.
In like manner, Sophocles (...).
one of the Heathen Poets using this Name, has a wise and worthy sentence; The
gifts of Enemies, are not gifts, nor profitable.

The last word is the same with the Name of this Servant, wherefore it is as
much as if the Apostle should have said; I do not fear, and do not thou
doubt, but he will behave himself answerable to my expectation and
commendation given of him, beseeming the profession of the Faith worthy his
own Name, and will approve himself unto thee to be a right Onesimus, that
is; thrifty and profitable. Before he was Onesimus in name, now he is so in
deed: before he held the Title, now he has the truth; before thou saw the
shadow, now thou shall see the substance; thou have had experience of his
unprofitableness, now shall thou have the benefit of the profit that he
brings with him, being made a new Creature in Christ Jesus. We learn from
hence, Doctrine 1. Christian religion makes a man profitable and helpefull to
others, that before has been iniutious and hurtful.
that Christian Faith or Religion, of a man unprofitable, makes him
profitable; and of one unfit, makes him fit to every good work. The
conversion of men to the true Faith, works the greatest change and alteration
that can be, and makes them good, profitable, and helpefull unto others, that
have been before, unjust, injurious, cruel, and hurtful. This appears by
the Prophecy of Esaias, Esaias. 11, 6, 7.
where he shows; That the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard
shall lie with the Kidde, and the Calfe, and the Lion, and the fat Beast
together, and a little Child shall lead them: the Cow and the Bear shall
feed, and their young ones shall lie together, and the Lion shall eat Straw
like the Bullock: the Suckling Child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and
the weined Child shall put his hand in the Cockatrice hole.

These things are not literally to be understood, but he means by these
Beasts, men of a ravenous and brutish Nature, who when they shall be brought
into the Kingdom of God, and Church of Christ, they shall lay aside their
wicked and Woluish properties, and become loving, gentle, kind, and courteous
one to another. This the Apostle teaches. Ephe. 2, 11. Ephe. 2, 11, 12, 13.
Col. 1, 21, 22.
Remember that ye being in times past Gentiles in the Flesh, and called
uncircumcision of them, which are called Circumcision in the Flesh, made with
hands, that ye were at that time without Christ, and were Aliants from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and were Strangers from the Covenants of promise, and
had no hope, and were without GOD in the World: but now in Christ Jesus ye
which once were far off, are made near by the blood of Christ. It is noted
in the Words of the Prophet, and of the Angel; Mal. 4, 6. Luke 1, 17.
That John the Baptist, by the power and force of his Ministry, shall turn the
hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just Men, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

This truth is farther confirmed unto us by sundry examples, as by the example
of Paul toward others, and others toward Paul. Let us look upon the example
of Paul, no man is ignorant, that before his conversion to the true Faith of
Christ, he was 1 Timothy 1, 13 1 Cor. 15, 9. Acts 9, 1, 2.
a bloody Persecuter, an horrible Blasphemer, and a cruel Oppressor, one that
made havoc of the Church of God, and sought to overthrow Religion: but after
he was called to the knowledge of Christ, he was turned into a new man, he
became gentle unto all, he thirsted after their Salvation, which is the
sincerest Testimony of the soundest love. The like affection we see in the
Iayler after his conversion. He had executed his office with all rigor and
extremity; Acts 16, 24, 33.
He cast the Apostles into the inner Prison, und made their Feet fast in the
Stocks, because he would be more sure of them: but immediately after the
feeling of the Earthquake, the hearing of Paul, the opening of the Prison, the
preaching of the Faith, and turning of his heart; He took them the same hour
of the night and washed their stripes, and was baptized with all that belonged
unto him. Whereby we see the fruit of his unfeigned love, after the truth of his
unfeigned conversion. Before he showed his cruelty, now he testifies his
Charity; before he manifested his rage, now he declares his Religion; before
we heard of his fury, now we see his Faith. The Jews, that crucified the Lord
of glory, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of the Son of God, Act. 2,
40, 41 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47.
when they were exhorted to amend their lives, and to save themselves from that
froward Generation: they received his word, they were added to the Church, they
continued in the Doctrine of the Apostles, in the fellowship of the faithful,
in the singleness of heart, in the breaking of Bread, in the communication of
goods, in the praising of God, in the selling of their possessions, and in the
distribution of them to all men, as every one had need. The like we see in
Zaccheus, he was at the first a Publican, a chief receiver of the tribute, and
a chief deceiuer of the people, he had robbed many by false accusations, Luke
19, 2, 7, 8.
so that he was grown rich, and by his Riches, into reproach and hatred: but
when Christ had reueiled himself unto him, he stood forth and said unto the
Lord: Behold, Lord, half my goods I give unto the poor, and if I have taken
from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him fourefold.

This is a great work of God that he works at our conversion, which the 1
Cor. 6, 10, 11.
Apostle speaks off. 1. Corin. 6, 10, 11. Be not deceived, neither
Fornicatours, nor Idolatours, nor Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor Buggerers, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards; shall inherit the Kingdom of GOD: and
such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our GOD. All
these Testimonies and examples teach us, that where is a right conversion of
the heart, there is also a true alteration of the life; and where there is an
embracing of the true Christian Religion, there is a change of our conversation.

Reason 1.
The Reasons of this Doctrine are evident, and shine as clearly as the Sun
at Noonday. For first, if we consider our natural estate and condition what
we are before our conversion, we shall easily be brought to acknowledge, both
where, and what, and whence the change is. For naturally we hate the truth,
and the professors of the truth, To. 1, 29, 10 2 Timothy 3, 2, 3, 4
Being full of all unrighteousness, Fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousness, full of Envy, of Murder, of Debate, of deceit, taking all
things in the evil part, Whisperers, Backe-biters, Haters of GOD, Doers of
wrong, proud, Boasters, Inuenters of evil things, disobedient to Parents,
without understanding, Couenant-breakers, without natural affection, such as
can never be appeased, merciless, Lovers of themselves, curssed speakers,
unthankful, unholy, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, no lovers at all of
them which are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more
then lovers of God, having a show of godliness, but have denied the power
thereof.

Behold here a Glass to behold our selves in, a perfect Glass to look upon,
that we may see our selves, and know our selves what we are. And albeit all
these sins do not actually break out of us, yet they are all originallie
bred in us: and albeit the fruit of them do not appear outwardly, yet the
very Spawne and Seed of them remains inwardly: and albeit we do not feel
the Branches, yet we have cause to fear the bitter Roots and Remnants and
Relics, of them that are deeply settled in the Garden and Ground of our
hearts. Seeing therefore our Nature is thus corrupt, and we so far alienated
and estranged one from another, we cannot be healthful or profitable to any of
Gods people and Children. Our Savior teaches, John 15, 19. and 10, 2.
That the Men of this World should always hate his Servants, and be unto to
them as Wolves to the Lambs; yea, that the time should come, that they which
kill them, should think they did God good service. This is it which the
Apostle speaks and confesses as well of himself, as of others; Tit. 3, 3, 4.
We our selves also, were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving
the lusts and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness and envy, hateful
and hating one another, until the bountifulness and love of GOD our Savior
appeared; who according to his mercy saved us, by the washing of the
Newe-birth, and renewing of the Holie-Ghost. This is our natural condition,
before we have freedom from this thraldom, and deliverance out of this
misery which we bring with us, and upon us.

Reason 2.
Secondly, when men are truly converted, they will make conscience of hurting,
they will abstain from wrongs and injuries, they will be ready to do good to
others, to profit others, to walk in all the duties of their callinges, and to
keep a good conscience toware God and man. This appears in the Prophet Esaias,
Chapter 65. where this Doctrine has his confirmation, when he has said; Esaias
65, 25. Acts 24, 16.
That the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat
Straw like the Bullock, and to the Serpent Dust shall be his Meat: He
adds; They shall no more hurt nor destroy in all mine holy Mountain, says
the Lord. The Apostle says, Acts 24, 16. I endeavor my self to have always
a clear conscience toward God and toward men. Christ Jesus himself says,
John 4, 34.
My meat is, that I may do the will of him that sent me, and finish his
work. So it is, and will be meat and drink to every one of us, if we belong
unto him, to do good unto all Men; yea, even our Enemies and Persecutours, as
appears in the example of Stephen, who prayed for his utter Enemies, that
hated him with deadly hatred, and stoned him to death: and in the example of
Joseph, when his Brethren feared revenge, and to be rewarded evil for evil,
according to their deserts, he said: Fear not, for am not I under God? Thus
he comforted them, and spoke kindly unto them.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, true conversion works in us the love of God and men, and so makes
us fruitful in all good works; it suffers us not to be barren and
unfruitful, and it subdueth the rage and corruption of our sinful Nature. For
such as perform not their duties to God in the several parts of his
worship, nor abstain from violence toward men, whom they ought to love as
their Brethren, do make it plain and manifest, that they were never rightly
converted. Such as are rightly converted, are truly sanctified; and therefore
that is a false conversion, where there is want of sanctification. When the
Prophet has sore-shewed the wonderful change and alteration that the Gospel
of Christ should make, he makes this the cause; Esaias 11, 9.
For the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters that
cover the Sea. We saw and showed this before in the example of Paul, we cannot
doubt, but he was before his conversion, as a roaring Lion, and as a raging
Wolf against the poor Lambs of Christ: but being made a Christian, and
called to the knowledge of the truth from Heaven, he couched down quietly with
them, so that we may truly say with the Prophet; That the wolf did dwell the
Lamb, the Leopard did lie with the Kid, the Lion did eat Straw like the
Bullock. Seeing then, that the conversion of a man works in him the love of
God and man, seeing before true conversion we hate others, and other hate us;
and lastly, seeing after true conversion we begin to make conscience of
hurting and harming others; it follows, that such as by nature were as Bears
and Bulls, as Aspes and Vipers, as Wolves and Cockatrices, as Lions and
Leopards; that is, fierce, cruel, covetous, injurious, and unjust, being
converted to the Faith, and gathered into the Church, are made gentle, mild,
and merciful.

Use 1.
Now let us come to the consideration of the Uses, and to the application of
the Doctrine to our selves. First of all, we see hereby, that they are greatly
deceived, that think true godliness to be unprofitable, and no gain at al to
return and redowne to the practiser of it. Great is the benefit of true
Religion, and much is the profit of our conversion. Without this, a man is no
better then a Beast; nay, worse then any Beast. He lives like a Swine, he
dies like a Dog, he becomes afterward a Devil. The holy man Job
describing the life and death of ungodly men, says of them; Job. 21, 14, 15.
They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go down to the Grave;
They say also unto God: Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways: Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? And what profit should we
have, if we should pray unto him? This is the voice of Atheists that regard not
God; yea, that think there is no God. But true Religion brings with it the
greatest profit, and no gain is comparable unto it. It makes us profitable to
our selves and others: the benefit that it brings to others, is both to their
Bodies and Souls.

Hence it is that the Wise man says; Pro. 3, 14, 19
The Merchandise thereof, is better then the Merchandise of Silver, and the
gain thereof is better then Gold, it is, more precious then Pearls, and all
things that thou can desire, are not to be compared to her; Length of days
is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory: her ways are
ways of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity, she is a Tree of Life to all
that lay hold upon her, and blessed is he that retains her. Howsoever
therefore the World, and the Children of this World, do repute and esteem of
godliness, it is most certain it is the greatest Jewel, and offers all
other blessings with it. Heereunto accords the saying of the Apostle, 1 Timothy
6, 6.
Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has. And in
another place; 1 Timothy 4, 8.
Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all
things, which has the promise of the life present, and of that which is to
come. What can be more profitable, then that which makes a man happy and
blessed, who is, by the fall of man (and the corruption of his nature) curssed
and miserable? And who is it that does not desire blessedness? But godliness
joined with true conversion of a Sinner to God, makes his State and standing
blessed. The Psalmist witnesses, That he is Psalm. 112, 1. and 119, 1, 2. and
1, 1, 2.
blessed that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his Commandments:
blessed are they that are upright in their way, and walk in the way of the
Lord: blessed are they that keep his Testimonies, and seek him with their
whole hearts: blessed is the man that walks not in the counsels of the
wicked, but delights in the law of the Lord, and exercises himself therein
day and night.

What can be more profitable then to have interest in Christ the treasure of al
treasures, and the Jewel of all Jewels; to have him our Mediator, our
Redeemer, our Savior? But when once we are truly converted, we have gotten
Christ, he is become ours, we have him dwelling in us, him I say Col. 1, 18, 19
and 2, 9. Ephesians. 3, 17. John 17, 3.
in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, who is the head of the
church, whom to know is eternal life. By him our bondage is turned into
freedom, our beggary into riches, out thraldom into liberty, our death into
life. Who is it then can be so simple or ignorant, to affirm that profession
to be without gain and profit, that brings Christ Jesus with it, in whom all
treasures are hid and had? Or who can be so sottish or senseless to deny, that
when we have done all that we can, our means are too slender, our cost too
small, our time too short, and our labor too little, in seeking to find him,
and in digging and deluing after him. For if we find him, we are sure to find
al things, and to want nothing that is good. What thing can be more profitable
then that which gives a man just Title to Gods blessings, and a sanctified use
of his creatures? The ungodly man that is not converted to God, but perverted
in all his ways, has no part or interest in the promises and mercies of God,
to warm himself with his wool, to feed himself with his meat: Psalm. 50,
10.
For all the Beasts of the Forests are his, and the beasts on a thousand
Mountains. Such as are wicked persons, are wrongful Usurpers, and unjust
intruders upon the Lords goods, and the portion that he has prepared for his
own people, nay they are shameful Thieves, and shameless Robbers that steal
from the godly, that which was created for them, bestowed upon them, and
sanctified unto them. Hence it is, that the Apostle says, Titus 1, 15.
Unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled.
In Adam we have lost the pure and free use of the creatures of God; in Christ
Jesus the second Adam, and Heb. 1, 2.
heir of al things, we recover our Title unto them again. Now, that which
puts us in possession, and brings the full fruition with freedom of
conscience, and comfort of heart of all these things, must needs be holden most
helpefull and profitable unto us in this life.

Last of all, if we consider the enduring and continuing of the gain of
godliness, we shall find the price of it to be above all other commodities:
the sweetness whereof may delight us, and the contentment thereof may satisfy
us, and the certainty thereof, may allure us to the seeking and preferring of
it before all other, and to travel and traffic for it far and near. What
commodity can thou name or remember, that the richest Merchants bring from
strange Countries, which is not subject to be lost by land, and to perish by
the Sea, by storms, by robbers, by rouers, by tempests and shipwreck, so
that when thou have fetched it with the greatest danger of thy life, it may be
taken from thee, and thou from it, which makes it to be but a shadow of true
gain? But the profit of godliness is of a contrary Nature, if once we have
gotten this Pearl, the Thief cannot steal it, the moth cannot corrupt it,
the Sea cannot drown it, the rust cannot fret it, the Land cannot loose it, the
length of time cannot consume it, the greatness of danger cannot take it from
us; the unfaithfulness of servant, the subtlety of enemies, the fraud of
false Brethren, the force of the mighty, the violence of the Oppressor, the
partiality of the Judge, the wresting of the Law, can never deprive us or
debar us of this benefit; yea, Cicer. pro Archia poeta.
that which an Heathen man said once of human learning, may more truly and
justly be spoken of godliness, which indeed is true learning; the which
whosoever wants (what Ornaments of Nature and Art soever otherwise he has)
is utterly unlearned; nay a stark fool: It will follow us as a sweet guide
abroad, to solace us, it will stay with us a pleasant companion to delight us
at home; it will lie with us as a bedfellow in the night, to teach us whereon
to meditate; it will sit down with us as a guest at the Table to direct us; it
will be with us as a skillful Physician in sickness to comfort us; it will
stick and stand to us in prosperity, to humble us; it will cleave fast to us
in adversity, and in the evil day to refresh us; it will wait upon us in
death, it will descend with us into the grave, it will ascend with us into
heaven, and always follow us from place to place, as the shadow does the body.
This made the Apostle John say, Blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Revel. 14, 13. To
conclude therefore, so often as we think of true Religion, or remember the
day of our conversion, we must think with our selves, that we made the most
blessed change that ever was made, and hold this for a firm and sure
principle, that no gain is like to this gain, no profit like to this profit.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing Christian Religion, planted in the heart of a man, makes him
good and helpful to others, who before was unjust and unprofitable, let every
one prove his effectual calling, and true conversion, by earnest seeking after
the good of others, and by a careful abstaining from hurting, troubling, and
wronging of others. It is to be chosen as a better thing to suffer, then to
offer wrong; to receive, then to requite; to take, then to give. Obadiah living
in Ahabs Court, is commended for the manifestation of his Faith by his Works
(as the Tree that shows what it is by the fruits) he hid 1 Kin. 18, 13
the Prophets of God from the sword of the persecutor, and fed them in the Cave
in the time of famine. The Prophet affirms and assures, that such shall
dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and rest in his holy mountain, as make
much Psalm. 15, 4.
of those that fear the Lord, and honor them whom God has honored. To this
purpose, the Apostle sets this down as a certain sign of our adoption,
that God accepts us as his sons and daughters, to wit; our love to the
Saints, 1 Ioh. 3, 14
We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
Brethren. Every one must be able to show the soundness of his faith, and the
truth of his conversion, by the fruits of his calling, Math. 3, 8.
and by the works of regeneration and amendment of life. An injurious man,
that loves himself, but not another, that has no care to do good to his
Brother, but to himself only, is not yet truly converted to God, nor
delivered from the bondage of sin, nor made a member of Christ, nor engrafted
into the true Church, nor endued with the grace of sanctification; he is yet in
the flesh, and not in the spirit; he is yet in death, not restored to life; he
is the bondslaue of Satan, not brought into the liberty of the sons of God.
For where there is no change in conversation, there can be no assurance of
true conversion.

The meditation of this point, must enter deeply into our hearts, and teach us
to try our selus, whether as yet we born again by water and the spirit, or not.
Whosoever can say thus, I have been in bondage to sin, now I am set free; I
have been the prisoner of Satan, now I am at liberty; I have lived
unprofitably to God, unprofitably to my self, unprofitably to others, now I
have learned to lead my life to the honor of God, to the benefit of my
brethren, and to the comfort of mine own soul; whosoever (I say) can say
thus, may be assured of his conversion and turning unto God, and that God has
begun his good work in him, which he will finish at the appearance of Jesus
Christ. Let us all therefore know and consider, that it is required of us to
repent of sins, to turn to God, to change our hearts, and to amend our
lives, that so we may bring forth the fruits of righteousness, and express
our obedience to the Gospel. To be without the fruits of the Gospel, is to
deny the Gospel; and to be without godliness of conversation, is to be
without Christ; and to be without an heart inwardly sanctified, and without a
life outwardly regenerated, is to be without faith. It had been better for us
that we had never had the Gospel offered unto us, then to have it, and to
contemn it: It had been better we had always remained in darkness, then to
have light come among us, and not to walk in the light. It is a worthy
exhortation that the Apostle makes to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 5, 6, 7,
8.
Ye are all the Children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of
the night, neither of darkness. Therefore, let us not sleep as others do,
but let us watch and be sober: for they that sleep, sleep in the night, and
they that be drunken, are drunken in the night: but let us which are of the
day, be sober, putting on the Breast Plate of faith and love, and of the hope of
salvation for an Helmet. It is not every Math. 7, 21.
one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that
has an earnest and careful endeavor to do his will. It is not enough for us
to be called a Christian, to bear the name of a Protestant, to renounce the
name of a Papist, to make show of the true Religion, and to be an hearer of the
word: we have learned better things, and must give an account of a farther
duty. Objection.
We will say peradventure, we hate and detest all the blind and erroneous
opinions of Heretics, of Arrians, of Papists, of Atheists, of Anabaptists, of
Libertines, and such like; that we renounce all those opinions, that derogate
any thing from the true worship and honor of God, as denying of Christ's
Godhead, his Manhood, his Mediation; that we abhor all kind of Idolatry, and
superstitious serving of our God. Answer.
But is this the whole conversion of a man? Or is this the perfect work of
Repentance, that ought to be wrought in us? We must go farther then thus, and
yet (my Brethren) I would we all went so far.

Many stand in the midway, and have not proceeded to learn and practice those
duties. We must hate all ignorance of God and of his word, which is the Mother
and Mistress of all sin and error: we must love and embrace the knowledge of
God revealed and offered unto us from time to time: we must seek after it as a
Treasure, we must receive it, otherwise we deceive our selves. We must hunger
and thirst after the sincere milk of Gods word, and account their feet
beuatifull, that bring it unto us, we must say; Come, let us go up to the house
of God, that he may teach us his ways, and that we may walk in his paths.
But do we thus? Nay, when it is offered, do we not spurn and kick against
it, as the Horse and Mule, that is without understanding? Do we not mock and
deride the Prophets of God, and preachers of the word, laboring to instruct us
in the right way, and are we not for the most part made worse, and our hearts
hardened, that we can receive no instruction? If we loved the light, we would
delight in it, we would be reformed by it, we would be transformed into the
obedience of it: but our profane works do testify against us, that we hate
both the light, and those that are the Authors and the bringers of it. I might
allege many other works of darkness, that swarm in our lives, and make us
swerve from the rule of righteousness left unto us in the word. If we live in
beastly drunkenness, in unclean lusts, in hatred, in malice, and such like
fruits of the flesh, we are not yet partakers of a new birth, we are not become
new creatures, we have not yet put on the new man, we cannot do good to any of
our brethren. When Abraham was to travel among the Heathen that knew not God
among the Idolaters that worshipped not God, among the profane Infidels that
were never converted to God, Genesis 20, 11.
he said, The fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my
wives sake. He could look for no duties of love, no practice of
righteousness, no fruits of humanity toward him, to proceed from them that
were vnmortifyed, vnsanctifyed, and unregenerated. It is the great mercy of God
to mankind, to give to them his word, which restrains their actions, subdueth
their affections, and orders men which otherwise would be outrageous
Monsters, as Wolves, Tigers, Lions, Bears, Bulls, Bandogs, nay Devils incarnate
one to another; who being left to themselves, they would be as Cormorants or
Canibals, ready to devour and eat up one another, being not only without
piety, but without ciuility, without courtesy, without humanity. If therefore
his word do not alter us, nothing will, nothing can. Thus then we see, that
seeing it is the conversion of a man, that makes him any way profitable or
serviceable to others, we must all labor to be born again, otherwise it had
bin better we had never bin borne; and we must seek true Repentance, and the
conversion of the heart, otherwise we shall be unprofitable members in the
Church of God.

Use 3
Lastly, seeing it is the turning of us to God, that turns us to the good of
men, it serves as a notable direction unto us, to teach us, that whosoever
desires that such as belong unto him should be profitable and faithful unto
him, let him labor to plant godliness in their hearts, and to sow the seeds
of eternal life in their minds. It will be able to minister no comfort unto
thee, to see godliness flourish in others, and to hear of their conversion to
God; endeavor to bring it home to thine own house, and to settle it in the
doors of thine own family. A better duty thou can not perform unto their
souls, and so unto them, then by this, which will bring the blessing of God
with it, and remove the curse of God from thee and thy family. Who is it (if he
were asked the question) that would be trobled with an unfaithful Wife, with
stubborn Children, with untrusty Servants, or who is it that would not account
them the greatest plague and punishment that can befall a man in this life, to
have such a dissolute and disordered house? If then, any desire to be with
comfort and contentment matched with a provident and profitable wife, blessed
with gracious and obedient children, furnished with diligent and dutiful
servants, let them seek out such as truly serve the Lord, make choice of such
as show lively fruits of their unfeigned conversion, be careful to train
them in the knowledge of God, and to procure their salvation.

This was Abraham's care and Conscience, to instruct such as did belong unto
him, and this was the cause that he had a blessed wife, partaker of the same
inheritance with him, that followed him up and down in every place, as God
called him; he had a faithful Isaac, ready in all duty to obey him; he had
careful and trusty servants, that contented not themselves with eye-seruice,
but performed their duties in the singleness of their hearts, as serving the
Lord, and not man. Would we then have our Wives that lie in our bosoms, and
are given as the dearest and nearest companions of our life, to be found
faithful unto us, of pure and chaste conversation, loving their children,
governing their house, and giving no occasion to the adversary, to speak
evil? Let us make them faithful to God, and endeavor to work true Religion in
them, 1 Pet. 3.
as they which are heirs together of the grace of life. Such a blessed couple
were Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Zachary and Elizabeth, Aquila and
Priscilla, with sundry others. This made the Prophet say, Psa. 128, 1, 2.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways, etc, thy
wife shall be as the fruitful Vine on the sides of thine house, and thy
children like the Olive plants round about thy Table.

Moreover, if we desire to have our Children the fruit of our own body, and
the fry of the Church to be good and dutiful unto us (as every one would have
them do their duty to him, and will cry out against them when they behave
themselves rudely and irreverently) let us be careful of their conversion, let
us give them the sweet taste of Religion, and let us teach them this trade of
the fear of God. We see that many complain of the hardness of the world, of
the straitness of the times, and of the miserableness of many men; Alas (say
they) it never went worse with poor men, we know not what to do with our
Children, how to employ them, or where to bestow them, except a man be able to
give a round and rich sum with his son, he cannot get him a Master, or
provide him a service, or bind him to a trade, or place him to get his living
another day. But understand, O ye unwise among the people, and ye Fools when
will ye be wise? How long will we live in the Church, and yet not learn this
one lesson which is the foundation and fountain of all the rest, that
godliness is the greatest gain? Bind them to this trade, this is the best
trade, with which no other can be matched or compared; this requires no great
stock or substance to put them forth. They that have nothing to give, and
little to live upon, may asloon advance and prefer their children this way,
as they that have great riches, and large possessions. Hence it is that the
Prophet says, Esaias 55, 1, 2
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and ye that have no
Silver, come buy and eat; Come I say, buy Wine and Milk without Silver, and
without Money: wherefore do ye lay out Silver, and not for Bread? And your
labor without being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which
is good, and let your soul delight in fatness.

Whereby we see, that whosoever are called to be of this Science, it will be
able to maintain the Tradesmen, it will bring in the greatest profit. There
are so many of some Trades, that they fear one will not be able to live by
another, one enuyeth another, and hinders another. It is not so in this
Trade, the more the better, the more the merrier, every one helps another, and
all do make up a blessed fellowship and communion of Saints. If then, thou have
a care to put thy son to an Occupation, that he may learn to live another
day, and neglectest this which is the chief and ground of all, thou art
greatly deceived in thy choice, and Christ Jesus shall laugh thee to scorn for
thy folly. Let me therefore commend this weighty business of bestowing thy
son, to thy wise consideration; a greater gain I cannot name, a richer trade
thou can not find, a better Master he cannot serve, a farther freedom he
cannot obtain, a surer inheritance he cannot purchase. This is it which
Solomon points out unto us, Prou. 22, 6. Teach a child in the trade of his
way, and when he is old, he shall not depart from it.

Furthermore, if we desire to have our Servants that attend upon us, and labor
for us, to be obedient and faithful unto us, painful in their calling, and
trusty in their business, let us know that we our selves must be the means to
procure it, and further it by seeking their salvation, and laboring earnestly
their conversion. If they be truly Religious, they will be truly righteous; if
they once know how to serve God faithfully, they will soon learn to serve us
faithfully for Conscience sake. Many have evil servants, and ungracious
Children, they see it, they complain of it, they seem to lament it; but they
never consider that the cheifest fault is their own. Have we Servants or
Children given to lying, to deceiving, to fraud, to falsehood, to robbing and
stealing, and breaking out into sundry disorders in their life? Let us mark
what the cause is, let us see where is the occasion, and let us provide how
these abuses may be remedied and redressed. There is no better way to recover
them, then to teach them their duties, to show them their sins out of the
word of God, and to lay before them his Judgments that are due unto them. It
is a great blessing of God to have a Religious servant, he brings the
blessing of God with him, the heart of his Master may trust in him, and he
shall have no need of spoil, he will do him good (and not evil) all the
days of his life. This we see in the servant of Abraham, who as he had a
care to teach and train up his household in the ways of godliness, so the
Lord blessed him with a faithful family, and a Genesis 24, 42.
religious servant, whom he employed in a weighty business, of fetching home
a Wife for his Son Isaac.

The like we see in Joseph, he was sold for a slave, and brought down into
Egypt, and bought at the hand of the Ishmaelites, And the Lord Genesis 39, 2, 3.
was with him, and he was a man that prospered, and was in the house of his
Master the Egiptian, and his Master saw that the Lord was with him, and that
the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand. So afterward, when as
thorough ^he slanderous accusation, and false information of his Mistress, he
was cast into prison, Psalm. 105, 18
where he was laid in Irons, and his feet were held in the stocks, the Lord
made his innocence known, and showed mercy unto him, and got him favor in the
sight of the Master of the prison, Genesis 39, 22.
and the Keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that
were in the prison, and whatsoever they did there, that did he; and the Keeper
of the prison, looked unto nothing that was under his hand, seeing that the
Lord was with him, for whatsoever he did, the Lord made it to prosper. Behold
here in Joseph (as in a clear glass) the right picture and pattern of a
right religious servant, who being a poor prisoner, and lying in a dark
Dungeon, being unjustly fallen into the displeasure of his Master, and
wrongfully cast into a close prison, did in that woeful and pitiful
condition, both gain glory to God, beautify his own profession, and seek the
good of his Master, that put his trust in him. For no man is in so low and
mean an estate, if he be a poor Servant, a base Kitchen boy, or a vile
prisoner, but by diligence in his Calling, (such as it is) and by showing
fidelity to his Master (such as he is) may greatly glorify the name of God
whom he does serve, and adorn the Gospel of Christ which he does profess.

Hence it is, that the Apostle exhorting all religious servants, says, 1 Timothy
6, 1, 2 Titus 2, 10.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their Masters worthy of
all honor, that the name of God and his Gospel be not evil spoken of, and
that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. The example
of Jacob also is worth and worthy the observation in this case, who albeit he
served an hard and froward Master, yet he rather considered what he ought to
do, then what the other deserved to suffer, so that he witnesses, Genesis 31, 40.
He was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and his
sleep departed from his eyes, whatsoever was torn of Beasts, he brought it
not unto him, but made it good himself. This is it which the Centurion in the
Gospel confesses, and commends in his servants, Math. 8, 9.
For I am a man also under the authority of another, and I have Soldiers under
me: and I say to one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes,
and to my servant do this, and he does it. These examples also of that servant
and Soldier, that waited upon Cornelius, is notable to this purpose, Acts 10,
7.
who being trained up in the fear of God, showed all fidelity and forwardness
to perform the will and commandment of his Master, and went to bring Peter,
by whose Ministry they might be further instructed. Thus we see, that
religious servants are the best Servants, the most dilligent Servants, the most
true and trusty Servants, the most provident and profitable Servants, and
therefore it belongs to al Masters of families, to be careful to teach them
the fear of the Lord, and to train them in the ways of godliness. Hereby
they shall honor God, heerby they shall do great good to their souls, heerby
they shall discharge a good Conscience, hereby they shall procure their own
profit, and further their own gain.

[ Which in times past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable both to
thee and to me.] The Apostle in this place, speaking of the estate of
Onesimus, and showing what he was before his Conversion, and what he was
after, does fitly distinguish the times, and says, that before his Calling
to the Faith, he was unprofitable, serving to no other purpose, but to feed
himself, and fill up a place; but no good, no grace, no godliness appeared to
be in him. But where did he converse and lead this life? Was it where the name
of God was not known, or where the sound of the Gospel was not heard? No, it
was in faithful Philemons house. This may at the first seem a very strange
and wonderful thing, that he living in so religious an house, in so reformed a
family, with so godly a company, which had the reputation of a little Church,
should favor nothing of piety, nothing of Christianity, but remain in
unfaithfulness toward God, and in unrighteousness toward his Master.
Doctrine 2. In godly families are many times ungodly Children and Servants.In
godly families are many times ungodly Children and Servants.
From this description of Onesimus, in the time of his ignorance, before his
eyes were opened, and his heart reformed, we learn that it falls out
(notwithstanding the desire and diligence of the Governors of the house) that
in reformed families, are oftentimes found unreformed persons. In godly places,
do many times lurk ungodly Children, and incorrigible servants, into whose
hearts no instruction will enter, and whose disposition no means of
reformation can alter. We see this in the first family that ever was upon the
earth; and there have been no more wicked men in the world then they, that
have had the best means to direct them. Adam had malicious and murdering
Caine, Abraham had persecuting and savage Ishmaell; Noah had scoffing and
cursed Cham; Isaac had ungracious and prophan Esau; David had ambitious and
aspyring Absalom. So it was with Eli, with Samuel, with Hezekiah, with Josiah,
and sundry others, who after good means used by themselves, have found much
evil practiced by their Children. The Fathers are often careful to lay a good
foundation, and to nurture their children with good instruction, Homer Odysis.
lib. 2. (...).
yet few children prove like their Fathers, but are a degenerate and
unregenerate offspring.

Reason 1.
And albeit this do sufficiently appear unto us by Testimonies of Scripture,
and by daily experience, yet we shall farther be confirmed in this truth, if we
weigh the Reasons whereupon it stands. First, Religion comes not by
inheritance, and grace cannot be conveyed by propagation, but every man
begets his like, as he himself is by nature, as one Serpent engendereth
another. This Moses teaches, that when Adam was fallen from God, and had lost
the grace of sanctification, Genesis 5, 3.
He begat a child in his own likeness, after his own Image. Godly Parents may
leave their children temporal possessions, but they cannot bequeath unto them
Faith and a good conscience, which are not to be found in the natural man.

Reason 2.
Secondly, there must be a new birth begun by Gods spirit; for the grace of
regeneration, whereby we are brought to have one foot in Gods Kingdom, is not
of flesh and blood, but of water and the spirit; it is not of the will of man,
but of the work of God. This is it which our Savior sets down, John 1,
12, 13, and 3, 3, 5.
As many as received him, to them he gave prerogative to be the sons of God,
even to them that believe in his Name, which are borne not of blood, nor of
the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Likewise, when he
disputed with Nicodemus, who was ignorant of this Doctrine, he says; Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, except that a man be borne of Water, and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. It is he only that gave the
heart, that is able to change the heart; it is he that gave the eyes, that is
able to open the eyes.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, albeit the unregenerate persons, and loose livers, do not want
education and good bringing up, yet they are not amended and reformed, because
God does not purpose their conversion, but appoint their confusion. The Lord
stirred up Pharaoh Romans 9, 17.
to this same purpose, that he might show his power in him, and that his name
might be declared throughout all the earth, yet he sent unto him Moses and Aaron
to clear his own Justice, and to make him without excuse. The like the
Scripture speaks of the sons of Eli, who were reproved of him, for making
the Israelites to trespass, and to abhor the offerings of the Lord, yet they
regarded not his reproof, being the Father of their bodies, the Priest of the
most high God, and the judge of the people: and this reason is rendered, why
they obeyed not his voice, and hearkened not to his Counsel, 1 Samuel 2, 25.
Because the Lord would slay the^. So then, whether we do consider that grace
cannot be conveyed by propagation, or that it is the proper work of the
spirit, to effect our regeneration, or that God will glorify his great name in
the confusion of such as break the bands, and cast away the Cords of
Discipline from them, we cannot greatly marvel, that in reformed places, are
oftentimes to be found unreformed persons.

Use 1.
Let us make use of this Doctrine, and see both what may be learned by it, and
how it may be applied unto us. First of all, it teatheth, that though
education be a notable means of reformation and working good in the hearts of
those that hear instruction, and albeit Parents and Masters be thereby
discharged, as they that have done their duty, yet bare teaching is not
sufficient to convert the soul, and to settle the Conscience in good things.
Noah was as careful for the instruction of Cham and Canaan, as of the rest
that were of his house, and belonged to his charge: yet they followed not his
Doctrine, but scoffed at him that was both Pastor and Parent. David a man after
Gods own heart, walked in the midst of his house, in the uprightness of his
Conscience; yet he had an incestuous Ammon, a Rebellious Absalom, a licentious
Adoniah, all of them ungodly and ungracious Children. So then, although
education be a good means, yet it is not a sufficient means to work
reformation. He that labors in planting and watering, is nothing, except God
give the blessing of increase. We see this evidently in the public assembly,
as well as in the private family; in the house of God, as well as in the house
of man. There is a difference of hearers, according to their diverse
dispositions, Math. 13, 13, 14.
some are deaf hearers, that have not their ears boared through to the heart,
they have only outward ears, and regard no more but outward hearing, and are
no way moved with that which is spoken, dead-hearted, dull-eared, dim-sighted,
heauy-headed. Others, beside their bodily ears, have the ears of their hearts
opened by the word and work of the Spirit, made pliable and tractable to
receive, embrace, and believe, that which they hear. So is it in the private
instruction, used in private Families, all that hear with the outward ear,
are not reformed; all that are instructed, are not converted. Objection.
What then? Shall not Fathers teach their Children, and Masters their
Servants, and Householders their Families, because some have not believed, and
many remain as blind and blockish as they were at the first? Answer.
Yes, it is their duty to be dilligent in teaching them, and in laying the
foundation of Christian Religion among them, howsoever it be received or
rejected of such as be in their houses, and belong unto them. Were not he a
simple Husbandman, that would neglect to sow his Ground, because he knows
that some of the Corn will never grow up, to bring forth fruit, but dye in
the earth? Or were not he an unwise Lawgiver, that will not have wholesome
Laws enacted and established, because some transgress them, and disobey them,
and make no account of them? Or were not he a very foolish Father, who because
he has one rude and riotous Son, that will not reverence his person, nor
fulfill his Commandments, nor regard his Authority, nor fear his
threatninges, would therefore hold his peace, and refrain himself from
instructing and informing his other Children in the ways of Godliness? Or
were he not a badde Gardener, who because some of his Ground brings forth
Weeds and Nettles, would therefore refuse to water the Herbs that are meet
for the use of man? When the Lord sent his holy Prophets to reprove the
stubborn and stiff-necked Jews, he knew what entertainment themselves
should find, and what effect their Doctrine would have taken, yet to make
them without excuse, they were commanded to go, that they might be convinced of
sin, seeing there had been a Prophet among them. The Prophet Jeremy being
called of God to preach the word, is told aforehand, that they should not
obey his word, Ier. 1, 19. Ezekiel. 2, 5, 7. and 3, 7.
but fight against him. Likewise Ezekiell being sent to the children of Israel,
is showed that they would not hear him, nor cease from their ways. Whereby we
see, that howsoever the people were stiff-necked, and stif-harted, howsoever
their faces were stronger then the Flint, and their foreheads were harder then
the Adamant, yet God would have his word offered unto them, and laid before
them. He has mo ends then one of the preaching of his word; sometimes he
uses it to soften, and sometimes to harden; sometimes to save, and sometimes
to condemn; sometimes to be 2 Cor. 2, 16
the savor of life unto life, and sometimes to be the savor of death unto
death. So should it be with all godly householders, howsoever they have many
that harbor in their houses, and are entertained within their walls, that
regard not the fear of God, but pull away their shoulders from the sweet yoke
of God, yet they are not to surcease or wax faint and weary, but to continue
the instruction of them and the pouring of water upon the hard stone, proouing
if God at anytime will soften their hearts, and give them repentance, that they
may come out of the snares of the Devil, of whom they are holde^ captives. We
know not at what time God may work in them, and call them to a sight of their
sins, and to a turning from their sins. They may hear that in the time of
their ignorance, which they may practice in the time of their knowledge. They
may hear that Doctrine, which though it lie hid and covered, as Corn in the
earth, or as fire in the ashes a long time, and seem buried in perpetual
forgetfulness, yet it may afterward break forth as the light, and kindle in
their hearts as a mighty flame. Thus peradventure it might be with this
Onesimus, when he was converted by the Ministry of the Apostle to the Faith of
Christ, he might call to his remembrance many good things that he had heard
before, but never a whit regarded nor respected, and now profit by that
Doctrine that before he had despised and derided. The Disciples of Christ did
not by and by receive, nor conceive of his preaching; but when John 2, 22.
he was risen again, they remembered what he had delivered unto them. So
ought we to deal toward such as are committed unto us, let us plant and
water, committing and commending the success and increase of all our labors
unto God.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing where there are good means, are many times godless and
graceless men, we learn that to hear to salvation, and to receive willingly
instruction, is no general or common grace, no man can believe, saving he to
whom it is given. It is the gift of God that must open the understanding, and
boar through the ear, and sanctify the heart, before any can hear, with a
desire to understand, or lay it up with a purpose to practice and obey. Hence
it is, that the Prophet says, Esaias 50, 5.
The Lord GOD has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned I
back. The Evangelist Luke teaches, that when the Apostles preached the
Gospel, so many as were appointed to salvation, believed, which was a fruit
of their election; others mocked, which was a sign of their Reprobation. Lydia
is commended, in that she Acts 16, 4.
attended unto the things which Paul spoke, but it was the Lord that opened
her heart before she could be a faithful and fruitful hearer. To this purpose
Moses speaks to all Israel, Deuteronomy. 29, 2, 3, 4.
Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the Land of Egypt unto
Pharaoh, and unto al his servants, and unto all his Land, the great tentations
which thine eyes have seen, those great Miracles and wonders: yet the Lord
has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear
unto this day. Now, as this ouer-throweth such as teach and maintain an
universal Vocation, so it must serve to settle us in the truth of the
Doctrine of particular election, and predestination, Romans 9, 15, 16, 18, 13, 14
That it is neither in him that wills, nor in him that rundeth, but in God
that shows mercy. He shows mercy upon whom he will show mercy, and will
have compassion upon whom he will have compassion: therefore, he has mercy
upon whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. God loved Jacob, and hated
Esau, so that it was said, The elder shall serve the younger. The Lord
electeth some unto life and salvation, before the foundations of the world; he
elected some, and therefore not all; before the beginning of the world, and
therefore not for their deserts, who then had not their being upon the earth.
Who art thou Job 9, 4, Romans 9, 20.
that wilt dispute with GOD? Or what shall it avail us to question it, and
quarrel it with the Almighty? May the Esaias 10, 15. Romans 9, 21.
Clay reason with the Potter, or the Axe with the Carpenter, or the Saw with
him that draws it, or the Rod with him that takes it? Or shall the thing
formed, say unto him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Dare any
Servant pry and search into all the secrets of his Master? Can thou follow
and track the way of the Fish in the Waters, of the Fowls in the Air, of a
Serpent upon a stone, of a Ship in the Sea? Let us not ask a reason of his
will, but rather say with the Apostle, To. 11, 33, 34
O the deepenesse of the Riches both of the wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out? For who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who was his Counselor, or who has given
unto him first, and he shall be recompensed? If God should do equally well
unto all his Creatures, then were he after a sort so much less to be praised
and magnifyed of some for his benefits, seeing he should do nothing specially
and singulerly to them, more then to others. Neither is there are iniquity in
our God in so doing, for may he not Math. 20, 13
do with his own what he will? May he not lighten what eyes he will, or shoot
away what arrows he is disposed, without our certain knowledge of his secret
counsels?

Objection.
But some man may say, when an whole assembly have the same means, the same
Ministry, an whole Family the same teaching and instruction; How is it that
some believe, others will not believe? Some are converted, others are hardened?
Some are elect, others are rejected? Answer.
I answer, it is not for the Creature curiously to search into the works of
the Creator, but to be wise, according to sobriety: and as well a man might
demand, why all in the field is not pure Corn, but some Tares? Why all in
the Barn is not Wheat, but some Chafe? Why Trees bear some leaves, and not
all Fruit? Why in a great house there are Vessels of Gold and Silver; some
to an honorable, and others to a dishonorable use? Why there are as well
Goats that will not hear, as Sheep that hear the voice of the Shepherd? The
Lord Jesus adoreth the Counsel of his Father herein, and confesses the
reason to be his will and heavenly pleasure, and farther then this whosoever
goes, higher then this whosoever ascends, and deeper then this whosoever
searches, shall wander as in a maze, and never return, shall fall down
headlong into a Gulf, and never rise up again. Our Savior says, Mat. 11,
25, 26
I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the Wise and men of understanding, and have opened them unto
Babes, It is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such. As for the
condemnation of the wicked, and the execution of the heavy wrath and just
judgments of God, there is more then sufficient due desert in the Reprobate;
and though the righteous Lord work therein, yet beware thou imagine any evil
in him. The rain moystneth an evil Tree, and therefore it bears bitter, and
no better fruit. In that it bears fruit, it comes of the moisture: but in
that it brings forth evil fruit, it comes of his own Nature. The Sun
by the strength of his heat, and virtue of the Beams thereof, rayseth out of
the Dirt and Dunghill, many foul and filthy savors, that infect men, and
corrupt the Air; the raising of them up, is from the Sun, the unwholesome and
noisome smelles are from the places themselves. The Rain is not properly the
cause of the evil fruit, but the Nature of the Tree, and therefore it
woorthily calls for the Axe to cut it down, and then justly deserves to be
thrown into the fire. The Sun is not directly the cause of those filthy
savors that are extracted out of stinking Ponds and puddles, but the Miery and
marish Ditches themselves. So is it with God, he is as the Rain that falls,
and as the Sun that shyneth from Heaven, Acts 17, 28.
He moves the evil man who works evil: the action is of God, the evil
is from the free will of man, and from the soul spirit of the Devil. God is
not the Author of the evil, and therefore let Iam. 1, 13, 14
no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any man: but every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised.

Seeing then, the grace of Election, of Redemption, of Justification, of
Vocation, of Sanctification, is not general, nor generally given unto all, but
according to the free purpose and pleasure of him that chooses, redeemeth,
calls, justifies, and sanctifies: Let us acknowledge his great mercy to
the praise and glory of his name, when he makes his own ordinances
auayleable, which we see in many to be unprofitable: let us confess his
loving kindness toward us, when he does beget us by the immortal seed of
regeneration, and works effectually our salvation. For what have we in us,
to move the Lord to savor us, and follow us, with a multitude of his
compassions? Does he see us any better by Nature then others, whom he has
rejected and refused? No, in no wise. We are of the same moulde with them, and
by nature no better then they. Let us not stand upon the righteousness of our
own nature, or the deserts of our own works, or the goodness of our
Ancestors, but seek to have grace in our hearts, Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 13.
Quae non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco.
and not to call that our own, which we our selves have not done. The Father
shall not be saved by the Child, nor the Child by the Father, Ezekiel. 18, 25
26, 27.
but every man shall confess the ways of God to be equal, and give an
account for himself. Many godly and faithful parents have had children
appointed to wrath, and reserved to destruction: and therefore, whether our
forefathers were believers or unbelievers, let not us look so much upon them,
to glory in them, or to rest upon them, or think to be saved by them, as enter
into our selves, and labor to approve our obedience in the sight of God.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing that in good houses are found evil persons, it puts all
Parents and Masters in mind of a necessary duty, and offers them comfort in
the discharge of their duty. Their duty is not to forget or neglect to pray
unto God earnestly, constantly, and continually, for Gods blessing upon his
labors in their family. For when we have done our best endeavors, and used
the greatest diligence, there remains somewhat behind to be performed for our
Children and people, even to wait for the increase of our labors, and the work
of Gods Spirit, to season and sanctify their hearts that belong unto us. It is
not the outward work of teaching, that can convert the soul, and reform the
life. We can but speak unto the ear, it is God that speaks unto the heart.
Hence it is, that some believe, and others blaspheme; some are bettered by the
word, others are made worse by instruction, and become desperate, and extremely
wicked, as the Sun that softneth the wax, and hardneth the Clay. The Jews that
were fed by the word, Acts 13, 45. and 19, 9.
were filled with envy, and contemned the ordinance of God offered unto them,
and spoke evil of the way of God, and the means of salvation. So it was with
Pharaoh, the more Moses and Aaron spoke unto him, so much the more his heart
was hardened. For the word, thorough the corruption of our nature, is as an
Hammer that hardens the Anuile, as a fire that consumes the Stubble, and as
a Rain, that brings up briars and bushes, that are reserved to be burned.
There is no godly Householder, but if he be diligent to mark the manners, and
to know the behavior of the people about him, he shall espy not only many
unreformed in themselves, but secret enemies to reformation in others. So that
it is their parts, to entreat God, both before and after the means used, to
make them effectual and profitable, and to desire him to incline their hearts
to practice and obedience. We must follow the example of the Husbandman, who
after the sowing of his seed, and Tilling of his ground, James 5, 7.
looks for the early and the latter rain to come from heaven, so must we
call upon God our Heavenly Father, to send a gracious rain to moysten their
hard hearts, and so to soften them, as that they may be fit to receive
instruction. This the Prophet Jeremy teaches, Ier. 31, 18.
I have heard Ephraim lamenting thus; Thou have corrected me, and I was
chastised as an untamed Calfe, convert thou me, and I shall be converted, for
thou art the Lord my God. And in another place the Church says, Lamen. 5, 21
Turn thou unto us, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old.
Whereby we see, that we must depend upon God to pour out his grace upon them,
and to begin in them the work of regeneration.

Moreover, this serves to comfort all faithful Parents, and godly Masters,
who have with a good conscience been careful to discharge their duties, and
to reform their families, albeit many remain obstinate, and continue settled
in the Dregs of their sins. It is impossible for the Ier. 13, 23.
black Moore to change his skin, and the Leopard his spots; it is hard for
them to do good, that are accustomed to do evil. Our labor shall not be in
vain to our selves, albeit it be in vain to others; our work shall return
into our own bosom, albeit it will not enter into the bosom and breast of
others. This is it which Christ our Savior said to his Disciples, whom he
sent unto the lost Sheep of the house of Israel, When Math. 10, 12, 13.
ye come into an house, salute the same, and if the house be worthy, let your
peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. Our
careful endeavors shall be rewarded of God, albeit they be smally regarded of
men; they are approved in Heaven, albeit reproved and rejected in earth. When
the Prophet Esaias brings in the Lord Jesus, complaining that his preaching
took none effect among the unthankful people of his own hard-hearted Nation,
he comfort himself in this assurance, that he knew his labors should not
be in vain in the Lord, Esaias 49, 4.
I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, and for
nothing, but my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. So shall it
be with every one of us that are devout and diligent in doing our duties, and
in instructing our families, God will not measure our pains by their profit,
nor reward our diligence according to their negligence, 1 Cor. 3, 8.
For every man shall receive his wages according to his labor. This ought to
be an encoragement to al men to take pains with their people, and to comfort
them against al discomforts that arise in their way, to slake their diligence,
to cool their zeal, to hinder their pains, and to stop the course, that
happily they have begun to win their families to a love of the truth.

Use 4.
Lastly, seeing evil persons are found, where good means are used, it
teaches all those that are under the government of godly Masters, not to
bless themselves as though they were happy, because they dwell not in profane
places, because they serve not profane Masters, because they are partakers of
instruction, which many thousands want; but it belongs unto them to labor by
all means to make the use of the means offered unto them, to be fruitful
and effectual for their salvation. For, as when we come into the congregation
of the faithful, we ought to be prepared and fitted to receive the spiritual
food of our souls; so in coming to the private exercises of Catechizing and
instruction, we are not to present our selves rashly and vnreuently, as if we
went to hear a Play, or to see some pastime, or to dispatch some worldly
business: but we must perform these holy actions with a conscience of our
duties to God, and with a care of our own salvation. We have not of our selves
ears to hear, nor eyes to see, nor hearts to understand: we are not able to
conceive the things that are of God, without the assisting and strengthening
Spirit of God.

Before we come to hear the word read unto us, or the principles of Religion
laid before us, or to ioyn in prayer with our Brethren; James 1, 19. 1 Pet. 2,
1. Eccle. 4, 17. Exodus 19, 10
we must purge our affections, of wrath, filthiness, maliciousness,
dissimulation, hypocrisy, envy, and evil speaking. For so long as these
corruptions are found in us, to offer unto us the Word, is all one, as if most
pure Waters were powered into a stinking and polluted Vessel, whereby they are
made unprofitable. We must use earnest and hearty prayer unto the Lord, to open
our blind eyes and deaf ears, Psa. 119, 18.
That we may understand the wonderful things of his Law: Ezekiel. 36, 26
That he would take away our stony hearts, and give us hearts of Flesh, in
which his Word may be deeply imprinted. And whenever we are performing these
heavenly duties, Acts 10, 33 1 These. 2, 13. Luke 10, 16.
we must account our selves to be in Gods presence; we must remember, that he
is either speaking to us, or we are speaking to him; and we must stir up our
selves to all attention. Thus it shall come to pass, that the word of God,
which works in many to condemnation, shall be to us the Seed of
regeneration, the food of the soul, the curing of our corruptions, the light
of our ways, and the means of working in us all necessary graces of God in
this life, and of assuring unto us everlasting happiness in the life to come.

[Verse 12. Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him, that is; mine
own Bowels. Hitherto the Apostle has named and described the party or person
for whom he prays: Now he shows breefely the matter of his request, and the
account that he makes of him. The request is, that he would receive him into
his House, and retain him into his service again: the account made of him,
that he was to him as his Bowels, even most dear and tender, being made a
member of Christ, though a poor Slave and abject Servant by his calling, and a
Fugitive Runna-gate by his former condition: whereby we see the loving
affection and tender compassion of Paul toward him for our imitation. As if he
should have said; If I thought or imagined that he would be as unprofitable
unto thee hereafter, as he has been heretofore, I would never have given him
my Letters of commendation, nor have sent him back unto thee in this manner.
For I should be of this mind, rather to have him punished then received. But
now I am not afraid of it, or discouraged from sending him unto thee, I have
had a comfortable experience of his faithful service, who ministered unto me in
my necessities. I have therefore good cause to conceive a good opinion of him,
and to give this testimony of him, that he was never so unprofitable to thee,
as I have found him profitable to me.

Doctrine 3. Former offenses upon true repentance, are to be forgiven and
forgotten.
We learn from hence, that former offenses upon true repentance and amendment
of life, are to be remitted and pardoned by all true Christians. Whenever
our Brethren have trespassed against us, and offended us, it is our duty, upon
their unfeigned repentance to forgive them, to forget their injuries, and to
receive them into favor again. Whereas Onesimus fled from his Master, it was
a sin, from so good a Master it was a greater sin: but whereas he conveyed
away with him his Masters goods, and did steal from him at his departure,
this was more heinous, and made his offense worst of all: yet upon his
repentance, he labors to have him forgiven, and to have his trespass put
out of remembrance. This is offered to our considerations in the Parable of the
prodigal Son, when once he resolved to leave his loose life, and to return
back to his Luke 15, 20
Fathers house, from which he shamefully departed, he was entertained with a
kiss, and received into favor, and had his former misdoings and misdemeanors
forgiven. When Peter came to Christ and said; Math. 18, 21 22.
Master, how often shall my Brother sin against me, and I shall forgive him:
Unto seven times? Jesus said unto him; I say not unto thee, Unto seven
times: but unto seauenty times seven times. To this purpose Christ propounded
a parable of a certain King, Verse 23, 32, 33, 34, 35.
which would take an account of his Servants, and finding one that was
unmerciful and hard-hearted to one of his Fellow-Seruants, he called him unto
him, and said unto him: O evil Servant, I forgave thee all that debt because
thou prayedst me: ought not thou also to have had pity on thy
Fellow-Seruant, even as I had pity on thee? So his Lord was wroth, and
delivered him to the Tormentours, till he should pay all that was due to him:
so likewise shall mine heavenly Father do unto you, except ye forgive from
your hearts, each one to his Brother their Trespasses. We have in the
Scriptures sundry examples of the practice of this Doctrine, and of the
performance of this duty. We see this in Joseph toward his brethren, when they
desired forgiveness, and craved pardon at his hands after the death of their
Father, Genesis 50, 20, 21.
he said unto them; When ye thought evil against me, God disposed it to good,
that he might bring to pass as it is at this day, and save much people: Fear
not now therefore, I will nourish you and your Children, and he comforted them,
and spoke kindly unto them. This Paul himself practiced, and moved others to
practice toward the incestious Corinthians, 2. Cor. 2, 7, 8, 9, 10.
It is sufficient unto the same man, that he was rebuked of many, so that now
contrary-wise, ye ought rather to forgive him and comfort him, least the same
should be swallowed up with over much heaviness. Wherefore I pray you, that
you would confirm your love toward him: to whom ye forgive any thing, I
forgive also: for verily, if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for
your sakes forgave I it, in the sight of Christ. To this purpose the same
Apostle says; Ephe. 4, 26 27, 31, 32.
Be angry, but sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither
give place to the Devil. And afterward; Let all bitterness, and anger, and
wrath, and crying, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all
maliciousness: be ye courteous one to another, and tenderhearted, freely
forgiving one another. All these Testimonies and examples, as a Cloud of
Witnesses serve to teach us, that repentant offenders must be forgiven, and
their offenses blotted out of our remembrance.

Reason 1.
The reasons to confirm this truth farther to our consciences, are not far to
seek, but near at hand. For first, hereby we imitate our heavenly Father, and
are made like to him. As we are commanded to be holy, as he is holy: so we are
charged, to Be merciful, Luke 6, 36. Ezekiel. 18, 23.
because our Father also is merciful, who has not desire that the wicked
should dye, but that he should live, if he return from his ways. God is
provoked of us every moment, and we are indebted unto him ten thousand Talents,
yet he is entreated of us, and he is reconciled unto us, so that he makes his
Sun to arise upon the good and evil, and the rain to fall upon the just and
unjust: ought not we therefore to love one another, and to forgive one another
after his example? This is the reason used by the Apostle; Col. 3, 12, 13
Now therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on the bowels of
mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another: if any man have a quarrel to another,
even as Christ forgave, even so do ye. It were woeful to us, if God were not
ready to forgive: for we find our selves ready to offend, and one sin
unpardoned, is sufficient to make us be condemned.

Reason 2.
Secondly, our forgiving of our Brethren, gives comfort and confidence that
we our selves shall be forgiven. We are taught to gather assurance of pardon to
our own hearts, from our readiness to forgive others, that God will, and in
Christ has forgiven us our trespasses. This we see in the fifth petition of the
Lords Prayer, when we are taught to say, and to pray: Luke 11, 4.
Forgive us our sins, for even we forgive every man that is indebed to us.
Every one would be glad to have a sure testimony and infallible witness of the
forgiveness of his sins, for from hence comes our greatest comfort. Now
there cannot be stronger Argument to work in us this persuasion, seeing that
we by examining our affections toward our Brethren, may conclude the certainety
of Gods mercy toward us. For our forgiveness is not made Cyprian sermo. 6 de
orat. dominica.
the cause, but the sign and Seal of Gods forgiveness, for as much as his
pardoning of us, does work in us the pardon of others.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, it is a certain thing, that such as will not forgive, shall
themselves never be forgiven. Our forgiveness is upon condition, if we remit
the offenses of others: if we retain them, our own sins are also retained.
If then the example of God and our own assurance cannot draw us to this duty,
let the greatness of the danger move us to forgive, which hangs over their
heads, that harden their hearts in hatred and malice against their Brethren.
This our Savior sets down immediately after the Lords Prayer; Math. 6, 14,
15. Mat. 11, 25, 26
For if ye do forgiae men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you: but if ye do not forgive Men their trespasses, no more will your
Father forgive you your trespasses. And in another place he says; When ye
shall stand and pray, forgive, if ye have any thing against any Man, that your
Father also which is in heaven, may forgive you your trespasses: for if you
will not forgive, your Father which is in Heaven will not pardon you your
trespasses. This the Apostle James assures, James 2, 13.
That there shall be condemnation merciless, to him that shows not mercy,
and mercy rejoices against condemnation. This we see in the example of that
evil Servant that fell from his Masters favor, and was denied forgiveness.
For when as being unable to pay, Mat. 18, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
He cried for mercy, desired forbearance and promised payment, his Master had
compassion upon him, loosed him, and forgave him the debt. But when that
Servant dealt hardly with his Fellow-Seruant that ought him an hundred pence,
so that he laid hands upon him, took him by the throat, and cast him into
Prison, his Lord called back his grant, and required the debt of him, and
delivered him to the Tormentours. This may seem very strange at the first,
that his Lord should forgive the Debtor, yet and afterward exact the debt of
him: to pardon the offense, and to punnish the offender. This may seem all
one, as if a Magistrate should remit the theft, and execute the Thief. But we
shall not greatly marvel at this dealing, if we consider that God gives
pardon upon condition, and that we receive pardon upon condition. True it is,
this condition is not always or here in this place expressed, but it is here
and always to be understood. Notwithstanding, sometimes the condition is
added, as when Christ says; Condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned:
forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Luke 6. So that he forgiueth us our
offenses, condicionally that we forgive the offenses of our Brethren. Thus he
forgave the Servant that was not able to pay, to teach him compassion and mercy
toward those that were indebted unto him. If we will not forgive, but require
of our debtors the utmost farthing, we shall find the Lord as hard, and our
selves to make a Law against our selves. Wherefore, to the end that Gods
example may be followed in well doing, that our own consciences may be assured
of forgiveness, and that great danger is incurred through want of
forgiveness: we learn, that God requires it as a special duty of us, to
show our selves ready and forward to forgive our Brethren, that have wronged
and offended us.

Objections made against this doctrine.
And howsoever this Doctrine be proved by Scriptures, cleared by examples, and
confirmed by reasons, yet as it stands not with the liking of flesh and
blood, which is ready to revenge and breath out threatenings; so carnal reason
ministers many objections which are not to be passed over, but to be
diligently discussed and dissolved. It shall not therefore be amiss, before we
proceed to the uses, to answer such questions as stand in the way, whereat the
vnleatned stumble, as at a stone that lies in the way: which being determined,
we will handle the Uses.

Objection 1.
First, seeing we are bound to forgive every one that is indebted unto us, the
question may be asked whether, this extend to all debts, and that we are
charged to forgive all our Debtors? Answer.
I answer, debts are of two sorts, either Civil, which comes by Covenants
of buying and bargaining one with another, without which, the life of man
cannot consist. Of these mutual Covenants and Contracts between man and man,
we must not understand our Savior Christ when he speaks of Debts and
Debtors: but of private hurts and damages that are done unto us, in our bodies,
in our goods, or in our good Names. These injuries done to our bodies, which
oftentimes are misvsed; to our goods which are diminished, to our good Names
which are impaired, are to be remitted. As for other debts due to us, we may
require them, so we do it with showing mercy to such as are in necessity,
toward whom we ought to have patience in forbearing.

Objection 2.
The second is, whether a man may lawfully sue him at the Law that has
offended him? Or how does suing and forgiving stand together in a Christian?
Answer.
I answer, the Law is free for all men, and the end of it is to redress all
disorders. And as a Soldier in a lawful war may kill his Enemy, and yet
love him: so may a man forgive an injury, and yet use the remedy of the Law,
and thereby seek in a Christian manner, to redress the wrongs that are done
unto him. Now, in suing at the Law, we must observe these six rules. First, it
must not be for toys and trifles, but in matters of wait and importance,
which do nearly concern us, and whereby we are some way damnified. But
trifles cannot damnifie us. This reproves those that are so far carried upon
the spleen, 1 Cor. 6, 7.
as that they are ready to prosecute every action and slight occasion that is
offered unto them, if it be but the wagging of a Straw, which bewrays an
evil heart in them. Secondly, we must take heed of private revenge and inward
hatred, which if we conceive, we do not forgive. We must not suffer our suites
to cool our love to our Brethren, nor to weaken our Faith in performing our
service and worship unto God. For albeit the cause be never so just and
lawful, Romans 12, 9, 10.
yet if we handle it unlawfully, uncharitably, and unchristianly, we offend
God, and transgress against our Brother. Thirdly, we must beware of giving
offense to the Church of God. Some offenses are taken, but not given, as when
men are offended for doing our duty to God. We must not omit that which God
requires, because man will be offended. Our care must be, to be ready to give
satisfaction to the godly, that our doing be not justly scandalous, observing
the rule of the Apostle; 1 Cor. 10, 32 1 These. 5, 22.
Give no offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the church of
God, and abstain from all appearance of evil. Fourthly, the end of all
Controversies and Suites in Law, must be to live in concord, and to maintain
godly peace. If we have not this end, we aim at a wrong end. The end of all
lawful War, is not murder and tumults, but peace and quietness. So the end
of all strife, must be to live without strife. For if all injuries were put up
and were not repressed, many would grow worse and worse, and ouerturne the
Civil State and government.

Fifthly, another end we may at, must be, that the truth may come to light that
is hidden, that the party offending may be chastised, 1 Cor. 6, 11.
and by chasticement be brought to repentance for his wrongs. For such is the
malice of many, that the passing by of one wrong, would but open a wide gap or
gate to bring other injuries upon our own heads: and the more we suffer, the
more hard measure they would offer. Lastly, the Law must be used, not upon
pleasure, but upon necessity, and we must take it up as the last refuge and
remedy. We must use it as a Father uses correction, or as a Physician uses
desperate Medicines, or as the Surgion uses searing and cutting, 1 Cor. 6, 6.
when other will not serve the turn. If a friendly agreement and private
arbiterment may be had, let it be preferred, and the Magistrate not troubled
with our contentions. Thou ought not to produce into public Courts of
Justice and judgment, that which may well be decided and determined by grave,
sober, godly, and discreet men at home, as the small causes which the Rulers
might judge, were not to be brought before Moses. Exodus 18, 22. If it cannot be
had, so that though we seek peace and ensue it, yet it flies from us, it is
lawful for us to go farther, even to sue our neghbour at the law, and use the
benefit of the Magistrate.

Objection 3.
The third objection is, how can the Magistrate practice this Doctrine to
forgive offenses and offenders, seeing (as the Apostle teacherh.) Romans 13. He
bears not the Sword in vain? If his duty be to punish, how can he pardon? If
he be to execute judgment, how can he forgive them that trespass? Answer.
I answer, a Magistrate is to be considered two ways, according to two
several persons which he does sustain; to wit, either as he is a Man, or as
he is a Magistrate, as he has a common condition, or a special. As he is a
man, or a Christian man (which estate he has common with his Brethren) he is
to bear and forbear, and behave himself as others: but as he is a
Magistrate, which estate he has as properly belonging unto him; he is the
Deputy and Vicegerent of God, he sustaineth his person, he executes his
judgment; and therefore he ought not to have any respect of persons, or wink
at the committing of any wickedness.

Objection 4
The fourth Objection, is, how we can be said to forgive our Brethren their
trespasses, seeing no man can forgive sins but only God. Hence it is that
David says in the Psalm; Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and
done evil in thy sight. Psalm. 51. Likewise the Scribes and Pharisees, when
they heard Christ speak to the man sick of the Palsy; Thy sins are
forgiven thee, began to reason among themselves, Who is this that speaks
Blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God only? Luke 5, 20, 21. Answer.
I answer, in every sin there are two things to be marked and considered; the
evil of the action, and the damage that arises to man by the evil action:
the one God forgiueth; the other man forgiueth. God pardons the evil; Man
pardonerh the damage or detriment that befalls his person, goods, or name. So
then God forgiueth, and Man forgiueth: God forgiueth the sin, man forgiueth
the hurt. For we must observe, that in every trespass are two offenses; one to
God; the other to man. To God, when he forgiueth the breach of his law, and
imputes it not to the offender which belongs properly to him, and no man is
able to do. To man, when he remitteth the injury or harm that has risen to
him, in the things that appertain to him. It is not in man's power to forgive
the sin, whereby God is offended: and he oftentimes pardons the wrong done
to him, when God forgiueth not the sin: for God never forgiueth any, but such
as are penitent.

Objection 5.
Lastly, the question may be asked, whether all offenders against us are to be
forgiven, or only such as repent. The Apostle moves Philemon to pardon his
Fugitive and false-fingred Servant upon his repentance. So Christ our Savior
speaks to his Disciples: Luke 17, 3, 4.
Take heed to your selves, if thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him:
and if he repent, forgive him: And though he sin against thee seven times in
a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying; It repents me,
thou shall forgive him. Whereby it may seem at the first, that either we are
only to forgive the penitent, and retain malice against the impenitent, which
were want of Charity: or say, that the condition annexed by Christ, is void
and idle, which were a voice of blasphemy. Answer.
I answer, offenses are forgiven two ways, as there are two kind of persons
that offend against us. Some acknowledge and yield their offense, others are
obstinate and stiff-necked. So, one kind of forgiveness is, when we bear no
malice, when we do no wrong, when we seek no revenge. Another kind, is; when
we think well of them that have offended us, when we are persuaded that God
has forgiven them, when we are ready to receive them into our favor again.
Wherefore we have no liberty granted unto us to deny mercy and forgiveness to
the wicked. If a man have done us wrong, and then either denies it, or
diminishes it, and will not repent of it: True it is, we are commanded to
love him, we are forbidden to hate or to hurt him, we are restrained from
revenge, we are brideled from wishing or desiring vengeance to fall from Heaven
upon him, we are charged to do him good and not evil, we are willed to procure
his salvation, to seek his amendment, and to further his repentance that he
may see his sin; but we are not bound nor bidden to have a good opinion and
estimation of him; for though we must love him, yet we must think of him as he
deserves. But when a man has offended us, and trespassed against us, and
being reproved and admonished confesses his sin, desires pardon, craves
reconciliation, offers satisfaction, bewaileth his former transgression, and
promises amendment of life, it is our duty not only to love him, but to like
of him: not only to hate him as an Enemy, but to account him as a Brother: not
only to desire vengeance to come upon him, but to accept of his repentance, and
to assure his heart that God has forgiven him, and will not lay his sin unto
his charge. So then, if any man do me an open injury, and I laying aside a
thirsting after revenge, Calui. harm. in Euangel.
do not cease to love him, but in stead of evil do good, and in stead of
wrong, do bestow a benefit upon him, though in regard of the wickedness of his
heart, the mischief of his hands, the want of repentance, and the nature of
his offense, I think hardly and heynously of him (as he is worthy) yet am I
truly said and rightly accounted, to forgive him. For when God requires that
we do good to our Enemies, love them that hate us, bless them that hurt us,
pray for them that persecute us, and to do good to all them that speak all
evil against us: he does not thereby presently command that we allow in them
those things that he condemns, or praise in them the things that he
reprooueth: but he only would have our hearts free from hatred, our minds from
malice, our tongues from slander, and our hands from revenge. The second
manner of forgiveness (which is a free and full forgiveness) is, when beholding
lively fruits of their repentance, we esteem them as brethren, we account them
as the children of God, we favor the^ as fellow members with us of Christ, and
are persuaded that the remembrance of their sins committed against God, and of
their injuries offered unto us, are blotted out of Gods sight. For true
repentance is an high and holy work, greatly accepted of God and his Angels.
Of God, Ezekiel. 18, 22.
because when we repent, he will put all our sins out of his remembrance. Of
the Luke 15, 7, 10.
Angels, because there is joy in their presence for one Sinner that conuerteth,
more then for ninety and nine just men that need no repentance. The substance
of that which has been said, is this: If an offender have wronged thee, and
continue obstinate and settled to wrong thee still, thou shall forgive him, that
is; thou shall not hurt him, nor malice him, but love him, and seek to do him
good: but as yet thou art to think him a wilful and wicked man, Esaias 5, 20.
Because thou art not to speak evil of good, or good of evil; to put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; to call bitter sweet, and
sweet sower. If he turn from his evil ways, and repent him of his sins,
thou shall forgive, him, that is; think as well of him, as ever thou did
think ill of him, comfort him, raise him up with the sweet promises of the
Gospel, and assure him that God has forgiven him, and therefore he need not
doubt of the forgiveness of his Fellow-Seruant. And if we will a little search
the Scriptures, we shall find examples of both these sorts and kinds of
forgiveness recorded unto us. Of the first sort of forgiving evil doers, even
while they remain evil doers, we have in David toward Shemei, that curssed
him with an horrible Curse, he swear that he should not dye, and pardons him
(albeit Abishai. the Son of Zeruiah said; 2. Sam. 19, 21, 22, 23. 2 King. 2,
9.
Shall not Shemei dye for this, because he curssed the Lords anointed?)
Notwithstanding, he thought of him as of a wicked man, and gave Solomon his
Son charge, not to account him innocent. And this is that forgiveness which
Moses speaks off. Leuit. 19. Thou Leu. 19, 17.
shall not hate thy Brother on thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy
Neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Of the second sort of forgiveness,
which is toward the penitent, we have an example in Paul and the Church of
Corinth, toward the incestuous person which had committed Fornication, 1 Cor.
5, 1, 13
And such Fornication as is not named without detestation among the Gentiles,
taking unto him his Fathers Wife. For when he being rebuked of many, and put
out from among them, sorrowed for his sin with a godly sorrow, which caused
repentance not to be repented off, he wills them to receive him, and
entertain him among them as a faithful Brother, and to think well of him as
they did before, 2 Cor. 2, 7, 11
And to minister comfort unto him, least he should be swallowed up with
overmuch heaviness, and least Satan should circumuent us, for we are not
ignorant of his enterprises. Hence it it that he says; ye ought to forgive
him, and to comfort him, and to confirm your love toward him, which is as much
as if he should desire them to take him again for a Brother.

Use 1.
The Objections being answered, which stood before us as a Cloud that dimmed
and darkened our sight: let us come now to the Uses of the Doctrine, and see what
we may conclude from hence. First, seeing former offenses are upon our
repentance to be forgiven, we learn that we ought all to be of a plakeable
Nature, easy to be appeased, and ready to be entreated; we must be inclinable
to mercy, and pass by offenses that might provoke us to anger. It is a fruit
of true love, described by the Apostle; 1 Cor. 13, 4, 5, 6, 7.
It suffers long, it is bountiful: Love enuyeth not: Love does not boast it
self: it is not puffed up: it does no uncomely thing: it seeks not her own
things: it is not provoked to anger: it thinks not evil: it rejoices not
in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: it suffers all things: it believes
all things: it hops all things: it endures all things. There is no man
but gladly desires to have God (that is able) to be ready and willing to
forgive him his sins: and therefore we ought to be like affectioned toward
our Brethren. It is a great comfort to the weakness of our Faith, which
needs all proppes and pillars to sustain and uphold it. For though the
forgiveness of our Brethren be no cause of our forgiveness, it is a sign and
testimony, whereby we are infalliblie confirmed, that as surely as we remit
others, we shall be remitted. Nothing makes us more resemble the Lord, then to
be merciful, he is the God of patience, Psalm. 103, 8, 9 14.
He is slow to anger, he is full of compassion, and of great kindness, he will
not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever, he knows whereof we are
made, and he remembers we are but Dust. On the other side, nothing in the
World makes us so like unto Satan, and to be transformed into his Image, as
malice and envy. Hence it is that he is called a Tempter, a Slanderer, a false
accuser, the author of all hatred and dissension. This appears in the
example of our first Parents, so soon as they were placed of God in the
Garden, immediately Satan set upon them, and sought to dispossess them of that
happy estate. If then we give our selves to hatred and malice, and never
think our selves well, but when we are disgorging the rank or and envy of our
boiling stomachs, we show our selves not to be the Sons of God, who is Love
it self; but to be the Children of the Devil, who is maliciousness it self.
For, He 1 Ioh. 3, 8, 9.
that commits sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the
beginning: for this purpose was made manifest that Son of God, that he might
loose the Works of the Devil: Whosoever is borne of GOD sins not, for his
Seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne of GOD.

This reprooueth those that keep old revenge and settled malice as a festered
sore, rusting and rankling in their hearts, to the satisfying of their own
lusts, to the poisoning of their own Souls, and to the dishonouring of
Almighty God. This we see to have been in Caine, who hating his Brother, and
suffering the Sun to go down upon his wrath, in the end his wrath
conceived, brought forth Murder, and Murder when it was finished, wrought out
his destruction. The like appears in Absalom toward his Brother Ammon. For
when Ammon had defiled his Sister Tamar, respecting neither the wickedness of
the Fact, nor the shame of his Sister, nor the reproach of his person, nor the
offense of his Brother, nor the blaspheming of the enemies, nor the scandal of
the Church, nor the offense of his Father, nor the defiling of his Fathers
house: Absalom 2 Samuel 13, 23 29.
conceived hatred in his heart, and executed vengeance upon him to the full,
two years after: he dissembled his purpose till occasion served, and afterward
his malice brought forth a lamentable effect, when he goared his Sword in
blood. It is esteemed among carnal men, a token of valor to revenge, but
indeed it is no better then slavish weakness, and want of true fortitude. So
then, they are possessed with the Spirit of the Devil, that are content to
shake hands and promise forgiveness, that speak deceitfully every one with his
neghbor, flattering with their lips, and gloze with a double heart; yet keep in
mind the remembrance of old injuries waiting and watching for opportunity of
time, place, and means, to execute the bloody designs of their beastly hearts.
Would we be thus dealt with all at the hands of God? Would we be thus
forgiven? Would we have half a forgiveness, and no more of him? Woe, and woe
again were it to us, if we were thus forgiven. Let us deal as faithfully and
fully, as sincerely and unfeignedly with them, as we desire to have the
eternal God to deal with us: Math. 7, 2.
For with what judgment we judge, we shall be judged: and with what measure we
mete, it shall be measured to us again. Let us bannish from us, all lame, and
half, and halting remission, which keeps a part and piece vnforgiuen: if we
would have the Lord forgive all, and cast them into ^he bottom of the Sea for
ever, let us be like minded toward our Brethren. Otherwise, our own
consciences shall convince and condemn us, so often as we say the Lords
Prayer, seeing we pray most fearfully against our selves: and as we reserve
behind in a corner of our hearts a piece of our malice, so we desire the
Lord also to reserve a part of his wrath for us, and of his punnishment
against us.

Objection.
If any think himself wise enough to shift off this danger, and say; so long
as I cannot resolve with my self to be in Love and Charity with my Neighbor,
and to forgive him that has offended me, so long I will not use the Lords
Prayer, but some other good and godly Prayers. For we are not tied to this or
that form, we have many excellent Prayers beside, we may use any of them.
Answer.
See, Fool, Fool, how subtle and crafty thou art to deceive thy self.
Blind people play Perk. on the Lords Prayer.
with the Lords Prayer, as the Fly does with the Candle, or as the child does
with the Knife: whereby it falls out, that the one is burned, the other is
wounded. Take heed, God is not mocked, we cannot dally with him. It is not
this or that form that God regards, it is our being in that estate, not
reconciled to our Brother, that brings upon us sudden destruction. For God
is Love, 1 John 4, 16. and 3, 14, 15.
And he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him: he that loves
not his Brother, abides in death: Whosoever hates his Brother is a
Manslayer, and ye know, that no May-slayer has eternal life abiding in him.
Whereby we see, that to such as are malicious, there is no forgiveness, as we
have noted before.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing such as offend us, must upon their sound repentance be
forgiven; we are taught hereby, not to reproach and vpbraid men what they have
been, when they are renewed by amendment of life, but consider their present
condition what they are. For when God has put out of his remembrance their
sins, we must not set them upon records: when GOD has discharged them of
them, we must not lay them to their charge: when God has cured and covered
them, we must not uncover them, and make them bleed afresh. Let us remember
what we our selves have been, before we were in the State of grace, even as
evil as others, and had our delight in all sin. The Apostle says. Romans 7,
18. Romans 7, 18.
I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will
is present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good.
Likewise, he forbids and restrains the Gentiles from insulting and
triumphing over the Jews, that were through infidelity for a season cut off:
Romans 11, 18, 19, 20.
Thou will say; The Branches are broken off, that I might be grafted in: Well,
through unbelief they are broken off, and thou stand by Faith: boast not
thy self against the Branches, be not high minded, but fear. It is a great
reproach to us, to reproach such as have fallen, and are risen again by true
repentance: to vpbraid such as have sinned, and have forsaken their sins. It is
a greater blemish to those that check them after they have turned from them,
then to those that committed them. For they have washed away by their tears
the filthiness of them, and blotted out the deformity that did cleave unto
them.

True it is, so long as we continue in sin, and follow the lusts of our own
hearts, we must be content to be reproved and shamed for them, that so we may
be brought to see them, and be sorry for them. Thus it is noted, that Christ
began to vpbraid the Cities, Math. 11, 20,
Wherein most of his great works were done, because they repented not. So the
Apostle feared, 2 Cor. 12, 21
Least when he came again to the Corinthians, his God should abase him among
them, so that he should bewail many of them which had sinned already, and yet
repented not of the uncleanness, and Fornication, and wantonness which they
have committed. They then that repent nor, are to be disgraced: but such as
have repented, are to be loved and cherished. It skilleth not what they have
been, for they are accepted according to the grace which they have received,
which serves as a singular comfort unto them. They that labor to disgrace
those whom they should embrace, do imitate the example and practice of the
Devil, who tempts those that he sees to have renounced his service, and
departed from his Kingdom, and tells them what they have done, how loose
they have been in their lives, and into what horrible sins they have fallen,
that thereby he might bring them to despair, and to let go their strong
confidence that they have in the promises of the Gospel. So it is with sundry
of the Servants and Children of the Devil, they taunt and revile the
faithful, for former faults which now they hate and abhor. But as they
answer Satan, so they may all his Instruments, that they should consider
rather what they are, then what they have been; and behold their present
condition, not that which is past. Let us be like the good Angels, who do
rejoice at the conversion of Sinners, but never cast them in the teeth with
their offenses that have stumbled, and are recovered.

Use 3.
Lastly, let us cut off all occasions of dissension, and quench the fire that
is begun to be kindled. A small spark, if it be not quenched, will break out
into a great fire: a little smoke nourished, will turn into a flame. So when
causes of contention and division do arise, we must endeavor to stay them and
appease them. It is easily stopped in the beginning, which afterward is
hardly, or not at all resisted. This wisdom we see in Abraham, (when strife
arose between his Heard-men, and the Heard-men of Lot) he said unto him;
Gene. 13, 8
Let there be no strife (I pray thee) between me and thee, neither between
thy Heard-men and my Heard-men: for we are Brethren. They were not natural
Brethren according to the flesh, as discending of one Father, but of a near
kindred according to the flesh, and a nearer according to the Spirit: he was
Lots Uncle and elder, and in that respect his better, he was richer and
wealthier, he had more Servants also to take his part, to join together, and
to ouer-maister him, if he had listed: yet he stands not upon one, or upon
all these: he looked not when Lot should stoop and bow unto him, but as in
years, wealth, and authority, so in godliness, meeknes, and moderation he went
before him. Let us all consider this, and be provoked by the example of Christ,
to be meek and lowly, Math. 11, 29.
That we may find rest unto our souls. The Lord Jesus has taught us to call
upon one Father, shall we then disdain our Brethren? The Apostle teaches,
Col. 3, 13. Ephe. 4, 4.
that we are one body: if the members of the body should disagree and fall out;
would not the ruin and destruction of the whole body follow? Again, we are
all called to the same hope of eternal life; there is one mark, at the which
we all shoot; there is one end, whereunto we bend; being Children of the same
Father, and Heirs of the same Grace, and partakers of the same inheritance. O
that this Meditation were settled and grounded in our hearts to love with
brotherly kindness, and to hate all malice as a Serpent.

Let us learn, that we ought no more to be divided asunder, then the kingdom
of Heaven can be divided: and that whosoever renteth himself from his
Brethren, banisheth himself from the place of glory, which we all look for.
Christ Jesus cannot be divided: for as his Coat was John 19, 23.
without seame, so his body must be without separtion. There are not diverse
Faiths, diverse Baptismes, diverse Suppers, diverse Gods: but one Lord Jesus, one
Baptism, one Faith, one Lords Supper, one God and Father of all. All these
things, Abraham (no doubt) did consider and believe, and therefore said; We
are Brethren. He does not stand upon his reputation, and say; Shall I stoop to
him? Shall I creep and crouch to him? Am not I better then he? Am not I
wealthier then he? Am not I elder then he? He lays all these aside, and
resolves thus; Are not we Brethren? And shall we strive? What a shame would
this be to us? What a dishonor to God? What an evil example to these Nations
that live among us? What a stumbling block of offense shall we lay before them
to cause them to blaspheme God, and to speak evil of us, of our Religion, and
of our holy profession? Let not us therefore tarry till others come and offer
conditions of peace, but let us seek peace and ensue it.

Shall we stand aloof and hang back from agreement with them, because we take
our selves to be abused, wronged, slandered, and injured? Shall God command us
to forgive, and will we answer presumptuously, we will not forgive? Shall the
Lord say unto us; Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart: and will we
reply audaciously, we will hate him? Or if we do not scorn God to his face,
what will we, what can we allege, or what shall we bring for our defense, that
Abraham might not have brought as well as we? Will we say we are more
excellent, and therefore reason it is, that they should bow the knee unto us?
Will we say we are the better men? So was Abraham. Are we richer and wealthier?
So was Abraham. Are we elder in years, and so look that the younger should
yield? So was Abraham. Have we many Friends to join with us, to see we
shall have no wrong, and to take our parts? So had Abraham. Are we mighter in
force and power? So was Abraham, he went every way beyond Lot. Now then, if we
be the Children of Abraham, John 8, 39.
we must do the works of Abraham. Whatsoever privileges we have to advance
us above our Brethren, under color whereof we shroud the corruption of our
Nature, and the malice of our hearts, let us lay all aside and cast them into
the Dust, let us renounce age and honor; let us cast from us birth and years;
let us deny wealth and worship, to the end we may be little and lowly in our
eyes. Abraham got more true honor by yielding, then we can do by our proud
looks, lofty stomachs, and corrupt minds. He that has most godliness will
relent soonest.

Let us strive who shall go before another in mercy and forgiveness, and put
far away all bitterness of Spirit, and put on all humbleness of mind. But
(alas) where is this meekness and long-suffering, while we rail and rage
one against another? If the least occasion of contention and jar be offered,
how ready are we to embrace it, to nourish it, to prosecute it with all
extremity? When we are a little moved, are these the words of Brethren, I
will not take this abuse at his hands, I will never put up this injury, I will
not be made such a Noddy, I will sue him at the Law, I will not leave him worth
a Groat, I will make Dice of his Bones, I will tread upon his Grave: and shall
I yield unto him, I will never do it.

O my Brethren, is this to follow the steps of faithful Abraham, or to be
like him, who was so wise, so meek, so great a lover of peace and concord? If
we be ashamed to tread in his paths, take heed least the God of Abraham be
ashamed of us, both in this life, and in his Kingdom for ever. We boast our
selves to be the Children of Abraham, we account our selves to be true
Christians, and yet we will neither follow the example of Abraham, nor obey the
commandment of Christ. The Lord remitteth the debtes that we are not able to
pay, and will we require the utmost farthing? He forgiueth ten thousand
Talents, and will not we forbear an hundred pence? It is the Master and Lord
of all that is so merciful, and shall the Servant be so cruel and hard-harted
to his Fellow-Seruant? Let us take heed least our malice and unmercifulness
unto others, do cry out for vengeance against us, and shut up the mercy and
compassion of God toward us, rendering seven fold into our bosoms, and
barring us from any access to the Throne of his Grace. For if we forgive not
men their trespasses, our prayers shall be abominable, our religious exercises
shall be turned into sin, and our offenses shall not be forgiven.

Three profitable Meditations.
To conclude, let us consider these three points. First, that no Man can
offend us, as we daily offend God, in thought, word, and deed. Secondly, that
we may fall, and perhaps have fallen already into the like offense that we
blame and reprove in others. Thirdly, we would be greatly grieved, not to be
respected and relieved in the bitterness of our hearts, therefore we should
regard the sorrow and supplication of others, craving mercy and commiseration
at our hands. If we suffer our Brethren to call to us, and we be deaf,
stopping our cares against them, we greatly deceive our selves, if we think to
find the Lord other-wise minded toward us.

[ Thou therefore receive him, that is mine own Bowels.] He calls Onesimus
his Bowels or Entrals, being nothing of Kin to him in the Flesh, in respect
of his earnest and fervent love that he bears to him in Christ, being a true
professor of the Faith. He knew well the lewd disposition of Servant, for
the most part in those days, as the Masters were cruel to them, so they were
unfaithful to their Masters. It was found commonly true by common experience,
which churlish and covetous Naball spoke falsely of David. 1. Sam. 25, 10. Who
is David? And who is the Son of Ishai? There be many Servant now-a-daies,
that break away every Man from his Master. The like we see in the Servants of
Shemei. 1. King. 2, 39. Who fled away from him to Gath. It was therefore a rare
thing; and consequently more wonderful to find a man of this quality so well
qualified: and a man of so bad note, to be so notable, which made the Apostle
so earnest in speaking for him, and in commendinh of him. For nothing could
have been said more effectual to pacify the wrath, and to mollify the heart
of Philemon, in as much as he infers, that if he would not be appeased at
his request, he had raged by this means on the very bowels of Paul. Behold
therefore in this place, the conjunction of two heavenly virtues in the
Apostle; to wit, Humility, and Love; that it is hard to say which was the
greater, so that he was not ashamed to receive as into his Bosom and Bowels, a
base Bond-slaue, and besides, a Thief and a Runna-gate, to the end he might
protect and defend him from the displeasure of his Master. And doubtless, if
the conversion and turning of man unto God, were as highly prized and worthily
esteemed of us as it ought to be, we would lovingly tender, and charitably
embrace and such as we see truly, without hypocrisy converted unto God.

Doctrine 4. Our love to to the Saints, especially such as have been converted
by us, ought to be dear and fervent.
We learn from hence, that the love which Christians ought to bear to all the
Saints, especially to those whom they have been means to convert, ought to be
entire, dear, hearty, earnest, most faithful, and most fervent. It is our
duty to love all men, more especially the Saints, but most especially such as
have been gained to the Faith by us. The Lord himself testifies his tender
compassion toward his Children, to provoke them to follow his example. The
Prophets declare; Deuteronomy. 32, 10. Zach. 2, 8.
That he which touches them, touches the apple of his eye. So Zachariah
blessed the God of Israel, Luke 1, 78.
Who through his tender mercy gave life to them that sat in darkness and in
the shadow of death, and guided their feet into the way of peace. This
appears notably in Christ Jesus, Heb. 2, 17.
Who was made like unto his Brethren, that he might be merciful, he will not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax: John 15, 12, 13. and
13, 34.
These things (says he) have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in
you, this is my Commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you:
greater love then this has no man, when any man bestows his life for his
friends. This affection we find in many places in the Apostle; Phil. 1, 8, 9.
1 Thessalonians. 3, 7, 8
God is my record, how I long after you all, from the very heart-roote in Jesus
Christ: we had consolation in you, in all our affliction and necessity, through
your Faith, for now are we alive, if ye stand fast in the Lord. The Evangelist
Luke describing the Church of God gathered together after the ascension of
Christ, says; Act. 2, 44, 45
All that believed were in one place, and had all things common, and they sold
their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every one had
need. This is a precept given in the Law, and no duty more often urged and
touched in the Gospel. Moses says, Leuit. 19, 18 Math. 5, 43. Romans 13, 9.
Gal. 5, 14.
Thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful of wrong against the Children of thy
people, but shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, I am the Lord. The Apostle
Paul among many precepts that he gives, this is one of the chief and
principal, Romans 12, 9, 10. and 13, 8.
Let love be without dissimulation, abhor that which is evil, and clean
unto that which is good: be affectioned to love one another with brotherly
love. All these testimonies of God the Father, of Christ Jesus our Lord, of the
Apostle, of other Christians, and of the whole Church, do sufficiently teach
us, that howsoever all the Saints of God are to be loved, yet those especially
that have been converted to us.

Reason 1.
The reasons that may be rendered to uphold (as firm pillars to strengthen)
this Doctrine, are many and infallible. For first, there is great labor
employed, long time spent, many means used, and continual care bestowed to
convert a Soul to God. It is no idle work, it is not brought to pass without
much ado. A Woman having had an hard labor with her child, does love it the
more, and will use speech accordingly, saying; This was a very dear Child
unto me, I must needs love it; yea, her love John 16, 21.
is so hearty and entire, that she forgets the pains and sorrow that she
has sustained. Benjamin among all the Sons of Jacob, was most tenderly
beloved, in whose birth the Mother dyed, the fruit was saved, but the Tree
withered and fell down, he cost Jacob therefore dear, even his best beloved
wife, and indeed his only lawful wife, whom Laban promised, and for whom he
served, Genesis 35, 18.
so that he called him Benjamin, the son of his right hand. If then, that
which is dearly bought, be deeply beloved, it is no marvel if it work
effectually in spiritual things, where the greatest pains and labor is
showed. We see this in the Galathians, who had put the Apostle to much trouble
and exceeding torment in their recovery to Christ, Gal. 4, 11, 19
are by him called his Little Children of whom he travailed in birth again,
until Christ were formed in them, and he was in much fear and perplexity,
least he had bestowed on them labor in vain. This appears in his behavior
toward the Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, the glory, and the
Covenants, To. 9, 1, 2, 3.
I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me witness in the
Holyghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in mine heart,
for I would wish my self to be separated from Christ, for my Brethren that
are my Kinsmen according to the flesh. The like affection is bewrayed in Moses
toward Gods people, who had carried them in his bosom as a Nursse does the
sucking Child, when God was offended with them, and threatened to consume them,
he cried unto the Lord, Ex. 32, 31, 32
Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them Gods of Gold,
therefore now if thou pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear: but if thou
will not, I pray thee raze me out of thy Book which thou have written. Thus
he showed the bowels of his love toward that people, with whom he had taken so
great pains, for whom he had so often prayed, and by whom he had been so
oftentimes provoked.

Reason 2.
Secondly, by testifying of our love, and showing forth the fruits thereof, we
gather great assurance that we are of the company of the faithful, of the
Communion of Saints, and of the society of them that belong to the truth, when
we love unfeignedly those that are of the truth. The Apostle John teaches that
our love to the brethren, is a fruit of true faith, 1 John 3, 14 19.
Hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall before him assure our
hearts. And again he says, We know we are translated from death unto life,
because we love the Brethren; he that loves not his Brother, abides in
death. Whereby he shows, that we are assured that we belong to God, are his
children by the fruits of love, which are certain tokens of our election to
eternal life.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, love is the livery of Christ, and as it were the badge and cognizance
whereby we are known to be his Disciples, and to be taught and directed by his
spirit. This agrees with the Doctrine of Christ, Ioh. 13, 34, 35.
A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another; as I have
loved you; that ye also love another; by this shall all men know, that ye are
my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Christ Jesus did instruct his
Disciples, especially in love, and did as it were graft it and engraue it in
their hearts, and thereby made Charity a note of Christianity, seeing that
where love does not rest, there Christ does not dwell. If then, we would make it
manifest, that we have been brought up in the School of Christ, we must love
one another.

Reason 4.
Lastly, seeing it is the sum of the Law, and a token and testimony that we
make Conscience to walk in the ways and commandments of God. Heerunto comes
the laying of the Apostle, Romans 13, 8, 9
Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another: for he that loves another,
has fulfilled the Law. For this; Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou
shall not covet, and if there be any other commandment, it is breefely
comprehended in this saying, even in this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. This is a special praise, and singular commendation of love, that it is
a short sum and brief abridgement of the whole Law, and of every
Commandment contained in the Law. This truth is taught in sundry other places,
and repeated again and again, Gal. 5, 14. Colos. 3, 14. 1 Timothy 1, 5.
All the Law is fulfilled in one word, which is this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. And Col. 3. Above all things put on love, which is the
bond of perfectness. Likewise 1 Timothy 1, 5. The end of a commandment, is Love
out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. Love
therefore comprehends all duties: for Charity is the Law abridged, as the Law
is Charity enlarged. Love is as it were a general Virtue, like unto the soul
which is said to be whole, in the whole and in every part, or as the blood
which is dispersed through the whole body, so is love enlarged and lengthned
through all and every virtue. Seeing then, such as are converted by us, are the
fruit of our labor, and that Love to the brethren is the seal of our
salvation, the badge of our profession, and an Epitome or a breuiary of the
whole Law, it follows that it ought to be hearty, earnest, and fervent, toward
all the faithful, especially such as have gone astray, and bin brought by us
into the right way.

Use 1.
This then being a virtue so necessary, that every one which belongs to the
Lord Jesus Christ, must yield their obedience, even to love the Brethren, and
show himself a true Christian, by showing Charity to his neighbor: let us
consider the nature and properties of this Love, that we may have the right
and true use of this Doctrine. For here is occasion offered unto us, to search
into the knowledge of this Virtue, which is almost banished from among men, or
weeded and worn out of the world, or carried from hence into the wilderness
from the sons of men, or departed up from heaven from whence it came, and to
have quite and clean abandoned the gross earth, which is unworthy to
entertain so precious a Jewel any longer. First therefore let us know What
Love is.
what Brotherly love is. It is a work of Gods spirit, whereby a man is moved to
affect his Brother for Gods sake, and to show forth the fruit of this
affection. I call it a work of Gods spirit, because it is not Naturally in
us, it is not borne with us. Naturally, every one is a lover of himself, and
unnaturally is an hater of his neighbor, so that true love is the print of
Gods finger, and a mark set upon us by his spirit. Hence it is, that the
Apostle setting down the fruits of the spirit, reckons up Love in the first
place, as one of the principal, Gal. 5, 12. Ephesians. 6, 23.
The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, etc. So then, we want this grace, until God work it in us. We
need not seek far for self-love, for Love of the world, and the things
that are in the world, for the Love of pleasures and carnal vanities, we have
these near unto us, even within us; but we can never love the godly for Gods
sake, until it be given us from above, of whom only we must ask it, and from
whence only we can receive it. Again, to be well affected toward our Brother,
is to wish and seek his good, to rejoice at his prosperity, and to be grieved
at his misery. True love is not idle, 1 John 3, 18
and it makes us that we shall not be unfruitful and unprofitable unto others.
We must be ready to help them bear their burden, and show the bowelles of
compassion toward them. That love which does not manifest it self to the
relief and help of his neighbor, is no true Love, but bears only the shadow
of it.

Moreover, it is added, that we must do it for Gods cause, because God is
principally and first to be loved with all our power, and for himself. Our
neighbor is to be loved in God, and for God, because he is Gods creature, and
bears his Image. For Love extended to man is a fruit of the Love of God.
Hence it is, that the Apostle says, 1 John 4, 21
This Commandment have we of him, that he that loves God, should Love his
Brother also. God cannot be loved, and our Brother hated, because there is one
and the same Lawmakers, that commands both to love him and our neighbor also.
Lastly, we must consider, who is our Brother, and what is our neighbor that we
must Love, which are the parties to whom it is to be showed. By [ Brother] we
are Who is our Brother or Neighbor.
not only to understand the son of our Father, that is our own blood and
kindred; and by [ Neighbor] we must take heed we do not deceive our selves,
restraining it to such as are joined to us in friendship, or near unto us in
dwelling, or such as bear unto us good will, but such as are of the same
Nature with us, even any of mankind. He is to be accounted as our neighbor
that is a man as we are, and does bear the Image of God as we do, of what
condition so ever he be, whether he dwell near unto us, or far from us;
whether he be our own Countryman, or a Stranger; whether he be worthy or
unworthy; whether he be a friend or an enemy; whether he be known or
unknown; because we are to consider him in God, not in himself, as we noted
before. This our Savior teaches in the Luke 10, 29, 30, 31. Romans 13, 8. Esaias
58, 7.
parable of the Samaritan, answearing the Scribes question, Luke 10. that we
must show the duties of love to him that wants our help and relief, though
he were our enemy and one that did hate us (as the Samaritans were unto the
Jews) whether he be godly or ungodly, we must extend the duties of love toward
them. Thus did David deal toward Saul his enemy, that sought his life to take
it away: he spared him when he might have slain him, and he cut off only a
piece of his coat, when he might as easily have cut off his head; which
kindness of his heaped up coals of fire upon his head, and so wrought with
him, 1 Sa. 24, 17
that he called him Son, and prayed God to recompense unto him that
goodness that he had showed, and ceased from persecuting of him at that time.
The like example we have in Elisha, 2 King, 6, 22, 23.
who would not suffer the Horsemen that were sent to take him, to be smitten
with the sword, but commanded Bread and water to be set before them; so they
did eat and drink, they refreshed themselves, and returned to their Master.
Let us follow these worthy presidents, and account all men our neighbors; let
us account our selves bound in duty to help them, and do unto them, as we
would have them deal toward us. Thus we see what love is, we have heard from
whence it comes, wherein it consists, and to whom it is to be showed. It
comes from God, and is the work of his spirit; it consists in a
fellow-feeling of their good and grief, of their prosperity and adversity, so
that we should rejoice with them, and mourn with them, according to the
condition wherein they are; it is to be showed to all such as are of the same
nature, and are covered with the same flesh; that is, to all mankind.

Secondly, we are to consider the property of this Love, The property of Love.
how it is to be performed. For, as we have seen the parties who are to be
loved, even al; so we must mark the manner how they are to be loved; that is,
fervently, and earnestly. This is taught by the Apostle John, 1 John 3, 18, 11,
12.
My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in
deed and in truth. This also he pointed out a little before, This is the
Message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should Love one another,
not as Caine who was that wicked one, and slew his Brother. And the Apostle
Paul says, Romans 12, 9.
Let Love be without dissimulation. Likewise in the Epistle to the Galathians,
Galat. 4, 18.
It is a good thing to Love earnestly always in a good thing, and not only
when I am present with you. Our Love therefore must not only be true, but
fervent, and that for these causes. We have the perfect example of Christ, John
10, 11,
Who gave his life for his Sheep, and suffered the shameful death of the
cross to redeem them. Again, if occasion require it, and our calling will
bear it, 1 John 3, 16.
we ought so to Love them, as we should give our lives for the brethren;
which duty we can never fulfill, except our Love be fervent. Lastly, there
are many means to quench Love, as wrongs, injuries, unkindness,
unthankfulness, hatred, and emulation; all these corrupt affections, are as
water to the fire. Seeing then, it is so quickly, and by so many means cooled
and quenched, let us kindle it, and labor to continue it, that it may always
burn, and not decay. This fervent Love is a rare Jewel, which seems almost
gone out of the world.

Thirdly, we must know the form and manner how we are to Love our brethren,
to wit, even as our selves. By this rule our practice must be squared, and by
this rule shall our love be judged. As we wish our own good heartily, sincerely,
and unfeignedly, so ought we to desire the good of our neighbor. It is the Law
of Nature that teaches us to do to others, as we would have others do to us.
It is the Law of God that commands us to Love our neighbor as our selves. Our
Love must be without hypocrisy and dissimulation from the very heart. This
hearty Love is as it were the life and soul of the duty due to our brethren.
Let us therefore love them with a sincere affection, and in unfeigned
simplicity. This appears plainly in such as prayed for their persecutors and
utter enemies, as Stephen when they stoned him, kneeled down and cried out
with a loud voice, Acts 7, 60.
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. And our Savior Christ when they
crucified him, said, Lu. 23, 33, 34
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. If we can practice and
perform the like, wish their good as our own, pray for them as for our
selves, and desire their forgiveness, as we would be forgiven of God, then is
this true love to our true comfort found in us.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing this is the Love that must be found in us toward the
Saints, it serves to meet with many enormities, and to reprove many sins
that reign in the world, and are as the forerunners of the full and final
ruin thereof. Our love to others, is a cold love; frozen, without heat; dead,
without life; barren, without fruit; such as our Savior speaks of in the
gospel, Math. 24, 12
Because iniquity shall be increased, the Love of many shall be cold. But our
Love is hot toward our selves, we have abundance of selfeloue, which
ouerfloweth in us, and overcomes true love. This is the only love that
remains in the world in these days, which is the corruption, nay the bane
and poison of true love. This is it which the Apostle prophesied of long ago,
2 Timothy 3, 1, 2
This know also, that in the last days shall come perrillous times, for men
shall be lovers of their own selves, without natural affection, no lovers at
all of them which are good. Where we see, that Paul prophesying of the last
days, days of great peril, and much impiety, does put self-love in the
first place, as it were in the forefront, and make it the fountain from whence
the train flows, that follows afterward. For he which loves himself,
will not regard what he does to others, and arrogateth all things to himself;
he sets up himself as the only man of account, he magnifyeth himself,
he contemns all others. Hence it is, that he is covetous, proud,
treacherous, stubborn, heady, high minded, and heapeth or hoordeth up sin
upon sin, till he fill up the measure. The world is pestered with these
Monopolies, which are all for themselves, nothing for the common good of Church
or Country. We have a common Proverb rife in their mouths, but more rife and
ripe in the practice of the people, Every one for himself, and God for us all.
The first branch shows what is in use, but the second part must be changed;
for where every one is for himself, there the Devil is for all. Wherefore
the former is the Devils Proverb, and is no more to be used among Gods people.
The Christian Proverb must be, Every one for his Brother, and God for us all:
1 Cor. 13, 5
because Love seeks not her own, but the good of others.

Secondly, as we see self-love checked and controuled, so they are condemned
that place brotherly love in fair words, and gentle speeches (and yet many
fail in these, and cannot afford them, as if every word of their mouth were
worth Gold) whereas in such is no sound Religion, but a vizard only of
holiness. True love must be showed in the fruits, in sustaining, helping,
pitying, and releeuing those that crave our relief, and are in necessity. The
Apostle teaches them that are destitute of true faith, that shroud themselves
under the profession of the Gospel, and yet are not able to make demonstration
thereof by their works. A good Tree brings forth good fruit. If the Tree
bring forth either no fruit, or evil fruit, it is an evil tree. If we have
only good words, and either no works at all, or evil works, it is a plain
argument, we are not yet in the number of true believers, Gal. 5, 6.
neither are endued with that faith which works by love. Hence it is, that
the Apostle James says, Iam. 2, 15, 16
If a Brother or a Sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you
say to them, Depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill your bellies,
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body,
what helps it? Even so the Faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self.
If then, we content our selves to give the Alms of fair words, which are but
empty shows, it shows that we are barren trees full of leaves, but void of
fruit, and it shall minister as little comfort to our hearts, as it does
relief to their bodies. We are taught to visit Christ in his members, and
apply our selves to do them good, that in the last judgment we may find that
mercy and compassion at the hands of Christ, which we have showed to the
members of his body. To give kind words, is not that fervent love which here
is commended unto us.

Lastly, it reproves such as give themselves to fraud and deceit, to cruelty
and oppression, to subtilty and circumventing their brethren, to lying and
using false Waights and Measures. For if this should be the rule of our love,
that it ought to be fervent, we should examine our own hearts whether we
would have another man to deceive and oppress us, by forgery and falshoode.
The Apostle reprooueth all such wrongful and injurious dealing, and as a
Prophet of God denounces severely certain judgment upon such wickedness, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 6.
Let no man oppress or defraud his Brother in any matter: for the Lord is an
auenger of all such things, as we also have told you before time, and
testified. It is common and wicked Objection. May I not do with mine own as I
list, who shall hinder me to use mine own as I think good? This is the common
argument of Harlots, Drunkards, and other beasts, which ought not to be in the
mouths of Christians. Let them use it that are out of Christ, let us be
ashamed of such profaneness and ignorance. For indeed, thou have nothing that
is thine own; thou art but a Steward, and the time shall come, when thou must
give an account of thy Stewardship, because thou may be no longer Steward.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing all are to be loved, but especially such as have bin converted
by us; it teaches us to further their salvation, that have been brought into
the way by us, and never to forsake them, until we have brought them to their
iournies end. For what a vain thing were it, to find a man wandering out of
his way, and going astray from the right path, and when he has brought him
back, to leave him without farther direction? Or what an unnatural part were
it for a Mother to bring forth her Child into the world, and then to take no
more care of it, neither to wash it in water, nor to wrap it in swathling
Clowts, nor to have any compassion upon it, but to cast it out into the open
field. The love of Moses his Mother was greater toward him, Hebr. 11, 23. Exodus
2, 3, 4.
who being borne, was hidden three months from the cruelty of the Egiptians,
and being put among the Bul-rushes in the water, was watched by his Sister, to
see how God would provide for his deliverance; even so, it stands us upon,
having been made blessed means and Instruments of the good of others, to be
assistants unto them, and to further their salvation, as God shall enable us.

It is the part of a good Worke-man, not to leave his work imperfect. A good
Physician will not leave his patient, when he has done but half his cure. An
Husbandman will not give over when he has half sown, but will labor unto
the end. He that does but half build an house, is but half a Carpenter. He
that enters into Christianity, and begins well, is but half a Christian,
the greatest part of the work remains behind. Let us all follow the example
of God, when he began the great work of the Creation of the world, he left not
his workmanship unfashioned and unfinished, but in six days fully
accomplished it to the glory of his name. And as he did in the generation of
his creatures, so he does in their regeneration, John 13, 1.
Those whom he loves, he loves unto the end. This is it which the Apostle
teaches, Phil. 5, 5.
I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has begun this good work
in you, will perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ. As then God never
leaves him whom once he loves, so should we have a care of those that we have
moved to embrace the truth, and watch over them for their good. The Minister
must preach sound Doctrine in love, to the souls of men that he has
undertaken the charge of, for whom he is to give an account in the great day.
We see the Apostles having taught the Gentiles, and planted a Church among
them, did not cast off all care of them, nor think themselves to have
discharged a sufficient duty toward them, but knowing the malice of Satan, the
deceit of false Teachers, and the frailty of man's nature, Acts 14, 22.
They returned back to confirm them in the faith, and to settle them in that
truth which they had received of them. When Peter professed great love to
Christ, John 21, 15.
he willed him to manifest it by feeding of his Sheep and Lambs: the greater
his diligence was in feeding the flock of Christ, over which he was made a
principal Watchman, the greater duty he performed to Christ himself. When
Agrippa the King had heard the defense that Paul made for himself, and the
confirmation of his calling, by the heavenly vision that apeared unto him, he
said, Acts. 26, 28, 29.
Almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian. But did Paul him so? Or does
he think it enough to make him almost a Christian? No, half a Christian is
no Christian; and almost godly, is not godly. Therefore his desire was to take
him by the hand, or rather by the heart, if he could have sounded into the
depth and bottom of it, and to have led him from Almost, to Altogether. Hence
it is, that when he sees him coming toward Christ, he casts out his Net to
catch him, if it were possible; saying unto him, I would to God, that not
only thou, but also all that hear me to day, were both almost and
altogether such as I am, except these bonds. Thus he cease not continually
to call upon the Churches, to increase more and more, and to proceed from
grace to grace. Again, it belongs to every Master of the Family, to water
that which himself or the Minister has planted, and to be always weeding out
the bitter roots that spring up in his Garden. If we have brought any of his
family to godliness, and to embrace the Gospel, let him make much of them,
let his countenance be toward them, let him favor them above others, and
admonish them to frequent the exercises of Religion, remembering that it is as
great a Virtue to keep, as to get; to preserve, as to find; to hold fast, as
to take.

Moreover, as it is a general duty belonging to all of us, Hebr. 3, 7. and
and 10, 24.
to exhort one another, while it is called to day, and stir up one another to
good things; so if by our example of life, or lighting of them a Candle to see
their ways, they shall come to the acknowledgement of the truth, we should
love them dearly, and provoke them to go farther forward in good works,
assuring them that such as continue to the end, shall be saved. This serves
severely to reprove those, who having been zealous in the faith, and witnessed
a good confession before many witnesses, and been a means to open the eyes of
others, to behold the glorious light of the Gospel, that before wandered in
darkness, are now gone back themselves, or seem to stand at a stay, Revel, 2,
4.
and have left their first love. To whom I can say no more, but wish them to
turn back to consider what they have been, and to remember what they are,
knowing that it had been better for them, 2 Pet. 2, 21.
never to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have
acknowledged it, to turn away from the holy Commandment. Let all such
therefore call to mind the exhortation of Christ, to the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, Revel. 2, 5.
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works, or
else I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of
his place; except thou amend. It is a great shame to show the way to another,
and to go out of it himseife; to teach another, and not to teach himself; to
stir up another to go forward, and himself to go backward; to kindle zeal in
others, and himself to grow cold and lukewarm, and therefore to give occasion
to others to think, that their former profession, was but an heat of youth,
seeing they decline in their old age. On the other side, such as have bin won
to the Gospel by others, ought entirely and fervently to love such as have
converted them, to show themselves every way thankful unto them. The Apostle
beseeches the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians 5, 12, 13.
To acknowledge them that labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and
admonish them, that they have them in singular love for their works sake. Who
is it, if he were blind and had his sight restored unto him, would not speak
well of him by whom it was restored, and acknowledge himself bound unto him
all the days of his life? We are all naturally borne blind, and have not one
eye to see the saving truth of godliness: If then, we attain the sight of our
selves, and to know our natural blindness, how ought we to praise Gods
mercy toward us, and to love those by whom we have the eyes of our minds
enlightened? He is a very unkind and unthankful person, who, having lost his
way in a great and terrible wilderness, where he knows not which way to
turn or return, not whether to go to get out, meets with a certain guide
that is able and ready to conduct him, and to enstruct him in his way, will
never so much as open his mouth to give him thanks. Or having been cured and
recovered from a dangerous and desperate disease, that brought him to the
doors of death, will never acknowledge the benefit and good turn that he has
received. So is it with those that have wandered a long time in the vanities of
this world, and in the pleasures of the flesh, as in a wilderness; it is the
greatest ingratitude not to acknowledge those his best and surest friends, that
have showed them the strait gate, and the narrow way that leads unto life.
And if our souls have bin saved from death, to which we made have, and ran
with greediness; if there be any comfort of love, or fellowship of the
spirit, or any compassion and mercy in us, we ought to show it to those that
have bin as spiritual and special Physicians unto us, to deliver us from
death, and to restore us to life.

[ Whom I have sent again.] Hitherto we have spoken of the first reason that
concerns the person of Onesimus, who was unprofitable, but now is become very
profitable. The second sort of reasons are touching Paul himself, and touch
either the present action of his sending of him back, or the common friendship
that a long time had bin between Paul and Philemon. The first of these reasons
is in this 12. verse, which may be thus concluded: If I have sent Onesimus
back unto thee, then it is thy duty to receive him: But I have sent him back
again, Therefore it is thy duty to receive him.
If there had not bin great cause that Philemon should receive him, the Apostle
would never have sent him, especially seeing he found his abode with him and
his service done unto him very profitable. Now we are to mark in this place,
that Paul requires not Philemon to make his servant free, and to discharge him
of his bondage; and albeit Paul had great need to have used the ministration of
Onesimus in the extremity of his imprisonment, yet being another man's
servant, and not his own; belonging to his own Master, and not to him; and
knowing that he ought not to covet another man's servant, he would not detain
him, but sent him back to Philemon to whom he did appertain, and from whom
he departed. This is consonant to the truth and purity of the Gospel, this
the Master might well require, and this duty the servant was bound to
perform, even to return and repair again from whence he came. Doctrine 5.
The Gospel does not abolish or diminish civil ordinances and distinct degrees
among men.
Hereby we learn, that the Gospel of Christ does not dissolve or abolish,
but confirm and establish civil ordinances, distinct degrees, and politic
constitutions among men, as between Princes and Subjects, Parents and Children,
Husband and Wife, Master and Servants, Superiors and Inferiors.

This appears in many places of the word, where the several and distinct
duties of Romans 13, 1.
several and distinct callings, are mentioned and required by the Apostle.
Heereunto comes that which he sets down, Romans 13. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and the powers
that be, are ordained of God. Likewise Ephesians. 5, 22, 25. and 6, 1, 2, 5, 9.
Col. 3, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
writing to the Ephesians, he charge Wives to submit themselves unto their
husbands, as unto the Lord: he wills Husbands to love their wives, even as
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it: he requires of Children to
obey their Parents in the Lord, for this is right: he commands Fathers not
to provoke their Children to wrath, least they be discouraged, but to bring
them up in instruction and information of the Lord: he prescribes unto
Servants, to be obedient unto them that are their Masters, according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of their hearts, as unto
Christ; and he sets down the duties of Masters, that they should deal
justly with their servants, putting away threatening, knowing that even their
Master also is in Heaven, with whom there is no respect of persons. In like
manner, when he writes to Timothy, he says, 1 Timothy 6, 1. Titus 2, 9, 10, and
3, 1.
Let as many Servants as are under the yoke, count their Masters worthy of
all honor, that the name of God and his Doctrine be not evil spoken of. And
Titus 2. Let Servants be subiest to their Masters, and please them in all
things, not answearing again; neither pickers, but that they show all good
faithfulness, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all
things: for that grace of God that brings salvation unto all men has
appeared.

The like exhortations, and establishing of civil ordinances, we see in Peter,
1 Pet 2, 13, 14, and 3, 1, 2, 7
Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake;
whether it be unto the King, as unto the Superior; or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil dooers, and for the
praise of them that do well. So likewise he charge the Wives to be Subject
to their Husbands, that even they which obey not the word, may without the word
he won by the conversation of the wives, while they behold their pure
conversation which is with fear. And the Husbands he teaches, That they
should dwell with them, as men of knowledge, giving honor unto the woman, as
unto the weaker vessel, even as they which are heirs together of the grace of
life, that their prayers be not interrupted. Christ our Savior wills us to
Math. 22, 21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and unto God, the things that
are Gods. The Apostle has heaped together many such precepts unto the same 1
Cor. 7, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 21, 22.
purpose, 1 Cor. 7. Let the Husband give unto the wife due benevolence; and
likewise the wife unto the Husband: defraude not one another, except it be
with consent for a time: unto the married I command; not I, but the Lord, let
not the wife depart from her Husband, and let not the Husband put away his
wife: If any Brother, have a wife that believes not, if she be content to
dwell with him, let him not forsake her; and the woman that has an Husband
which believes not, if he be content to dwell with her, let her not forsake
him. Let every man abide in the same Vocation, wherein he was called:
Brethren, let every man, wherein he was called, therein abide with GOD. All
these rules and commandments, serve to teach us this truth, that howsoever
the gospel does make us al as brethren, and join us together in one body, yet
it does not abrogat and abolish the difference between man and man, and bring
in an Anarchy and confusion, but setleth a distinction between Prince and
subject, between Master and servant, between high and low.

Reason 1.
This Doctrine of the gospel will better appear, if we mark the reasons. For
first, God is not the author of confusion and disorder, but of peace and order.
Look upon all the creatures of God in heaven and earth, on high and beneath, and
we shall be constrained to cry out with the prophet, Psalm. 104, 24
O Lord, how manifold are thy works? In wisdom have thou made them al, the
earth is full of thy riches. Al tumult and sedition, al disorder and
insurrection comes from the devil, he is the author thereof. For he first
brought in sin, and sin brought in disorder. Hence it is, that the apostle
says, 1 Cor. 14, 33 40. Colos. 2, 5
God is not the author of confusion, but of peace as we see in all the churches
of the Saints. He commands that al things be done honestly, and in order; he
commends the goodly order that is observed among the faithful, and therefore
he teaches not any disorders, nor allows them where they are.

Reason 2.
Secondly, Christ came not into the world to abolish the Law, but to establish
it, Mat. 5, 17, 18
as he testifies, Mat. 5. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the
Prophets; I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them: for truly, I say
unto you, till heaven and earth perish, one jot, or one title of the Law shall
not escape, till all things be fulfilled. Now we know that the moral Law
commands the honor of Father and Mother; that is, of all superiors, who bear
a part of his image. If then, the end of his coming were to ratify the Law;
then it follows, that the Law making a difference between superiors and
inferiors, remains, and shall remain in his full strength, power, and virtue.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the Gospel commands hearty obedience, as unto God, and therefore
does not dissolve or disanull true obedience; nay, it is a praise and ornament
to the Gospel, when all sorts walk in the duties of their several Callings,
and specially such as are the obedience of others. Servants are the lowest
condition in the Church, and yet the Apostle teaches, that by vprighnesse of
their life, and obedience to their Master for Conscience sake, Titus 3, 10. 1 Timothy 6, 1.
they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things; and on the
other side, by the evil life, stubbornness, and disobedience of servants, that
profess the knowledge of the Gospel, the name of God and his Doctrine is
blasphemed and evil spoken of. Likewise, speaking of believing Wives, that
have unbelieving Husbands, he puts them in mind of subjection, to the end
that by their holy conversion, they may win their husbands to embrace true
Religion. To this purpose the Apostle Paul teaches servants to be obedient to
them that are their Masters, according to the flesh, and charge them Col. 3,
22, 23
that whatsoever they do, they do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not to men.
Seeing therefore, that God is the author of order, not of confusion; seeing
Christ came not to abolish, but to establish the Law; and lastly, seeing the
Gospel teaches subjection, and does not release or acquit any of their duty;
it follows, that the gospel does not bring in parity and equality among al
(the Mother of al mischief) but discerns and distinguishes of the Callings
of men; it does not give liberty to pervert all order, it makes not Servants
to be Masters, and Masters to be servants, but directs every one to keep
his place, and to abide in his vocation.

Use 1.
Seeing this is the honor and commendation of the gospel, let us see what Uses
arise from the knoledge of this point. First of al, we conclude from hence
necessarily, that it has always bin a lying devise, and devilish slander to
Christian religion, to be the author and fauorer of carnal liberty, and to
Christian professors, to be enemies to states and commonwealths, to magistrates,
laws, and civil ordinances. This has always bin the accusation of sla^derous
tongs, to brand the Gospel, as the breeder and bringer in of all vprores and
conspiracies: and yet there is no Doctrine under the Heaven, that less
deserves to be defamed. For the Gospel was a friend to Princes, when Princes
were enemies to the Gospel; it teaches to be subject unto them, to pray to
God for them, and to obey all their godly constitutions, and therefore it is
the Father of lies, and enemy of al truth, that has sought to disgrace and
discredit the holy truth of God, and such as in truth do embrace it. He sees
and perceives, that if the Gospel stand, his kingdom must fall; if the Gospel
flourish, his kingdom must decay. Hence it is, that the church and people of
God, have in all ages and times of the world, bin accused of rebellions,
treasons, seditions, insurrections and many other grievous impieties Heerof the
scripture and experience afford plentiful examples. In the book of Ezra, the
enemies accuse the guiltles Jews Ezra 4, 15. 1 King. 18, 17. Ester 3, 6.
to be a rebellious people, and that they have of old bin always given to
sedition. Ahab burdeneth Elias, that it was he and his fathers house that
trobled Israel. Haman suggesteth unto the king against the Jews, that their
laws were diverse from al people, and that they did not observe the kings
laws, and therefore it was not for the kings profit to suffer them. The
Apostles are accused to be authors of sedition, troublers of cities, raisers of
tumults, causers of rebellion, breakers of laws, and teachers of ordinances
not lawful to receive, they said of them, Acts 16, 19, 20. and 24, 5.
These men that are Jews trouble our City, and they preach ordinances which
are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe seeing we are Romans.
Where we see, they cover their covetousness with a shadow and pretense of
standing against innovation, but they discover the hollownesse and hypocrisy
of their hearts, when they ioyn trobling of the state and preaching of the
gospel together. Whereby it appears, that their troubling of the city was
nothing else, but because they preached the word, which the devil and his
instruments could not bear and abide. Paul is accused by Tertullus, to be a
pestilent fellow, and a moouer of sedition among all the Jews thoroughout the
world, and that he taught al men every where against the law of Moses. And no
marvel, for thus they dealt with the son of God, when he taught the truth
without mixture of error, and without respect of person, he was accounted and
accused not only to be a Sorcerer, a Samaritan, a Drunkard, a glutton, a
deceiuer, a devil, Luke 23, 2.
but an enemy to Caesar, and a troubler of the public peace. Now al these
things being considered, let us remember what the Lord Jesus says to us, John
15, 20.
The servant is not greater then his master, if they have persecuted me, they
will also persecute you. The heathen after Christ's time, cried out against the
christians, that they were the authors and causes of al public plagues and
calamities that fell upon kingdoms and countries. If Nilus flowed not over the
fields, if the heaven stayed, if the earth quaked, if famine increased, if the
pestilence continued by and by the poor Christians, as the sheep of Christ,
were cast unto the lions. They charged them to make privy conspiracies, Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 11. Tertulli in Apologel. Cyprian contra Demetrian.
to devise secret counsels against the commonwealth, to murder children, to
feed themselves with man's flesh, and to practice all Iniquity; they were so
blinded, that they could not perceive that their Idolatries brought Gods
judgments. Thus we see how the church has lien open to all false surmises and
suggestions of sedition. But what can be immagined more unjust or vetrue? If
there be any peace in this world in any land, it is for the Gospels sake, and
it comes through the bountifulness of God for his peoples sake that call
upon him. Nevertheless as the Gentiles dealt with the Jews and Christians
from time to time; so do the wicked in these days with the godly, they lay to
their charge that they keep no laws, that they disobey Princes, that they are
seditious and tumultuous, and enemies to the State. If we see or hear the
Saints of God thus handled, and euilly entreated, we must know that this is an
old devise of the devil practiced against the Prophets, against Christ
against the Apostles, and against all true Christians, even from the beginning.
And let this serve to comfort us, when we find such slanderous imputations
and accusations laid to our charge, considering that thus they have reviled
and railed upon the Servants of GOD, that have been before us in all times,
and that we have Christ Jesus, the witness of our innocence, who if not in
this life, yet in the life to come, will reveal the things that are hidden in
darkness, and bring to light the things that are covered. In the mean season
we must remember Math. 5, 11.
that they are pronounced blessed, that are reviled and persecuted for
righteousness sake: and we must labor to convince them, not so much by
words, as by deeds, Demosth. de corona.
answearing the falsehood of their slanders, by the uprightness of our lives,
which shall be able to speak for us, even when we ohld our peace.

Use 2
Secondly, we see that Christian poillicy is not against Commonwealth policy,
so that there is no State under heaven, whether entertaining the regiment of
one, or of many, but may give entertainment to the Gospel. For seeing it
medleth not with matters of civil government, whether it be a free state, or
depending of others, it shall receive no impeachment or detriment in temporal
affairs. Our Savior teaches, John 28, 36
That his kingdom is not of this world, but spiritual for the soul and
Conscience. When one came unto Christ, and entreated him to bid his Brother
divide the with him, Lu. 12, 13, 14
he said unto him, Man, who made me a Judge, or a diuider over you. When
tribute was required by the Officers and Receivers, he sent Peter Math. 17. 25.
to pay it, declaring by his willing obedience, that civil policy is not
taken away by the preaching of the Gospel.

Against the Anabaptists.
This serves to overthrow two sorts of Heretics, both of them (enemies to
the Crown and Dignity of Princes) the Anabaptists, who take away Magistracy,
and despise government, and the Papists, who follow apace after them; and if
they make have (as they begin) they will soon overtake them. The Anabaptists,
take away all dominion and power, deny Magistracy to be lawful, take away the
propriety of things, and will have all things common. These are such as the
Apostle Jude prophesied of in his Epistle, Jude 8.
which despise government, and speak evil of them that are in authority.
Their error, or rather heresy, they ground upon diverse places of Scripture,
which we will breefely answer.

Objection 1.
First, they object, that Christ says, Math. 5, 39.
Resist not evil, which is required of al Christians: What use then is there
of the Magistrate, who bears the sword and resists evil? Answer.
I answer, Christ in these words exhorts us to christian patience, and
reproves private revenge, he does not abrogate the Office of the Magistrate,
as appears by the words of Christ, if they be aright considered. For he does
not say, if any man shall strike thy neighbor on the right cheek, command him
to turn the left also; neither does he say if any will sue his neighbor at the
law, and take away his coat, charge and require him to deliver his cloak also;
but whosoever shall give thee a blow on the right cheek, turn thou to him the
left also; and if a man shall take away thy coat, let go thy cloak also.
Wherefore it appears, that this concerns private persons, not public
Magistrates. Again, To resist evil, is not simply and in it self evil; but
to do evil, is evil indeed. For if it were simply evil in it self; no
householder among Christians should withstand and resist the evils of his house,
but suffer them to do what they list, and lay the bridle in their own neck:
No Schoolemaister shall bridle the folly and licentiousness of youth, which
the rod of correction does drive away; no Father shall be allowed to chastise
and punnish his children, but must let them alone to run into al evil. If these
things be absurd and unworthy the person and doctrine of Christ; it follows,
that it is not simply and absolutely forbidden, to resist evil. For what is the
Magistrate else in the commonwealth, then as an householder among his family; as
a schoolmaister among his scholars; as a father among his children; nay if
there be need any where, of a Christian Magistrate, it is among faithful
Christians; that is, amongst those that do not revenge themselves, but are
patient before their oppressors, as the Sheep that is dumb before his
shearers. The Children of this world are like brute beasts, who as they make
no conscience of wrong, so they make no conscience of revenge.

Objection 2.
Secondly, they object that we are charged to stand fast in the liberty which
Christ has purchased for us, and whereby he has set us free, Gal. 5, Answer.
I answer, this is to be understood of spiritual liberty, not civil; the
liberty of Conscience, not of obedience; of Christian liberty, not
Anabaptisticall. For the liberty of Christ, is a freedom from the power of
Satan, of sin, of death, of hell, and of condemnation; it is not a freedom
from the power of Princes, and an exempting of men from civil subjection.

Objection 3
The third objection is, that Kings sons are free from tribute, and therefore
from subjection. Math. 17, 26. Answer.
I answer, though all Christians be made the sons of God, yet Christ Jesus
speaks that of himself, who according to his deity was the natural son of
God, and according to his humanity and birth into the world, was of the lineage
of David, and heir to the crown and kingdom, and consequently was freed from
payment of tribute. But this serves nothing to free men from Magistrates, and
the duties we owe unto them.

Objection 4
Fourthly, the Apostle says, Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the
Servants of men, 1 Cor. 7, 23. But Magistracy makes us the servants of men.
Answer.
I answer, this touches nothing the calling of Magistrates, but teaches
that in matters of Religion we should not depend upon the aurhoritg of men, or
hang upon their sleeue, as the Corinthians did, who are reproved for addicting
themselves, some to one teacher, some to another. This is to make men Lords of
our faith. To conclude, we must know that the Magistrate is the Minister of
God, and has received from God, not an absolute power to do what he list, but
a limited power, Rom 13, 1, 2
to take vengeance of the wicked, to countenance the godly, that so we may live
a peaceable and quier life in all godliness and honesty. He is the keeper of
both the Tables of the Law, he executes Justice and judgment without respect
of persons, he abolisheth Idolatry, and maintains public tranquillity;
without whom, one of us could not live by another, but men would be as Wolves
and wild beasts one to another; so that the Anabaptists that would abolish
this ordinance of God. are enemies to religion, to godliness, to equity, to
honesty, to peace and quietness.

Against the Popes and Jesuits.
Secondly, the Popes, Jesuits, and Papists, that hang upon the Pope, as upon
their God, does cut short the authority of Princes, thar they may establish an
absolute sovereignty and supremacy of Antichrist, the man of sin, who
tyrannizeth over men's Consciences, and aduanceth himself above all Kings, and
Emperors, and Magistrates of the earth. Hence it is, that the Priests and
Jesuits; bring in an immunity and exemption of the Clergy, from the authority
of the civil Magistrate, and secular powers, which is a kind of rebellion,
and this is claimed as a privilege belonging unto them by the whole Roman
Clergy. Again, the Jesuits are medlers in State-matters, in establishing and
deposing of Princes, in troubling of Commonwealths, in plotting and practicing
of Treasons, in murdering of Princes, and in setting all things in an uproar.

Thirdly, the Bope usurps a power to free subjects from their allegiance and
their oath of obedience, as appears by the Popes two Breeues that he sent
over, forbidding his popish Catholics to swear homage and fidelity to the
King.

Fourthly, their teachers of popish Divinity, publish and maintain many
Treasonable positions, tending to the dishonor of Princes, and to the
overthrow of Kingdoms. It is well known to all the World what Bellarmine has
delivered in the Controversies of Religion, that he has published to be read
and viewed of all men; how basely he has spoken of Princes, and how boldly he
has diminished their authority, that he might establish the Popes Temporal
Soueraignety. He teaches out of his Doctors Chair, or rather from his
Orators Deske, Bellar. de laic. lib. 7. cap. De pontif. lib. 1. c. 7. et lib.
5. cap. 8. and 7.
that Princes are rather Servants, then Lords, subject not only to Popes and
Cardinals, but to Bishops and Priests: that Princes have their authority, not
immediately from God, nor from the Law of God, but by the Law of Nations: that
Princes may be deposed and dethroned by their Subjects, and other placed in
their stead; that the Pope has Temporal power indirectly: that obedience is
due to the Pope for conscience sake, but to Princes for policy sake. That the
cause why Christians in former time deposed not Nero the Tyrant, and Julian the
Apostata, and Valens the Arrian, and such like, was, because they wanted
Temporal power, and if they had not wanted strength, they would not have
wanted will to do it: that if Princes go about to turn away the people from
their base- Roman, and Bastard-Catholike Faith, they may and ought to be
deprived of their dominions. Heereunto we might add many like principles of
their deuilish Divinity taught in their Schools, and brought into the State,
and practiced by their Disciples, out of Sanders, Sand. devisib. Monarch. lib.
2. cap. 4.
who was himself an Arch-rebell, and perrished in his rebellion that he had
raised, being not only a beholder of it, but an Actor in it.

Whereby we see, if he had no other matter, what we are to esteem of the Roman
Religion; namely, that it is a counterfeit Religion, to be abhorred of all true
Christians, being the Nursery of Treasons, and the Mother of all abominations;
which sets up the Pope, as the great Idol and Arch-rebell of the World, so
that he usurps a Supremacy over all Civil Governments in the Earth: whereas
the true Christian Religion is as contrary to this, as light to darkness,
which teaches to be subject to the higher powers for Conscience sake; which
teaches to fear God, and to honor the King: which teaches all degrees, as
well Chrysostom. hom. 23. in Romans 13.
Ecclesiastical as Civil, to stoop down to this ordinance of God. Our
Weapons are Prayers, and tears; our means that we use, are supplications to
God and to Man. But these Seducers put down the honor of Kings and Princes,
and teach them that depend upon them, to take up Fire and Sword, and all other
seditious practices which the God of this World teaches the Children of
rebellion, so often as occasion of advantage, and hope to prevail serves them.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing the Gospel does establish, not abolish; strengthen, not
weaken; confirm, not disanull the ordinances that God has settled among Men;
we learn, that whosoever is a good Christian, and has rightly embraced the
Gospel, is also a good obseruer of Household Government, and of Commonwealth
Government, which stand with the word of God, and the maintenance of peace and
human society. I say then, that a faithful and sound Christian, is a good
Subject, a good Father, a good Master, a good Wife, a good Child, a good
Servant, a good Common-wealths-man. The Church and Commonwealth are as loving
Sisters, living, dwelling, growing, flourishing, prospering, decaying, and
falling together. We must all consider our common and special calling; and
know, that Christian duties and Personal duties, must not be divided the one
from the other, but be coupled and joined in one man. It is not sufficient for
a man in common conversation to be a Christian, but he must show himself to be
so in his special calling. A Magistrate must not only be a Christian, but he
must be a Christian Magistrate. A Father and Master must not only be
Christians, but they must be Christian Fathers, and Christian Masters. It is
not enough for us to be Christians abroad, we must not content our selves to be
Christians in the sight of others, but we must manifest our selves to be so, in
the administration and government of our particular Families, and in the
discharge of our several duties, toward Wife, Children, and Servants. This
reproves many that live among us, who bear themselves abroad as men, forward
in Religion, eatnest in their profession, and such as would be accounted to go
before many others: yet take a view of them what they are privately in their
own houses, and what duties they perform toward their Families, they have
lost the reputation at home that they had abroad, and show themselves to be
more careful to seem religious, and to be thought great Christians, then to
be good Christians indeed. The like we may say of all Inferiors. It is not
enough for the Wife, the Child, the Servant, the Subject, to show themselves
faithful and religious openly in the Congregation, and other places of resort,
but they must show themselves right Christians in their reverence, subjection,
and obedience toward those Superiors that are set over them.

Every one has two callings: general, and personal.
Thus we see, that as every one has two callings; one general, which is the
calling of Christianity, common to every member of the the Church; the other,
personal or particular, which is the discharge of special duties, in regard
of that distinction made between man and man: so both these callings must be
joined together in our life, as the body and soul are in one man. If one of
them be wanting, the other is missing. If they do not meet together in one
person, there is only a show of true Christianity, but the substance is
absent. A good Christian therefore cannot be an evil Subject, an evil
Servant. If they have Christ Jesus formed in them, it will make them obey for
Conscience sake. Nay, hereby we see, that only such as fear God are good
Subjects, others cannot be. For the wicked and ungodly do provoke God to
anger; against the King, against the Kingdom, and to procure the destruction
of them both by their sins. This is it which Solomon teaches in the
Proverbs; Prou. 28, 2.
For the transgression of the Land there are many Princes thereof: but by a man
of understanding and knowledge, a Realm likewise endures long. Thus the Lord
took away good King Josiah from the Children of Israel, because the people
were not worthy of him, and God was angry against Judah because of their
iniquities. This is the chief cause of the alterations of Kingdoms, and of
the often mutation and changing of Kings and Princes. For how can it be, that
such as are Rebels against God, should be Frinds to Princes?

Wicked men are the greatest breakers of Princes laws.
True it is, it has been the ready way which the Devil has used (as we
showed before) to bring such as are godly and fear God, into hatred and
detestation, by his Instruments; to bear the World in hand that they are
Enemies to Princes. Christ Jesus, though he obeyed Caesar, and taught obedience
to Caesar, and paid poll-money, yet he was accused of Treason, and charged to
be an enemy to Caesar, and condemned for it. So was Paul slandered, as a
disturber of the State and Commonwealth. But if we will rightly consider this
point, we shall find, that these men that have nothing in their mouths but
obedience, and harp upon no string so much as disobedience, (as if they
themselves were made of obedience) may justly be censured and convinced to
break three Laws for their one, whom they falsely and fraudulently accuse. So
that we may inuert the accusation, and turn it as a wheel upon their own
heads, and charge them justly with that, wherewith they unjustly ouercharge
others. When the zealous Prophet Eliah was blamed and reproved to be a troubler
of Israel, he answered the crime objected unto him, and rejected it back,
that it rebounded upon him that gave the charge; 1 Kin. 18, 18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy Fathers house, in that ye have
forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and followed Baalim. Such then as
break the Commandments of God, and despise his laws, cannot for conscience
sake to be obedient to Princes: and they that have been found unfaithful to
God, can never be judged faithful to men. It is well known and seen how they
transgress the Kings laws, in their apparel, in their meat, in their
words, in slandering, in fighting, in quarrelling, in carding, in bowling, in
dicing, in drunkenness, in sitting at Alehouses, where the Magistrate and
Minister are the common Table-talke, and an hundred such like inormities. As
for the godly, Only the godly are friends to princes.
though they be branded with breach of obedience, and duty to Princes, they
will be found the best, the greatest, the cheifest; nay, the only true Friends
that Princes have. For first, they pray unto God earnestly and heartily for
their Prince, and the whole Land fares the better for their prayers: for God
hears the Prayers of such only as hear his voice, and love his Laws, and
fear his Name, when they call and cry unto him for their Prince. But he
hears not, he grants not, he regards not the prayers of wicked men: for
he that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayers shall be
abominable.

Hence it is that Solomon says; Pro. 15, 8, 29 and 21, 27.
The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the
righteous is acceptable unto him: he is far off from the wicked, but he
hears the Prayer of the righteous: the Sacrifice of the wicked is an
ahhominaion, how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind. So then,
there can be no more utter enemies to Princes, then such as are wicked against
God, according to the saying of the Wiseman in another place; Pro. 25, 4, 5.
Take the dross from the Silver, and there shall proceed a Vessel for the
finer: take away the wicked from the King, and his Throne shall be established
in righteousness. All men therefore may see how absurd and preposterous a
thing it is, that such as are no better then rebellious against God, should be
the Friends of the Prince, and that such as are godly should be accounted
enemies.

Again, the godly are ready to subject themselves according to Gods ordinance
to Magistrates, their obedience is in the Lord. When lawful things are
commanded and required at their hands, they address themselves to do the
things commanded: if unlawful, they submit themselves in all things, they
resist not in any thing, but suffer according to the pleasure of the
Magistrate. If then they be subject with all fear, not only to such as are
good and courteous, but also to the froward, knowing that this is thanke-worthy,
when a man for conscience sake toward God endures grief, suffering
wrongfully: How is it, that wicked men are not ashamed to account them as
Traitors and Rebels? If it should fall out, that godly Princes command
something which is contrary unto Gods word, we must obey Acts 4, 19. and 5, 29.
God rather then men, but we must submit our selves in well-doing unto Princes.
It is a gross and unreasonable thing to imagine, that a man in obeying God
does disobey his Prince. This appears in the example of the three children,
mentioned in the Prophecy of Daniell, when the King commanded them to fall
down before the golden Image that he had set up, Dan. 3, 16, 17 18. and 6, 22.
they answered; We are not careful to answer thee in this matter: Behold, our
God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the hot fiery Furnace, and he
will deliver us out of thy hand, o King: but if not, be it known to thee, o
King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image that thou
have set up. The like we see in Daniell himself, when he had been thrown
into the den of the Lions, he says to the King; My GOD has sent his Angel,
and has shut the Lions mouths that they have not hurt me: for my Justice was
found out before him, and unto thee, o King, I have done no hurt. He had
indeed broken the Kings edict, but he accounted it no disobedience, seeing
therein he obeyed God. Hence it is, that the Apostle says; 1 Pet. 2, 17.
Fear GOD, honor the King: where he shows the order that is to be observed,
the fear of God challenges the first place, and goes before the honor of
the King. Let us therefore suffer the reproaches that are cast out against us,
and learn always to obey in things lawful, but to submit our selves even in
things unlawful, by enduring the punishment that shall be infflicted upon us.
Thus the Servants of God, and faithful Martyrs from time to time have done:
they never rebelled, they never took arms, they never made resistance, but
always prayed for Princes, when Princes were enemies unto them. And concerning
the ungodly, whatsoever they pretend, they cannot be the Princes Friends,
because (as we have showed) they care not to keep their Laws, and if they had
a care of Princes Laws, they would also have a regard of Gods Laws.

13 Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have
ministered vtno me in the bonds of the Gospel.

14 But without thy mind would I do nothing, that thy benefit should not be as
it were of necessity, but willingly.


The order of the words in this division.
HItherto we have spoken of the reason that Paul urges to Philemon to receive
his Servant, drawn from the action of his sending of him back: Now follows
the preventing of Objections, taken either from Paul his retaining of him,
Verse 13. and 14. or from Onesimus his departing from his Master, Verse 15.
and 16. The first objection is concerning the keeping and retaining of
Onesimus, the objection is wanting, and may be thus supplied. For Philemon
might have said; I hear many words, how profitable he is to me, how dear to
thee. I know no such profit in him, I can see no benefit that I am like to
receive by him: of this I am well assured, I have sustained great loss by him.
If then he be so necessary and profitable, and if he be as dear unto thee, as
the Son that comes out of the Bowels of the father, why did thou not
retain him still with thee? To this the Apostle makes a double answer; first
he grants, and then he reuoketh that which he had granted. For he
confesses, that his desire was to have detained him: which he makes plain by
a reason drawn from the end, that he might have continued [ To minister unto
him in the bonds of the Gospel.] In the next verse he joins a correcting of
that which he had granted; to wit, that he would do nothing in this matter
without the assent and consent of Philemon his Master: which reuocation he
amplyfieth by an Argument from the end, That thy benefit should not be as it
were of necessity, which also is declared by the contrary, [ but willingly.]
In these words, howsoever they be naturally the preventing of an objection,
is included also a certain reason. For the Apostle in this Epistle uses more
show of Art, and force of persuading, and power of reasoning, and skill of
creeping into the heart of Philemon, then he uses ordinarily in other places:
and therefore in remoouing objections he argues, and in arguing he remooueth
Objections. This appears evidently in this place. For he reasons and
strengthens his request by this Argument: Whom I desire for the good parts
that I see in him to retain, that in thy place he might serve me in the bonds,
or, cause of the Gospel: him thou ought to receive lovingly, and willingly.
But Onesimus for whom I entreat is such a one; Therefore thou ought to
receive him lovingly and willingly.


The meaning of the words.
This is to be considered of us, touching the order of the words: Now let us
see what is to be known concerning the meaning of them. When he says [ Whom I
would have retained] he shows again what great account he makes of
Onesimus, being as it were the only man whom he would have made choice off (if
it had been in his liberty) to have comforted him, and ministered unto him in
the time of his affliction and imprisonment. Again, when he says; [ For thee]
or in thy stead, he infers, that Philemon himself did owe unto him that
duty, if he should require it of him, and urge it from him. He mentions, The
bonds of the Gospel, meaning thereby, the afflictions which the Gospel had
brought him, wherein the Genetiue case does note the cause as we saw before,
verse 1. and 9. As if he should say, the cause why I am prisoner and put in
bands, is the preaching of the Gospel. In the 14. verse he says; Without thy
mind I would do nothing, where, by the general put for the special, he
means without thy counsel and consent I would not do this thing; that is,
retain Onesimus with me, I would do nothing touching the keeping of him from
thee, to whom as thy Servant he does properly belong.

Lastly, he adds, Least it should be of necessity; that is, least I should
extort and wring it from thee against thy will, and so seem to compel thee
hereunto, whereas thou should do it cheerfully and willingly. This is the
Method and meaning of this division, according to which order and
Interpretation, the words are thus much in effect. If thou ask a reason why I
kept not Onesimus with me, seeing I make him so profitable, and worthy to be
loved and liked, so comfortable, trusty, and serviceable: I answer, I could
have been content with all my heart to have done so, he is my Son, and I his
Father: but withal, he is thy Servant, and not mine; and thou art his Master,
and not I; and therefore I ought not, without thy leave, knowledge, and consent
to keep him, for the Gospel maintains, and not dissolueth politic order
and household government, which both are the ordinance of God. Besides, a
benefit and good turn should come, with a cheerful heart and a willing mind,
and ought not to be gotten by constraint and compulsion, and therefore I would
know thy will, before I kept him to my self.

Diverse points to be observed.
Before we come to the particular handling of the Doctrines that arise from
hence, some things breefely are to be noted, which I will breefely observe,
without any long and large application. First of all, the Apostle intimates
his desire, to have retained Onesimus with him, and that he was loath to suffer
him to depart from him: which declares that the presence of those that are
dear unto us in Christ, is welcome, pleasant, comfortable, and much set by,
and we greatly desire to keep them continually with us. For as love is the
knot of conjunction that binds us together, though we be absent and far
severed one from another: so it craves and requires the bodily presence of
those whom we entirely love, which howsoever we cannot obtain in this life,
for as much as our earthly affairs will not suffer it, yet we shall be sure
to enjoy it perpetually, and without end in the life to come, when we shall
have the greatest joy and comfort one in another that can be wished or desired;
such as the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive.

Secondly, note with me the end why he desired to retain Onesimus with him,
that the Servant might do service to him in the Masters stead. The end then,
is, the Ministry and attendance which Paul might of duty require of Philemon
himself. If then the Master be bound to do his service, and wait upon the
Apostle, much more the Servant! Whereby we may note and mark, how great right
and jurisdiction he that has gotten and gained a man to Christ, has, over
him whom he has gained, so that he may challenge not only one of his
Servants, but himself to Minister unto him, and to help him in temporal and
transitory things. For he that has received spiritual blessings, cannot
without great unthankfulness deny corporal benefits, so that it cannot be
expressed how well he has deserved of that person, whom he has won by the
word to God, Col. 1, 13.
And delivered him by his Ministry from the power of darkness, and translated
into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

Thirdly, we may observe, in the Apostles correcting of his former grant, that
as he is commended that does his duty that is required of him, freely and
willingly, so he is worthy to be praised and commended, that does not go about
to wring and wrest a benefit against a man's will, though it be due debt and a
bounden duty, but labors by all means, that it may be voluntary, and not
upon necessity: for hereby it comes to pass oftentimes, that he not only
gets a benefit, but wins his heart and good will that gives it: and many
times it falls out, that the mind of the giver is more to be respected then
the gift it self, as we see in the poor Widow mentioned in the Gospel;
Luke 21, 2, 3.
who casting into the treasury two mites, is said to have given of her penury,
more then all the rich men that bestomed of their superfluity. Thus much of the
general observations. Now let us come to the particular Doctrines.

[ I would have retained him with me, that for thee he might have ministered
unto me in the bonds of the Gospel.] The Apostle in these words, does claim
both Philemon and Onesimus to owe unto him, being in bonds, their service and
comfortable administration. Indeed he senderh his Servant back to him: yet he
seems closely and secretly to insinuate, that he would take it thankfully at
his hands, and receive it as a gift most welcome unto him, if Philemon would
return him to him again: and that he should deserve more praise, if of his
own accord and liberality he would have sent back his Servant now restored
unto him, of whose help and Ministry he had so great need. The Servants of
Christ that suffer for his Name, are to be succored by what duties soever we
can. For seeing the banishing of our persons, the whippings of our bodies, the
spoiling of our goods, the impairing of our good Name, and many other
reproaches and afflictions do accompany the preaching and profession of the
Gospel, whosoever shrinketh back from suffering them, and refuses to be
partaker of them when God calls him to bear witness unto the truth, he
renounceth the Gospel, forsakes his Brethren, and separateth himself from
Christ. The defense of the Gospel is common to all, and every man must be an
helper to the truth. Therefore the man that suffers persecution for Gods
cause and the Gospels, is not to be accounted as a private person, but as one
that discharges a public duty of the whole Church, and therefore the care of
him, generally lies upon the shoulders of all those that profess the faith.
Doctrine 1. Every Christian is bound to serve the common good of the Church, by
what means soever God has enabled him.
From hence we learn, that help, succor, and service, is a due debt from all
that truly are religious, to them that suffer for the Gospel and for
righteousness sake. We see how Paul requires it of Philemon and Onesimus, that
they should in his bonds Minister unto him, and help him in his distress.
The virtue here required, is that fruit of love, by which a man becomes a
Servant to every one for their good, within the compass of his calling. So
then, every Christian is bound to serve the common good of the Church, and of
them that have need therein, by his guiftes, by his goods, by his wisdom, by
his authority, and by what other means soever God has enabled him. This is
commanded by by the Apostle. Gal. 6. While Gal. 6, 10.
we have time, let us do good unto all men, but specially to the^ that are of
the household of faith. So the same Apostle sets out love by his effect, 1
Cor. 13, 5.
Love seeks not her own things but the good of others, it suffers all
things, it endures all things. The Church of the Hebrews is commended for the
notable fruits of their love showed unto the Saints, that thereby they might be
encouraged to go forward, and to hold out unto the end, Hebr. 6, 10.
For God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor of
love, which ye showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered unto the
Saints, and yet Minister. This we read to have been the practice of the
Primitive Church in time of extreme misery, and the hard weapon of necessity
pressing sore upon them; Acts 4, 33, 34 35.
Great grace was upon them all, neither was there any among them that lacked,
for as many as were Possessers of Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the
price of the things that were sold, and laid it down at the Apostles feet, and
it was distributed unto every Man according as he had need. The examples of
the godly are worthy to be considered, who have shined in the world by this
virtue, as by a light in dark places. Obadiah ministered to the Prophets in the
time of Famine, and in the days of persecution; 1 King. 18. Neh. 1. and 5.
He did not only hide them from the rage of the enemy, but supplied their
necessity. Nehemiah employed himself for the good of Jerusalem, by his
authority, power, wealth, and credit that he had with the King. This was in
Paul, as he testifies of himself, 1 Cor. 9, 19
Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self Servant unto all Men,
that I may win the more: So that he was ready to offer up himself upon the
Alter of their Faith. Likewise he requires of the Widows employed in the
Church-seruice, to attend upon the sick, that they should be of this good
report, As 1 Timothy 5, 10.
to have lodged Strangers, to have washed the Saints feet, to have Ministered to
them that are in necessity. So the Church of Thyatira is commended by Christ
for the performance of this duty; Reu. 2, 19.
I know thy works, and thy love, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and
thy works, and that they are more at the last then at the first. This is so
general a duty; that the Apostle Paul expresses it among the common fruits
of Faith. Romans 12. Be affectioned to love one another with To. 12, 10, 11
brotherly love, in giving honor go one before another; Not slothful to do
service, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. No man is exempted from this duty
be he never so high, is is no disparagement, but a great advancement, even of
the honor and glory of Princes, as the Prophet teaches; Esaias 49, 23.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Nurses, they shall
worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy
feet; That is, they shall reverence and serve Christ and his Church, and they
shall account it no dishonor unto them to do any good to the Saints. All these
Testimonies serve as so many proofs to witness this truth, that we must
account this our condition, that we are all as Servants, to do service to our
Brethren, and to employ our selves and best endeavors, to do them good
according to their wants.

Reason 1.
The reasons follow, which will cause this Doctrine to sink deeper into us,
and make the truth appear without all gaine-saying. First, whatsoever gifts
are bestowed upon us, to this end they are bestowed, to profit with all, to
help one another, and to edify that body whereof we are members. We are all
Fellow Members of one body, and therefore are bound to relieve and refresh our
Brethren. Every member serves one another, and are for the whole. Nature it
self in other things, teaches us this duty. The Sun as the eye of the
World, shines not for it self, it yeildeth not heat for it self, but for
others. The clouds which are as the bottels of heaven, do not drop down rain
for themselves, but for others. The earth, which is as the Mother of these
inferior things, brings forth Herbs, and Grass, and Fruit, and Corn, for
the use of man, and not for it own benefit. This comparison drawn from the
members of the body, serving one another, and every one caring for the whole,
is often urged by the Apostle: He teaches, that Romans 12, 4, 5. and 1 Cor. 12,
20, 25, 26.
As we have many Members in one Body, and all Members have not one office: so
we being many, are one Body in Christ, and every one, one another Members.
And in another place; There are many Members, yet but one Body: the Members
should have a care one of another, least there should be any division in the
Body: Therefore if one Member suffer, all suffer with it: if one Member be had
in honor, all the Members rejoice with it. If then one of the Members of our
natural body be ready to do service to the other, and to the whole, it should
be our care to do the like that are of the Mystical body of Christ Jesus, from
whom as from the head we receive all influence of spiritual grace necessary to
salvation.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is our duty to follow the example of our Lord and Master Christ
Jesus, he came to serve, not to be served; to Minister, not to be ministered
unto; to redeem, not to rule. This our Savior preached to his Disciples, when
they began to think of Lordship, and to disdain one another, Mar. 10, 43, 44.
Whosoever will be great among you, shall be your Servant: and whosoever will
be chief of you, shall be the Servant of all, for even the Son of man came,
not to be served, but to serve; and to give his life for the ransom of many.
Where he shows, that the way to true honor is to serve, so that the greater
service we do to the Brethren, the greater honor we shall receive at the
hands of God. The greater our service is, the greater shall be our reward,
when every one shall receive according unto his work. This we see farther
strengthened unto us in the example of Christ, who humbled himself to wash his
disciples feet, and to wipe them with a Towell being washed, and said unto
them; John 13, 4, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Know ye what I have done unto you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say
well, for so am I: if I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye
ought also to wash one another feet: for I have given you an example, that ye
should do, even as I have done to you, the Servant is not greater then his
Master, nor the Ambassador greater then he that sent him. We are taught to
set Christ the most absolute example before our eyes, to learn humbleness of
mind, and the duty of service one to another: we must consider him in his
glory, and in his humility. First, in his glory as our King, as our head, as
our Lord, and as our Master: then in his humility, as abased and humbled in
our Flesh unto death, even to the death of the Cross. When we have done this,
then we are thus to reason with our selves; has Christ in his great glory cast
down himself for my sake: and ought not I, if I were the highest upon earth,
stoop down to my equals? Ought not I, that am his Subject, his body, his
Disciple, his Servant, to serve the necessities of my Fellow-seruants? Thus the
Apostle commending Love to the Saints, and meeknes of mind, leads us to
Christ; Phil. 2, 4, 5, 6
Look not every man on his own things, but every Man also on the things of
other Men: let the same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus, who
being in the form of GOD, thought it no robbery to be equal with GOD, he
made himself of no reputation, he took on him the form of a Servant, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death. If then we look unto
Christ Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Salvation, we have him as a
perfect example without blemish, and as a pure Glass without stain to look
upon, who in the greatest glory has showed the greatest abasement, in the
greatest honor, he has set before us the greatest humility.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, true Religion consists in ministering to the Saints, in helping and
succouring of the poor, in employing himself to the good of others, as a
Candle that spends and wastes it self to give light to them that are in the
house. It consists not in bare knowledge, but in practice; not in an idle
Faith, but in the fruits of love. This the Prophet Esaias shows and sets down,
Esaias 58, 10.
If thou pour out thy Soul to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soul,
then shall thy light spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be
as the noone day; And the Lord shall guide thee continually, he shall satisfy
thy Soul in drought, he shall make fat thy bones, so that thou shall be like a
watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not: Meaning,
that they which relieve the poor, and comfort such as are comfortless, their
light shall never be put out, but shine for ever, God will be their comfort in
the day of trouble, and he will recompense aboundently their good works.
Seeing then, the giufts 1 Cor. 12, 7.
that we have, are given to every man to profit his Fellow Members withal,
seeing we are to tread in the steps of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, and
seeing the truth of Religion stands in the fruits of love; we may conclude
necessarily the former Doctrine, that we ought to account it no disgrace unto
us, to abase our selves to do service, and to Minister to the wants and
necessities of the Saints.

Use 1.
Let us now proceed to handle the Uses, and edify our selves thereby in our
most holy Faith, and in all Christian obedience. First, this serves to
reprove those that have forgotten all true service to the faithful. Many
there are that have no feeling of the troubles and turmoyles that fall upon
the dear Servants of God. Their eyes are closed, and their hearts are hardened,
they have no bowels of compassion to Minister unto them, they have no hands
open to relieve them. The rich of our Churches, who have this Worlds good given
unto them, are either in their insatiable desires (as Hell or the Grave) poor,
wrongfully getting, miserably keeping, unconscionably scraping, and unjustly
pulling from others, without mean or measure; or else they spend their wealth
and consume their substance; some in Hawks and Hounds; others, in sumptuous
apparel; others, in excessive Feastings; others, in worse uses, which I will
not name, all being unnecessary and fruitless things, unprofitable for the
Church or Commonwealth, so that little can be spared for the poor Saints,
and that which is spared, is as hardly drawn from them, as a piece of flesh
out of their sides. These men never think of doing service to others, but of
serving their own turns and commodities: which ought not so to be among them
that profess Christ Jesus, who served not himself, nor sought his own
benefit, nor minded his own gain and glory, nor lifted up himself above
others, nor desired to get earthly riches, nor went about to empouerish others:
but being 2 Cor. 8, 9.
rich, he became poor; being Heir of all things, Math. 8, 20.
he had not whereon to lay his head; being Lord of all, he became Servant unto
all. Hence it is that the Apostle says, Hebr. 4, 15. and 2, 17, 18.
We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. And
a little before in the same Epistle; In all things it behooued him to be made
like unto his Brethren, that he might be merciful and a faithful High Priest
in things concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the
people: for in that he suffered he was tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. Whereby it appears, that Christ Jesus has a lively feeling of
our infirmities, and an inward touch of our wants, he is not slightly affected
with our infirmities, but as the head is when the members are pained. And if we
be the true members of his body, we will remember, and cannot forget them that
are in bonds; Heb. 13, 3.
But be grieved as if we were bound with them: and them that are in affliction,
as though we were also afflicted in the body. This compassion toward those that
are in misery, is an assured pledge, and a comfortable Testimony unto us, that
we are engrafted into Christ, and united to all true Christians, that we have a
Communion with him as with our head, and that we have a communion with the
faithful, as with his members. But if we be without feeling of the
afflictions of Joseph; that is, of the troubles of the Church, we are without
Christ, without Faith, without Love, without compassion; and consequently,
without peace and consolation in our hearts. For what peace can he have that
is out of Christ, who is the Author of peace? Without whom, all things are
but trouble and vexation of Spirit. Or what consolation can we have that we are
his members, when we have no sense or sight of the troubles and infirmities
that are incident to our Fellow Members?

Secondly, it reprooueth such, as in the pride and haughtiness of their hearts
do scorn to do service to the poor Saints, and think it a great disgrace to
them, to cast their eyes upon such contemptible creatures. But would thou
have Christ look upon thee, and have a respect unto thee? Then disdain not
thou to look upon his members, which are unto thee in place of Christ, so
often as they suffer in his cause. In what a miserable case shall they be in at
the last day, to whom Christ Jesus the Lord of life, shall say; Depart from me,
I know ye not? Now, if we in this life, turn away our faces from the faithful,
and are ashamed of them in the day of their calamity, and say to them, Depart
from me, I know you not. Let us take heed that he be not ashamed of us before
his Father, and before the elect Angels. The highest that are upon the earth,
must not refuse to show all fruirs of love even toward the meanest for Christ's
sake, but be ready to acknowledge that they have received their Callings and
Dignities, not to lift up their hearts above their brethren, but be as
Fathers, as Shepherds, as Nursses, to nourish and cherish such as want their
help. This is it which good Mordecai did teach Ester, when the church was as
it were in travel, and in great danger, Est. 4, 13, 14.
Think not with thy self, that thou shall escape more then all the Jews, for
if thou hold thy peace at this time, comfort and deliverance shall appear
to the Jews out of another place, but thou and thy Fathers house shall
perrish, and who knows whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time?
Where he puts her in mind, that the cause of her advancement was to be a
Nursing Mother unto the Church, and that it was the end which God aimed at, in
calling of her to that place of dignity. And as the greatest are not to scorn
the smallest, nor the highest be ashamed of the lowest, nor the richest
trample under their feet, the poorest; so on the other side, the meanest and
lowest, must not envy others that are above them, but know that they likewise
are bound to do service to them, according to the utmost of their power and
endeavor. Who was meaner in place and condition then Onesimus? yet the Apostle
testifyeth of him in this place, that He had ministered unto him in the bonds
of the Gospel. So there is no man so poor, so low, so small in his own
eyes, and in the eyes of others, but he may do some good to others, and
thereby gain glory unto God, and to his Gospel.

If then, we think that the poverty of our condition, or the meannesse of
our place, or the baseness of our person, shall excuse us, or exempt us from
serving Christ and his Church, and that it skilleth not, though we live as
idle Drones, and unprofitable burdens to the earth that bears us; we
deceive our selves, and bereave our selves of much comfort, that we might
receive, by bearing our selves painefully and profitably in our Callings. The
Apostle instructing all persons in the Church, to behave themselves without
contempt and envy, proves it notably by a comparison drawn from the members
of the body, 1 Cor. 12, 20 21, 22.
There are many Members, yet but one body: and the eye cannot say unto the
hand, I have no need of thee: nor the head again to the feet, I have no
need of you; yea, much rather those Members of the body, which seem to be
more feeble, are necessary. The Rich, cannot want the poor, and therefore may
not contemn them; and the poor cannot want the rich, and therefore may not
backbite them, and envy at them. For as God has tempered the body together,
that one member should stand in need of the help of another; so is it in the
things of this life, one lives by another, and therefore, one must have a care
of another, and seek the good one of another.

Thirdly, here are reproved all merciless men, that shut up their pity
and compassion from the poor, and therefore have not the Love of GOD dwelling
in them, nor the Love of Children remaining in them. For whosoever loves GOD,
will for his sake Love his Brother also. The Apostle John, 1 John 4, 7, 8, 20,
21.
handles this Argument at large, in his first Epistle, and the fourth Chapter,
where he says, Beloved, let us love one another, for love comes of God, and
every one that loves is borne of God, and knows God: he that loves not,
knows not God, for God is love. If any man say, I love God, and hate his
Brother, he is a liar; for how can he that loves not his Brother whom he has
seen, love God whom he has not seen? And this commandment have we of him,
that he which loves God, should love his Brother also. To this purpose the
Apostle James says, James 2, 13.
There shall be condemnation merciless, to him that shows not mercy, and
mercy rejoices against judgment. If then, we look for mercy, let us show
mercy. There is no poor Beggar that craves an Alms at thy door, there is no
man stands in so great need of thy help, that lives with thee, as thou
want the mercy and favor of God to comfort thee, to cloth thee, to feed
thee, to succor thee, to hear thee, to help thee, when thou criest unto him.
We are all as naked and needy Beggars that knock at his gate, and we are
wholly nourished by his hand. We are al as poor suitors, suing for his grace
and favor, and we cannot live if we be denied, and take the repulse of him.
We receive mercy, under condition to show mercy again. If we be unmerciful,
we make our selves unworthy to receive any mercy from God.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing we are servants to all, to help them by all the means we
can, by comfort or counsel; by word or deed; by our wealth or authority; or
whatsoever God shall enable us: from hence arises a great comfort unto a man's
conscience, and an assurance of his peace and acceptance with God, to pray
unto him with comfort for his graces, not doubting to obtain them, if we have
bin serviceable and comfortable unto others, especially to the servants of God,
that are as dear to him as the Apple of his eye. It is a means of excellent
joy and peace to a man, to consider that he has employed all the good things
he has to the use of Gods house, and his household servants: for when any
common danger shall fall, or he find anguish and affliction of Conscience
for sin, he may be assured of comfort, seeing GOD has wrought this
sincerity, and set it as a seal of his mercy in his heart. Obadiah having
been in the practice of this duty a diligent servant, and performed most
notable service when Iezabell sought the destruction of the Prophets, he hid an
hundred of them, by fifty and fifty in a Cave, and gave them Bread to eat,
showing himself liberal handed, and tenderhearted, with the hazard of his
own credit, favor, and life. When he met Eliah, that willed him 1 Kings 18,
12, 13.
to go to his Lord, and told him, he would show himself unto him, although
Obadiah at the first feared and distrusted, and thought the spirit of God would
carry him away to some other place, and then Ahab would kill him, he began
at the length to comfort himself with the meditation of his service that he
had done to the Saints: Do thou not know that I fear God? and have thou
not heard of the fruits of it that I took in the heat of this persecution,
and in the bitterness of this long judgment, and in the extremity of this
famine, an hundred of the Lords Prophets, and how I hid them, and fed them
secretly in two Caves of the earth? If thou account of this my service, and
have judged me faithful to the Lord, let this move thee, not to give me over
into the hands of thine and mine enemy.

The like we see in Nehe. 5, 19.
Nehemiah, an excellent Prince, he did so employ himself and his service to
the good of the Church, that he regarded not his own profit, but spent of
his own Goods and substance, because the necessity of the people was
exceeding great, so that he entertained them at his own cost and charges:
From whence, he gathers unto himself this comfort (as Obadiah had done
before, who proves, that he feared the Lord, and assured his Conscience
thereof, because he had preserved and nourished the true Prophets of God.
Nehemiah (I say) gathers this comfort, by succouring the poor servants of
God in distress, that God, not for the desert of the work, but the grace of
his own mercy (who crowns not August. epist. 105.
our merits, but his own gifts) would not forget them, so that he says;
Remember me, o my God, according to all that I have done for this people. Now,
as the remembrance of our service ministered to the Saints, shall Minister
comfort to us, so the contrary practice must of necessity gall a man's
conscience, and the horror thereof accuse him for not doing any good service to
the Church of God, when he shall remember how long he has lived in the world,
and yet been barren of all good works, and never done any good to the people
of God. Nay, it were well with many, if they had only done no good, if they
had only been barren and brought forth no good fruit, and if they had only
done no hurt to the Church. For their daily practices cry out against them, and
the tears of the faithful which they have shed; what said I, their tears?
Nay their blood which they have poured out as Water, does witness evidently
against them, that they have brought forth plentiful fruits, of hatted, of
enmity, of malice, of outragiousnesse against the Church. Their own
consciences accuse them, and Gods people have felt them, and in the end
fearful judgments shall overtake them. No enemy of the Church that set
himself against Sion, has ever prospered. O that that they had hearts to
consider these things, but now are they hidden from them. God has given them
breath and life to do good to his Church, and he has lifted up their heads
above others in wealth and authority to serve him: but they are going out of
the World, before they know wherefore they came into the World. And when they
must leave the World and depart out of it, wherein they have been but Tennants
at will, they remember with anguish and terror of conscience, that they have
done nothing less then that for which they were sent into it, but have
employed their goods, their strength, their wit, their wisdom, their life,
their dignity, and all to oppress and vex the Church; yea, to root it (if it
were possible) out of the earth. It were good they could in time remember their
Forefathers, Pharaoh, Senacharib, Ahab, Iezabell, Judas, Herod, and such like
Persecutours and Enemies, that breathed out threatenings against the Church: and
as they resemble them in their life, let them take heed they follow them not
in their death, and after their death. But let us that practice better things
know, that God doubtless will remember them in kindness, that remember the
afflicted Saints, and cast such off with shame and dishonor, that do despise
and despite them. We have a worthy example hereof in Ebed-melech, recorded by
the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 38, 8, 9. and 39, 16, 17, 18.
who because he entreated for the Prophet, and suffered him not to lie in the
Dungeon, and to dye for hunger, through the false suggestions of his malicious
enemies, God showed mercy unto him, and delivered him from the plague that fell
upon the City.

This serves as an How the mister is to comfort himself in serving the Church.
instruction, both to the Minister and people. If the Minister have labored in
the duties of his calling, and in the service of the Church, and in the
execution of his Ministry, and in the feeding of the flock committed unto him,
he has wherein to comfort himself, he may be assured of his love unto Christ,
and consequently of Christ's love toward him. We must remember what Christ
said to Peter; Love John. 21, 16, 17.
thou me? Feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs. So the Apostle mentioning his great
pains and troubles, and dangers, to preach the Gospel, that he seemed as a
man either distract of his wits, or puffed up with ambition and vainglory, he
assigns this as the true cause; 2 Cor. 5, 13, 14.
The love of Christ constrains us. If then we consider what love the Lord
has showed toward us, or behold how dear his Church is unto him, and with how
great a price he has redeemed it, we cannot but in the Meditation thereof be
thrust forward (if we love him, or regard him) to perform the duties of our
Ministration, although they be mighty painful, in seeding, in weeding, in
plauting, in strengthening, and in comforting, according as daily occasion shall
be offered unto us. But if we be entered into this calling, and do nothing
therein but please men, and serve our selves, and our own lusts being entered,
what comfort can we find, or what reward do we look for at his hands, that
has chosen us to be Shepherds and Watchmen? We must not be like unto the
Prophets mentioned in the Prophet Micah, Mich. 3, 11.
The Priests of Sion teach for hire, and the prophets thereof prophecy for
Money. If then we have greater respect to the fleece, then to the Sheep; or
to the wages, then to the work; we serve our selves, and not the Lord Christ,
and he will accept no such service at our hands. For we serve our own
bellies, but not the Church; we fill our purses, we feed not the people. Woe
Ezekiel. 34, 1.
be unto such Shepherds, should not the Shepherd feed the flock? What will
our gain and glory profit us at the last day, when they must leave us, and we
must leave them? We shall receive more sound comfort and peace, when we shall
depart this world, and remember what account we are to give of our pains taken
in our calling, in our labors undertaken in the Ministry, then in the heaping
up of many liuinges, and the getting of much riches. If we have gained but one
soul to God, he shall stand up for us, when all the mucke of this earth shall
fall down. He shall be our joy and our crown, when all other delights shall
give us the farewell. Neither does this Doctrine and duty serve only for the
comfort of the Minister, How the people are to comfort them selus in serving
the Church.
but for the comfort of the people that have endeavored in their callings to
serve the Church, and labored unfeignedly to seek the welfare thereof. They
that have had a sweet feeling of the love of God, are careful to love him
again: and they that love him in singleness of heart, will be enforced and
constrained to love his children, and to do all the service they can unto
them. They will think no duty too much, they will think all they have done,
all they can do to the Church, to be too little. Hence it is, that Christ
Jesus commending the Church of Tyatira, for such good works as were found
therein, Revel. 2, 19
begins with Love and Service; First, he mentions their Love, then he
adds their Service, to show that as our Love must appear by our fruits of
Service, so all our Service must proceed from Love to those whom we serve.
If a man employ himself never so dilligently, and take never so great pains,
and travail with all his power, for the peace and good of the church, yet if
it proceed not from a sincere love toward them, but either from a love of
gain, or a desire of glory, or a fame of praise, he shall receive no reward
at the hands of God. This service, as at all times we must be ready to make it
appear, so especially we must show it in the necessities of the Church. When
it lies under the heat of persecution, or feels the Arrow of famine, or
bears the affliction of poverty, and groaneth under the weight of these
burdens, we must remember that we owe our service to them as a duty, and that
we are the servants of the Church. This shall be our crown and comfort in the
last day.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing God requires of all true Christians, of what condition soever
they be, according to the means affoorded unto them, to use their gifts,
their power, their possessions, and whatsoever benefits they have received, to
use them (I say) to the comfort and service of Gods Saints, it kindles the
affections of Gods people to bless and praise God for them, to speak well of
them, to pray unto God for them, and to obtain greater blessings for them, then
they have bestowed. Thus they that do good to the Church, do good to
themselves: they that give much unto them, do receive more; and such as have
been helpful and serviceable to Gods people, shall find them as their
remembrancers to God, who will not forget the labor of their love, and the
duty of their service. This ought to be a notable encouragement unto us, not
to deal niggardly toward the Saints, nor to withhold from them the fruits of
our love, seeing nothing shall be lost, that is bestowed upon them, but we
shall receive an hundred fold into our bosom, grace for grace, love for love,
blessing for blessing, mercy for mercy. For this comfort and consolation will
arise to them that do good to Gods people, they shall have favor with God,
they shall gain a good report with the world, and they shall purchase the
sweet savor of a good name, as of a precious ointment among the Saints, and
shall stir them up to entreat Gods manifold mercies for them. Iehoiada that
good High Priest, was so honored of the people, for suppressing the tyranny of
Athalia, for setting up the kingdom of Ioash, and for restoring the true
religion of God, that he was accounted a common Father of the Country, and
they gave him the burial of a King, 2 Chronicles. 24, 15, 16.
for they buried him in the City of David with the Kings, because he had done
good in Israel, and toward God and his house. So the apostle Paul declaring
that Onesiphorus had done him great service, prays unto God for him, 2 Timothy
1, 16, 17, 18.
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my chain: but when he was at Rome, he sought me out
diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy with
the Lord at that day. Whereby we may gather, that the benefits bestowed upon
the Saints, shall not perish, although they themselves cannot requite the^; for
though they want ability to pay them, yet they want not hearts to pray for them;
yea, the Lord will not only have pity of them that take pity of his people,
but he will show mercy to their households, because when Paul praises the
bountifulness and zeal of Onesiphorus, he wishes well for his sake to his
whole family. The blessing of God shall not rest only upon the head of the
just, but it shall descend into his whole house, such is the love of God toward
those that be his. If the consideration of this great promise, and rich
recompense of reward, do not prick us forward to exercise the works of love,
and fruits of compassion, we are more then blockish and brutish. On the other
side, such as have been, not helpful, but hurtful; not industrious, but
injurious; not serviceable, but unprofitable to Gods people; when God shall
visit them either with public calamities, or private judgments, their own
Consciences shall gall them, and gnaw upon them, when they remember their own
works, which shall provoke men to speak evil of them, cause them to pray
against them, and constrain them to call upon God to work their confusion.
This we see in Paul the Apostle, in the latter end of the same Epistle, 2 Timothy
4, 14
Alexander the Copper-smith has done me much evil, the Lord reward him
according to his works. Thus does the Prophet David deal oftentimes in the
Psalms, Psalm. 74, 2, 3.
Think upon thy congregation which thou have possessed of old, and on the rod
of thine inheritance, which thou have redeemed, and on this mount Syon, wherein
thou have dwelt: lift up thy strokes, that thou may for ever destroy every
enemy that does evil to the Sanctuary. Thus we see the people of God have from
time to time prayed against the malicious enemies of the Church, that sought
the ruin and destruction thereof. Their prayers are of great force, and enter
into the ears of the Lord of hosts, whether it be to obtain mercies upon
the friends of the Church, or to draw down vengeance upon the adversaries
thereof, that oppress it with cruelty, and blaspheme the name of God, which is
holy throughout all ages and generations. There is no greater honor that we
should desire or delight in, then to be called the friends of God, and the
servants of the Church. If we be the servants of God, we must also account our
selves the servants of the Church. The Prophet David did esteem the faithful
that were in Jerusalem, as his Brethren. So on the contrary side, there cannot
a greater dishonor and reproach befall us, then to be reputed the enemies of
God and his people. For if we set our selves against his people, that are his
portion and inheritance, he will no otherwise deal with us, then with his
enemies. If God come against us as his enemy, we shall not be able to prevail,
we cannot stand before him, but shall be as stubble in the fire, and as chafe
before the wind.

Use 4.
Lastly, seeing God requires service to his Church at our hands to do all good
to them by all good means, it is our duty to enquire and learn the estate of
the distressed Church, that we may know and be informed where, and when, and
how it is afflicted. How many are there that never think upon the people of
God to do them good, but forget their affliction and oppression. The Butler of
Pharaoh did not remember Joseph, but forgate him and the kindness he showed
toward him when they were prisoners together, who had said unto him, Genesis 40,
14, 23.
Have me in remembrance with thee when thou art in good case, and show mercy I
pray thee unto me, and make mention of me to Pharaoh, that thou may bring me
out of this house. So when Zachariah the son of Iehoiada (whom we mentioned
before) was, for preaching the truth, and denouncing the judgments of God from
his mouth, oppressed with envy, and ouerborne by the might of the Rulers, the
King would not deliver him out of their hands, 2 Chronicles. 24, 21 22.
but commanded him to be stoned with stones, and remembered not the kindness
that his father had done to him, but slew his son. This is the common course
and current of the world, we will not see the afflictions of the poor Saints,
but turn away our eyes from them; or if we cannot choose but see them, we
quickly forget them, as if we had never either beheld them, or known of them.
This is one misery of the faithful, that men do not regard them when they are
in misery. The Lord has determined, that there shall be always some objects
offered unto us, and set before us to exercise the fruits of our Faith and
Love. He has said, that the poor we shall always have with us, and such as
stand in need of our help and comfort. It is in easy thing to boast of Faith
and Love: but if we will be assured, that we have true Faith indeed, we must
show it by our works, which are the fruits whereby it is known. We must not
turn away our faces from the faithful, as the Priest and Leuite did in the
Gospel, but be ready to help, as God gives ability, and offers
opportunity. Nay, it is not enough for us to succor such religious Saints, as
we see want succor, but we must learn and labor to know the state of the
Church, and ask of others how it fares with the godly poor among us. The
children of God have gone before us in the doing of this duty. It is noted of
Abraham the Father of the faithful, that he waited not till the strangers
craved entertainment at his hands, but he ran to meet them from the Tent
door, and prayed them to take some refreshing at his hands, Ge. 18, and 19
Heb. 13, 2.
whereby he received Angels into his house at unawares. If we believe him to be
the Father of the faithful (as the Scripture calls him) and that we would be
accounted as his children, we must be careful to do the works of Abraham.
They are not children that tread not in his steps, and follow not his example.

The like we might say of Lot, who sat at the gate of Sodom, and rose up to
meet the men, and prayed them to turn into their servants house, and to lodge
with him all night. The holy man Job justifies his innocence, and clears
himself from Hypocrisy, Job. 31, 32,
That he suffered not the stranger to lodge in the street, but opened his
doors unto him that went by the way. Nehemiah was careful to know the state
of the Church, Nehem. 1, 2.
and asked his brethren that came from Jerusalem, concerning the Jews that
were delivered, which were of the residue of the captivity, by whom he heard,
that they lived in great affliction, and in reproach, that the City was broken
down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire. So the Shunamite having prepared
a Chamber for Elisha to lodge him, and set therein a bed, and a Table, a
Stool, and a Candlestick, constrained him to come into her house to eat
bread. We see how Lazarus and his two Sisters, Martha and Mary, received the
Lord Jesus to house, Luke 10, 38. John 11, 3.
and ministered unto him. They fed him, and he fed them; they gave him the
meat that perishes, but he gave them the bread of life, and the meat that
endures for ever.

Likewise the Evangelist Luke notes in the Acts of the Apostles, that when the
heart of Lydia was opened to attend to the things that Paul delivered, she
besought them saying. Acts 16, 15.
If ye judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide
there, and she constrained them. These are worthy examples of faithful men and
women, that teach us by their own practice, what manner of service is due to
the Saints, not only to help those whose misery we know, but to enquire of
them whose state we do not know. This indeed is pure and perfect love, when we
do to our brethren, as we desire they should deal toward us. The Wiseman would
have every one Prou. 27, 23
to be diligent to know the state of his flock, much more it is required of
us, to enquire the state of Gods flock, which is his Church, that he has
redeemed with his precious blood. It is not therefore enough for us to say, we
knew not their wants, seeing all those are wilfully ignorant, that have the
means to come knowledge, and yet will not use the means. We may oftentimes
know the necessities of the Saints, but we will not enquire of them, because we
will not know them. This shall not excuse us in the sight of God; but accuse the
more, because our ignorance is affected ignorance, inasmuch as we might know,
and yet we do not desire to know.

Verse 14. [ But without thy mind would I do nothing, that thy benefit should
not be as it were of necessity, but willingly.] We have seen already the
reason why Paul was desirous to have retained Onesimus with him, to wit, that
he might have ministered unto him, and served him in his afflictions that did
befall him for the Gospels sake. Now he declares the reason, why without the
knowledge and consent of Philemon, he would not detain him, to the end, that
the duty or good turn which he might that way receive at his hands, might be
done freely, willingly, and chearefully, not by constraint and compulsion.
Doctrine 2. All Christian duties done to God or man, must be done willingly and
cheerfully.
Hereby we learn, that all Christian duties done to God or man, must be done
with a free, willing, cheerful, and hearty affection. This is it which the
Lord requires. Deuteronomy. 6. Hear, o Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only. And
thou shall love the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Math. 22, 37.
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. So the
Prophet David Psa. 119, 108
prays, O Lord I beseech thee, accept the free offerings of my mouth, and
teach me thy judgments. No other Sacrifices please God, but such as are free
and voluntary: all things must be done in love with a ready mind. The Apostle
teaches, that Romans 12, 8.
He that distributeth, must do it with simplicity; he that rules, with
diligence; he that shows mercy, with cheerfulness. This also was figured
out unto us in the shadows and Ceremonies of the Law, when the people were
commanded to offer a male without blemish, presenting him Leuitic. 1, 3.
of his own voluntarily will, at the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation before the Lord, declaring thereby, that our serving of him must
not be grudgingly, but we must perform it frankly and freely, and with a
willing mind. The Apostle moving the Corinthians to bountifulness toward the
poor Saints at Jerusalem, teaches them that they must offer a free will
offering, 2 Cor 8, 19
I sent the brother whose praise is in the Gospel, (which seems to be Acts
13, 2.
Barnabas) who is also chosen of the Churches, to be a fellow in our journey,
concerning this grace which is ministered by us unto the glory of the same Lord,
and declaration of your prompt mind. All these words of Scripture, are
vvitnesses of this truth, beyond all exception, that God never likes of
constrained service, but will have men to do their duties to him voluntarily,
as is fit to be performed of the creature toward his Creator, and of the Child
tovvard his Father.

Reason 1.
Let us see how the reasons vvil make this better to appear unto us, that we
may have strong proof to put the matter out of all doubt. First, God loves a
cheerful giver, a cheerful servant, a cheerful service. It is the heart and
the inward affections that he accepts and regards, which is the
principal part of a man, and the fountain from whence al outward actions
proceed. He will have the heart, or else he will have nothing of us. This is
the reason urged by the Apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 9, 7.
As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of
necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver. Now, that which the Apostle
speaks of charity and of alms, may as truly be spoken of every duty that
God requires of us. When we pray we must call upon God chearefully, for he
loves a cheerful prayer. When we give thanks to his name for blessings
received, we must thank him chearefully, for he loves a cheerful giver of
thanks; and albeit these be notable parts of Gods worship and excellent duties
commanded of him, and required of us; yet without this cheerfulness, they are
as a dead thing, and not regarded.

Reason 2.
Secondly, our obedience unto God, must be answereable to the obedience of
Christ, that he performed to his Father; for he has therein given us an
example, and taught us how to obey. The manner of his obedience was willing, and
done of his own accord, not extorted and wrested from him, for then it could
not have been accepted of God, nor merritorious for us, nor praised in him.
Hence it is, that the Apostle says, Heb. 10, 9, 10.
Then said he, Lo I come to do thy will, o God, he takes away the first,
that he may establish the second. By the which will we are sanctified, even by
the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made. Thus Christ himself
speaks in the Gospel, John. 10, 17, 18.
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might
take it again: No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have
power to lay it down, and have power to take it again. Where he shows, that
the cause wherefore he suffered, was not because Caiphas conuented him, or the
witnesses accused him, or Pilate condemned him, or the Jews executed him, but
because it pleased his Father and himself to make himself an offering for
sin. For except he had died willingly, all his adversaries had bin too weak
to work any thing against him, John 18, 6.
as appears in evidently the Garden, when he cast them all down to the
ground with a word of his mouth. Here is set down a pattern for us to follow:
we must perform the like obedience that he did, as his was voluntarily and
willing, so ought ours likewise to be, that it may be acceptable in the sight
of God.

Reason 3
Thirdly, the things that are not done in Faith and Love, are sin. For,
without faith it is impossible Heb: 11, 6
to please God. And though I had the gifts of prophesy, and knew al secrets,
and al knowledge, yea if I had al faith, so that if I could remove mountains,
1 Cor. 13, 2, 3
and had not love, I were nothing; and though I feed the poor with all my
goods, and though I give my body that I be burned, and have not love, it
profits nothing. So then we see, that no duty is acceptable without Faith
and Love. But nothing done unwillingly, uncomfortably, or hypocritically can be
done in Faith and Love. And therefore such duties as are thus performed, have
no life nor virtue in them, to give them any grace or acceptance with God.

Reason 4
Lastly, God knows our hearts, and sees how we bring our gifts, and offer
our offerings. He looks not upon the outward work, but regards the intent
of the heart. When Caine brought unto God an oblation of the fruits of the
ground, Gen: 4, 5.
he had no regard to him nor to his offering, because he savv the hollownesse
and hypocrisy of his heart. This is the reason that David uses to persuade
Solomon his son, to have a care to learn and to practice the will of God, 1
Chro. 28, 8. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of thoghts, if thou
seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
off for ever.

Where we see, the Father careful for the future good of his son, moves him
to endeavor and strive to know God by learning what he wills, and to serve
him uprightly and willingly, by practicing as he enableth, because our
thoughts are not hidden from the all-seeing eye of God, and because he offers
himself to them that seek him, but forsakes them that refuse him, when he is
offered. We may easily deceive the eye of man, that looks only to the person,
and beholds only the outward work; but it is impossible to deceive the
searcher of hearts. If then we gather al these reasons into a short sum, and
set them as in a Table before our eyes, if we consider that God loves a
cheerful service, that Christ performed a willing obedience, that faith and
love gives acceptance to the work; and lastly, that God gives recompense
according to the heart, which he knows; we see that the strength of them will
bear the full weight of this conclusion, that the duties of our Religion must
not be performed constrainedly, but freely; not grudgingly, but chearefully;
not unwillingly, but readily; not of necessity, but voluntarily.

Use 1.
Now we are to make Use of this Doctrine. First, seeing no man must perform
any holy duty to God or man upon compulsion, or against his will, but with all
his mind and might, we learn that every action or duty is accounted of by
God, not according to the greatness of the worker, or outward show of the
work, but according to the will and affection of the dooer: it is the manner
of doing that God more accepts, then the action or deed it self. A Child
in his obedience to his Father, is esteemed for his reverent, loving, obedient,
and dutiful heart, and not for the greatness or worthiness of his work. For
what can he do, when he has endeavored to the utmost, to pleasure his Father?
So is it with us, when we have done all that we can, we must confess we have
bin vnptofitable servants, and therefore God more respects the intention,
then the action; the Worke-man, then the work; the affection, then the effect.
Mary is commended of Christ, Luke 7, 47, and 21, 3, 4.
because she loved much. The poor widow that cast into the treasury one
mite, is praised by Christ above the rest, that offered of their substance and
superfluity. He that gives a cup of cold water, in the name of a Disciple to a
Disciple, Math. 10, 42
shall not loese his reward. What is the bestowing of a Mite? Or what is a cup
of cold water? Are they of themselves, and in themselves considered any thing
worth? Or can they deserve to be accepted? No, in no wise: but God accepts
the manner, more then the matter; how they are done, more then what is done.
This is it which the Apostle expresses, 2 Cor. 8, 12. If there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that a man has not. This lays before us the abundant kindness of God,
who albeit he be a spirit every way perfect, yet he accepts our lame and
defective service. Our duties shall be all acceptable in his sight, though they
be performed in great weakness, and mingled with many imperfections (which
were sufficient to cause them to be rejected and refused) if we be careful to
do them in the truth and uprightness of our hearts, and with cheerful and
ready minds. All things must be done in love, and this must be considered in
all the works of our hands. This ministers a double comfort; First, unto such
as are of poor and low degree, to consider that GOD regards the heart more
then the hand, and our willingness more then our work. Hence it is, that even
servants whose condition is lowest in the family, and which meddle not in great
matters, or in weighty affairs, or in excellent works, yet are charged with
this affection, and in sincerity to behave themselves in those inferior
duties, Col 3, 22, 23 Ephesians. 6, 5.
Servants be obedient unto them that are your Masters, according to the flesh
in all things, not with eye-seruice, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of
heart fearing God: and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and
not to men.

Where he shows, that servants must do their duties, not as serving for the
penny, or aiming at the filling of their belly, or contenting themselves to
please their masters eye, but even as serving God, looking for a recompense
from him, knowing that he has placed them in that estate, and requires those
things in truth and sincerity to be performed as unto him. For the Lord does
not see as man sees, he does not look to the outward action, but he beholds
with what heart al things are done, and therefore measures according to every
man's deed, whether he be high or low, rich or poor, Lord or Servant. The best
heart has the best recompense; the worst heart has the worst wages. There is a
great difference between work and work; some are great, some little; some
beautiful, some base; some high, some mean, some low; but whatsoever I do, if I
do it cheerfully, as serving my master Christ, that looks upon me, albeit my
calling be never so simple; as to wash dishes, to wipe shoes, to scour the
spit, to sweep the house, I please God therein as well as he that manageth a
kingdom, that ministers Justice, that preaches the gospel. True it is the
work is greater to rule the affairs of State, then to remain in the kitchen,
yet he shall be better accepted of God, that performs these small things
heartily, then he yt does the greatest works grudgingly, either drawn by
importunity, or co^peld by necessity. Thus it does fall out, that a poor
servant, carrying this mark and testimony with him, is more acceptable to the
Lord, then he yt has done greater things to the judgment of the eye, to the
show of the world and to the sight of men. Secondly, this serves as a singular
comfort to every one of us, that groan under the burden of sin, that feel the
weakness of our faith, and are dismayed at the smalnesse of our
sanctification. We know how busy Satan is to watch his advantage of our
infirmities and imperfections, and to persuade us that we have no faith at all,
that we are without repentance, without grace, and without regeneration,
because we feel great defects, and many wants in our best works, and our best
gifts. But this must comfort us, that God accepts of that measure that he
has given us, even according to that which we have, not according to that
which we have not. A weak faith, shall be as auayleable to apprehend Christ, as a
strong faith. If we have a desire and an hungering after grace, Psalm. 145, 15
and 10, 17.
He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, he also will hear their
cry and save them. God has assured us, that as he has begun his good work
in us, so he will finish his work, and in his good time bring it to perfection.
When we find any dullness and untowardness in our selves, if we hate and
dislike them, and labor to profit and grow forward in sanctification, God
accepts our willingness and readiness, though our strength be not
answerable to our desire, or the outward work answereable to our heart. For God
is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above the strength that he
shall give us; and the Lord Jesus is a merciful Highpriest, who will not break
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. Let us al therefore look that a
willing and ready mind be found in us. Again, this must be considered in all
things: If we come to hear the word, and to exercise the duties of Gods
worship, if we do it for fashion sake, for fear of the law, for the praise of
men, or for custom, they are nothing worth; they ought to be performed in
obedience to God, in love of his ordinance, in delight of his worship, in
singleness of heart, and in an earnest affection, to the means of our
salvation. The like we might say of giving of alms and liberality toward the
poor, if they be not bestowed with promptness of mind, with compassion of
heart, and with feeling of the wants of those that crave our help, they are
nothing at all respected of God, nor they that distribute the^ rewarded of him.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing only that duty which is done freely and not by compulsion,
deserves due commendation; this reproves al those things that are don upon
wrong grounds, and evil foundations. It is not enough to do a good thing, but
we must do it well; It is not sufficient to do those things that are godly, but
we must do them in a godly manner. Let every one herein carefully examine his
soul, and try his own heart, whether he do the duties of his calling
unwillingly, uncomfortably, and upon necessity, for fear of danger, for
avoiding of shame, for keeping of his credit, for praise of the world, or such
like causes, which are all false motives; or whether he do them heartily and
cheerfully as in the sight of God, before whom all things are naked and open.
This is to be considered as well of the Minister himself, as of the people
that hear him, and are partakers of his labors. The calling The Minister must
preach willingly, and of a ready mind.
of the Minister is an high and mighty calling, he is the Steward of God, and a
watchman over the people, for whose souls he must give an account in that
great day of the Lord. It is not enough for us to labor among them (though we
should work, and weary, and toil our selves never so much) but we must do
it diligently and cheerfully, as serving Christ the Shepherd of the sheep. If
the chief end that we respect be to maintain our selves, to live easily, and
to increase in riches, we have our reward. Or if we preach unto them, because
the law does enforce us, and enjoin us unto it, and because otherwise the
people would cry shame upon us: if reaping their Temporal things, we do not
give them Spiritual, 2 Timothy 2, 4.
or if we so entangle our selves in the affairs of this life, that we cannot
intend the duties of our calling, we cannot possibly please him that has
chosen us, to be as Soldiers to fight his battles, and has appointed us to be
as Shepherds to watch his flock. It stands us upon, to be so touched with a
care of our duties, as that if there were no Law to compel us, and urge us to
be painful therein, yet the zeal of Gods glory, and love of his people should
constrain us. Hence it is, that the Apostle Paul speaking of his own
practice says, 1 Cor. 9, 16, 17.
Though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to rejoice of: for a necessity is
laid upon me, and woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel: for if I do it
willingly, I have a reward; but if I do it against my will, notwithstanding
the dispensation is committed unto me. Whereby we see, he shows, that such a
necessity of the divine calling, did press sore upon him, that he must preach
or perish. For, if he held his peace, and did not do his duty, the curse of God
would lie hard and heavy upon his shoulders, and bring such intolerable
torments upon him, as should make him cry out, woe, woe, alas, alas, what a
wretch am I? yet notwithstanding this necessity, he must have a willing
mind, and do his duty gladly. A good work done willingly, is made much better
by the willing doing.

Again, there is nothing so easy, Terent. Adelph act. 4. scen. 6.
but it becomes difficult and unpleasant, hard and tedious, which a man does
by compulsion. No man therefore has done his duty, or discharged his calling,
that works against his will. Jonah the Prophet went to Niniuie against his
will, Ion. 1, 3, and 4, 2, and 2, 1.
he could have wished that his preaching had taken no effect, so that he was
chastned of God. When Moses was called to go to Pharaoh, to charge him to let
the people go, that they might serve the Lord in the wilderness, Exodus 4, 1,
10, 13, 14.
he provoked God to anger, because he delayed the matter, and excused himself,
and framed objections, and showed himself backward to enter on the work. Hence
it is that Peter speaks to all the Ministers of the gospel, 1 Pet 5, 2, 4
Feed the flock of God that depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, etc. that
when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye may receive an incorruptible crown of
glory. That which is not done willingly, is not performed conscionably, and
where there is not found readiness of mind, there cannot be looked for any
recompense. The Prophets of God being inwardly touched with a feeling of Gods
effectual calling, have obeyed imediatly, and ran whether he sent them to
preach. The Prophet Esaias speaking of himself says, Esaias 6, 8.
I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, whom shall I send? Or who shall go for
us? Then I said, Here am I send me. When Christ Jesus called Simon and Andrew
his brother, and said unto them, Mark 1, 18.
Follow me, and I will make you Fishers of men, they forsook their Nets
straight way, and followed him. The like we see in Paul, when he was converted
and called by a voice from heaven, Acts 26, 19. Gal: 1, 15, 16.
he was not disobedient to the heavenly voice and vision, he communicated not
with flesh and blood, but prepared himself to the work; whereunto he was
separated from his mothers womb. This practice ought to be in all of us that
are entered into this calling, we must labor chearefully, willingly, and
gladly, that the work may prosper and go forward under our hands: The end of
our labor should be the salvation of men's souls; the drift of our sowing, to
see a plentiful harvest; and the purpose of our preaching, to make ready a
people prepared for the Lord. Secondly, such as are hearers The people are to
do their duties willingly.
among the people are from hence also to learn their duty, to do those things
that are required of them; not daily, but dilligently; not heavily, but
heartily as to the Lord. Many seem desirous to have the Gospel, but they would
have it of free cost, and therefore repine at the costs and charges it brings
with it. If we give maintenance to the Ministry, not for conscience, but of
necessity; not for love to the Gospel, but by compulsion of Law; not as a
free will offering to God for the recompense of his kingdom among us, but as a
taxation which we cannot resist to retain with us, or detain from them,
accounting the Gospel not a benefit wherein we delight, but a burden which we
should shake and shift off if we might; it is our sin, and eo acceptable
service unto God. For God in this respect loves a cheerful giver. These men
are wholly carnal, and regard not the salvation of their souls. If they have
an Horse-keeper that dresseth their horses, or a Shepherd that watches their
Sheep, or an Heardman that looks to their Swine, or a Cobbler that mendeth
their shoes, they are more willing to consider him for his pains, and to
recompense his labors, then to minister to the necessities of the Minister.
They think that well gotten that is gotten from him, and that ill spent and
employed, that is bestowed upon him. Again, as we are to give them a liberal
maintenance cheerfully, so when we come to the exercises of our religion, we
must come unto them willingly, not unwillingly; joyfully, not tediously. For as
he is accursed Ier. 48, 10.
that does the work of the Lord negligently, so is he also accursed, that
comes into the house of the lord grudgingly and grievously, not as one
delighting in the work, but as one discoraged with the weariness, whether it
be of the way, or of the word. He is an evil servant that does his masters
business committed unto him unpleasantly and untowardly; he is an unfaithful
subject that obeys the laws of his Prince by compulsion; he is a disobedient
child that performs his Fathers will against his will, and honoreth him without
his heart. So he is an evil and unfaithful hearer, that treads in the Lords
courts unwillingly, and reioyseth not when the time comes to perform his duty
unto him. It is noted of the people of God, that they travailing to the place
of Gods worship, Psalm. 84, 6, 10
passed through many dangers, and endured much heat, and suffered many wants in
the wilderness, for the pleasure that they took in his service. The profit they
reaped, did swallow up the tediousnes of the pains; and the love to his
court^, did mittigate the greatness of the labor. This made the^ say, A day in
thy Courts is better then a thousand other where: I had rather be a doorkeeper
in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness. Where is
this zeal to be found among us? Who shows this forwardness to Gods service?
Or whom can a man single out to say of him, that no want or weather does
hinder him from the exercises of godliness? We are grown unto that loathing
of the heavenly Manna, that albeit it fall in the midst of our Camp, and
round about our habitations, yet we will not step out of the doors to see
it, nor open our mouths to taste it, nor stretch out our hands to gather it:
either the blasts of wind do trouble us, or the fear of rain does hinder us,
or the heat of Summer does burn us, or the cold of Winter does pinch us, or
a Lion in the way does stay us, and every trifle stops our journey. If our
heart were in the house of God, it would quickly move our feet to carry us
thither. But where the heart is not, every member is heavy, and hardly drawn
to do their duty. The Devils do the will of God by constraint, and against
their wills, it must be otherwise with us. Where the heart is, there is our
delight. The Prophet describing the flourishing estate of the Church, says,
Psalm. 10, 2, 3
The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion, be thou Ruler in the
midst of thine enemies: thy people shall come willingly at the time of
assembling thine Army in holy beauty, the youth of thy womb shall be as the
Morning Dew. Where he shows, that the people of God were wont to come to the
hearing of the word, to the partaking of the Sacrifices, to the receiving of
the Sacraments, and to the exercises of Religion, they assembled and gathered
themselves together freely and of their own accord, to present themselves
before the Lord. This duty is required of us, we must come willingly to Christ,
to hear him speak unto us. It is one virtue to come into the house of God,
but to come cheerfully and comfortably as to a feast, is a double virtue, and
that which gives life unto her coming. If we come unwillingly, and be drawn
to our duty on the Lords day, either by shame of the world, or by fear of law:
we come as dead men that are without working of the spirit, or desire of
profit, or feeling of comfort, or increase of Faith, or bettering of obedience.
If the danger of law did not more compel the^, then the conscience of their
duty or the love of religion allure them, many among us would sildome or never
keep the Lords Saboths, nor attend upon his ordinances: they com to them as
willingly as the Bear goes to the stake, and as cheerfully as the malefactor
passes to the place of execution. Hence it is, that some come to this place
once a month, others once a quarter, others only upon high days and solemn
feasts, more I think to show themselus, then to labor to save their souls. Such
was the zeal of our brethren to the gospel in the days of persecution, that
they went more willingly to the fire and flame, then these men in the days of
peace com to the hearing of the word, and to the house of prayer. They were
more cheerful in suffering of death, then these are in seeking the means of
life. Hence it is, that some linger so long before they come, and are afraid
they shall be there too soon. Others, when they are present, give little
attention, and not at al regard to profit themselves. Others, are ready to
depart and be gone before the assembly is dismissed, and think they have
learned enough. These are they that think they are at liberty to do what they
list, and to go and com when they list. They make no conscience to begin and
end the exercises of religion together, and so profit accordingly, having little
more knoledge then brute beasts.

Use 3
Thirdly, this confuteth the common adversary, which ascribe al to the work
done, and regard nothing at al either the mind of the doer, or the manner of
doing, as their blind distinction, de congruo and condigno teaches. They hold
that the bare presence at the sacrifice of the Mass, without any good
intention of the mind, is meritorious in the sight of God. This is their opus
operatum, the which is indeed the cutthroat of al true religion. For admit once
into the worship of God an outward resting in the work done, who will regard
the reformation of the heart? But this fitteth well enough the new Roman
religion, which consists wholly in external observations, in delighting the
eye, in pleasing the ear and the other senses: but requires nothing aright
which may not be performed of a Reprobat. God is a spirit, John 4, 24.
and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth: so that
whatsoever religion rests and teaches men to rest in ceremonial and carnal
observations, is a false religion invented by the devil. This also is the error
of the ignorant people, that will not be accounted Papists, and yet are as
ignorant as they in their practice, and as superstitious in their devotions,
and as corrupt in their opinions. They never look to their hearts to purge
them, nor to their affections, to order them aright, when they come to the
service of God. If they can say, oh we have heard the word, we have bin at the
church, we have prayed to God, they think al is well, and that God can require
no more at their hands. They dream the whole service of God to stand in
outward things only, as though they were the things wherein the Lord
delights, and not rather the truth and uprightness of the heart. This is it
for which the Prophet Esaias reprooueth the people in his time, and compares
them to the Princes of Sodom* and to the people of Gomorra, notwithstanding a
zealous observation of the outward ordinances that they practiced, and God
commanded, Esaias 1, 11, 12, 13.
What have I to do with the multitude of your Sacrifices? I am full of your
burnt offerings, and the fat of Rams, I desire not the blood of Bullockes,
Goats, and Lambs: when you come to appear before me, who required this at
your hands? Bring no oblations in vain: Incense is an abomination unto me; I
cannot suffer your New-Moones, nor Saboths, nor solemn assemblies, I am weary
to bear them, because your works are evil. But wash you, make you clean, take
away the evil of your works from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well. All these were but as outward Ceremonies without substance, which
the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 7, 8.
calls Lying words that cannot profit. Outward observations of religion will
deeeiue us, if we rest upon them, and put our trust in them. If we perform a
worship to God without the heart, we dishonor God, we deceive our own souls,
and we increase our condemnation. We draw near Esaias 29, 13. Math. 15, 7, 8
to God with our mouths, and honor him with our lips, but our heart is far
from him, and therefore we worship him in vain, who is not delighted with
outward shows, and with idle shadows, but requires the singleness of the
soul, and the willingness of the mind. He looks upon the heart when we
come before him. We see how careful men and weomen commonly are, when they
come to the place of Gods worship, to have all things in the outward man decent
and cleanly; they look upon themselves, that their faces be washed, their
Garments brushed, their linen white, that no spot, no blemish, no want, no
wrinckle may appear in them; but if we go no farther, we are but Hypocrites
and dissemblers in the sight of God, all our glorious shows are no better then
abomination before him. So then, as the wiseman teaches, it stands us upon
to give to God our hearts, which is the best present we can offer unto him. We
are taught in the Lords Prayer, to pray unto God, Math. 6, 10.
that we may do his will upon the earth, as the Angels do which are in heaven.
They perform the will of God readily, and without any grudging; they obey his
commandments (whenever he sends and employeth them) faithfully and
chearefully. No one of them slacketh in his function, but is diligent in the
execution of that which is given him in charge. Thus it ought to be with all of
us, we must delight in Gods worship, and encourage others to delight therein.
We must make the house of God a place of pleasure, we must make his word our
meat and drink, and our continual hearing, must be a daily refreshing unto
our souls.

Use 4
Lastly, seeing all Christian duties must be performed of us willingly, we are
hereby guided and directed in our obedience, that we are not to hinder the
necessary duties of Christianity belonging unto us, by obiecting fleshly
reasons, as it were laying stumbling blocks in our own ways, to keep us
back from a willing, free, and cheerful going forward in the works of our
calling, and in the parts of Gods worship. We see, when many are called to a
new course of life, and told of the necessity of laboring to get knowledge,
and hearing the word of God, they can object for themselves, I shall loose my
time, neglect my business, hinder my estate, make my self a laughing stock
unto others. I shall miss such a bargain, I shall omit such a journey, I
shall want such a meeting of Good-fellowes, of Friends, and of Neighbors.
These are like Mat. 22, 5, 6. Luke 14, 16, 17
to those Guess mentioned in the Gospel, who being bid to the banquet, made
their excuses, and would not come; they made light of it, and went their
ways, one unto his Farm, and another about his Merchandise. Our Savior
teaches, that when the word of God is preached unto us, Math. 13, 22
the cares of this world, the deceitfulnes of riches, and the lusts of other
things, choke the word, and it is made unfruitful. The world is a deceitful
bait, and the glory thereof dazleth our eyes, that we cannot discern the
vanity thereof.

Again, when the duties of Love and Charity, ought to be extended toward those
that want relief, and the fruits of mercy, they are ready to object, I shall
weaken by giving to others the means of my maintenance, I shall disable my
self, I shall hinder my family and Children (whom I must provide for, or else
I should be worse then an Infidel) and thereby give cause to my adversaries,
to rejoice and triumph over me. Thus every one is wise in his own eyes, and
carnal reason is apt enough to Minister fleshly objections, to slake our
zeal, and to hinder our course of obedience. But let us stop our ears against
the songs of these enchanters, which seem to bewitch, not our bodies, but our
souls. These are nothing else but words, full of distrust and doubting,
proceeding from Infidelity. Let us learn to rest upon Gods providence, by
wel-dooing, and look for his blessing. This is it which the Apostle
remembers, where he labors to move the Corinthians to relieve the
distresses of the Saints, 2 Cor. 9, 7, 8
Give not grudgingly, or of necessity, and God is able to make all graces to
abound toward you, yet ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may
abound in every good work, As it is written, he has sparsed abroad and has
given to the poor: his benevolence remains for ever. Such as lived in the
Church, in the days of the Apostles, when there were many poor, many
extremely poor, Acts 4, and 5, 2
were moved to be liberal, yea very liberal and bountiful unto them, so that
they that had possessions sold them and distributed them, as every one had
need. Many of them no doubt had wives and Children, and were burdened with
charge and family of their own, yet they accounted nothing peculiarly their
own, but they had all things common, they had them not only for themselves,
but for their brethren. To conclude therefore, we must beware we be not led
aside by the subtlety of Satan, and the corrupt immagination of our own
Nature, to be hindered thereby, from practicing such duties as are required at
our hands. He that will not follow the calling of God, until the flesh minister
no objection against it, shall never have the commendation of obedience. He
shall never go about any good duty, but we shall find somewhat stand in the way
to cross it, either our pleasure or profit, or somewhat else will round us in
the ear, to make us forsake it, or delay it, or condemn it. When the word of
God reproves any sin in us, that seems sweet unto the flesh, we shall
meet with a thousand tentations, to persuade with us to continue in it with
greediness, and to follow after it with all eagerness. Wherefore, so soon as
we know the will of our heavenly Father, let us prepare our selves to do it,
and to delight in it, and step over the rocks of offense, that stand before us
to make us fall; that so God may be delighted with us, and take pleasure in our
obedience proceeding from the heart.

15 It may be, that he therefore departed for a season, that thou should
receive him for ever.

16 Not now as a Servant, but above a Servant, even as a Brother beloved,
especially to me: how much more then unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the
Lord?


The order of the words.
IN the words going before, we have already handled the remoouing of the first
Objection which arises from Paul's sending of Onesimus back again to his
Master. The next Objection is touching his departure from his Master,
mentioned in these two Verses, wherein he both aunsweareth the Objection,
makes a new reason, and seeks to extenuate the displeasure that Philemon
had conceived against him. The Apostle answers here in this place, that
Objection which might be made and moved from the former matter of this suit.
He has entreated Philemon (as we have heard) to receive Onesimus, he might
hereunto have said; But why should I receive him? Shall I entertain a
Runna-gate Servant, a base Varlet, that has wasted and purloyned my goods, and
sought to undo me? If he were well with me^, why did he depart from me? If
not well, why will he return to me again? He that is once evil, is always
presumed to be evil. Answer:
This is the Objection: whereunto the Apostle makes a double answer, as he
did before: first, by way of granting and yielding to Philemon: secondly, by a
kind of correcting his former grant. The granting is, I confess and
acknowledge willingly, that he departed from thee, and would not tarry with
thee. The correcting is, though he did depart, it was not for ever, it was but
a very short time, as thou see. So then, the answer is from the adioynt of
time, he went from thee for a little season, which is not barely set down, but
with an illustrastion added unto it from the end, [ That thou should receive
him for ever:] which also is enlarged by a comparison from the greater; Not so
much as a Servant, but as more then a Servant. The latter part of this
enlargement, being the second part of the comparison, is declared by the
special [ A beloved Brother] more then a Servant, for a Brother carries with
it a better respect, and a farther regard then the name of a Servant. This also
is enlarged by a comparison from the greater to the less, especially to me,
which comparison also is amplified by another from the greater, how much more
to thee, which is farther strengthened by a division or distribution of the
Subject, showing wherein he was more bound to Philemon then to Paul himself;
Both in the flesh and in the Spirit.

Thus we have seen the resolution of these Verses, The meaning of the words.
and the order which is propounded in them. Now let us see what are the points
that require interpretation. First, he says; [ He departed] he uses a kind of
diminution, called (...), or a qualification of his fact and fault committed
against his Master. For he uses a more gentle and friendly word to lessen the
offense, that it might not appear to Philemon so great as it was, calling his
running away, a departure from his Master. Now the Apostle says; It may be
that he departed, or peradventure he departed. The word, used in this place, is
also found. Rom 5, 8. where he says; Romans 5, 8.
Doubtless one will scarce dye for a righteous man, but yet for a good man it
may be that one dare dye. Properly (...).
it signifies quickly or speedily, or hastily: but that signification cannot
fitly agree to these places, and therefore it must be turned and translated [
It may be he departed.] Where the Apostle does not speak of this secret work
of God precisely and peremptorily, but with an exception or limitation, warily
and reverently, least offense should be taken, and encouragement given thereby
to the committing of evil. For if he had said simply and absolutely, he
departed for this end, and he fled away that he might be converted: other
Servants might have been emboldned in wickedness, and have pretended the same
cause, and have run away from their Masters: who, being asked the cause why
they took them to their heels, would readily answer; It was that I might be
converted to the Faith, as Onesimus was: he ran away from his Master, and was
saved; I ran away also that I might be saved. So then, the Apostle by this
word, notes out the special providence and mere goodness of God, ordering
and governing this Fact, which is not to be drawn into a general practice.
In the next place he adds [ For a season:] the word signifies for an hour,
that is; for a small time, even so much as Onesimus was travailing from Colosse
to Rome, from his Master to Paul, by whom being converted, he was immediately
sent back, which was no long time, but a very little while, even as it were an
hour, in comparison both of the time that he before had been with him, and of
the time he was like to stay with him hereafter. Wherein also he seeks
farther to lessen his fault and offense by the circumstance of the time, as if
he should say; If he had been from thee any long time, or that thou had
missed him many years, thy wrath might be harder to be appeased; but he has
been from thee a small time, it is but as it were one hour, and therefore
have patience toward him, especially considering by his absence, thou shall
gain this, that he shall never depart from thee hereafter, but remain
faithful and profitable unto thee many years. Thou may well bear the lack
of him one hour, seeing thou shall thereby get the advantage of many months
and years. Therefore he adds, That thou should receive him for ever; that
is, all the days of his life, unto his death. Thus the phrase is taken in
sundry places of the Old Testament; Gene. 17, 7.
when circumcision is called an everlasting Covenant: the Passe-ouer is
commanded to be kept holy by an ordinance Exodus 12, 14
for ever: whereby he means a long time, even unto the coming of Christ in
the flesh. So if a Servant would not go away from his Master, because he loved
him, and was well with him, the Master should take an Aule and pierce his ear
through against the door, and he shall be his servant Deuteronomy. 15, 17.
for ever, that is; to the year of Iubile. So in this place the Apostle says;
Philemons Servant should remain with him for ever; that is, a long time, even
so long as he should live upon the face of the earth. Lastly, when Paul
says, he must be beloved [ In the Flesh, and in the Lord] he means, both in
things appertaining to this life, and the life to come. In the Flesh, in
regard of his service which he shall perform to his Master, in matters
belonging to this Mortal life. In the Lord, in respect of the common faith in
Christ. This is the meaning of the words in this division: wherein (as we noted
before) howsoever the Apostle does purposely answer an objection, yet in this
answer also he propounds two new reasons, to move Philemon to receive his
servant. One is in the 15. verse, taken from the secret work of Gods
providence, which may be thus concluded: If the providence of God have governed
his departure, that by occasion thereof he is changed, for his good, and for
thine, that he might be saved, and thou better served: then receive him again
unto thee: But the providence of God has guided his departure, etc. Therefore
receive him again unto thee.


The second reason is contained in the 16. verse, because Onesimus of a
Servant, is m^de a Brother to Paul, much more to Philemon; and therefore to be
loved exceedingly, being bound by a double band; to wit, in the Flesh, and in
the Faith. In the Flesh, as a Servant. In the Faith, as a Christian: whereas
Paul had only one cause to love him; namely, the common Faith. This reason
may be thus framed; If Onesimus of a bad Servant be made a good Servant; yea,
more then a Servant, even a Brother much to be loved, then receive him. But
Onesimus is become more then a Servant, Therefore receive him.


Thus we see how the Apostle intermingleth Reasons with Objections, and
Objections with Reasons. So then according to the former order and
Interpretation of the words: the sum of them is thus much in effect: But thou
will say unto me; He ran away from me. I grant indeed, and cannot deny, but
that his purpose was wicked, and I acknowledge the cause that moved him to
leave thee, and to forsake thy house to be very lewd; to wit, the fear of
punishment for his offenses, but look, look I say unto the end, purpose, and
counsel of God, in his departure from thee, which appears to be far from
the drift and intent of Onesimus; to wit, by his flight to bring him to Rome,
by bringing of him to Rome, to direct him to me in prison, by directing of him
to me, to convert him to Christ, and by converting of him to Christ, to change
him from a bad and lewd, to a faithful and profitable servant. What said I, a
Servant; nay, a degree higher, even a Brother. Consider therefore (I pray thee)
how many ways thou art to respect this my son Onesimus, and to accept of
him. For in that he is now joined to thee in the common fellowship of the
Faith, through the great mercies of God in Christ, thou art bound to regard him
henceforth, not as an ordinary Servant, but as a dear Brother in Christ,
equal with thy self in the Covenant of grace, and the inheritance of eternal
life: withal, remember how many ways he is joined to thee, rather then to me.
He is for the common faiths sake dear, I confess, to me, and tenderly
beloved: but he is bound to thee by two bands; first, in respect of the flesh,
in that he is of thy charge and family, he is thy Servant, and an helper of
thee in the means of thy outward maintenance, and withal, in the Lord Jesus
(our common Master) he is thy Brother and fellow-heire of the same promises,
being together with thee a member of his body. Now the more ways we are bound
to any, the more we should regard them: he is dear indeed to me, but he is
nearer to thee then me; and therefore he ought to be much dearer to thee, in
regard of this conjunction between you.

Diverse points to be observed
From these verses, diverse worthy considerations do arise, which are not
unprofitable to be observed of us. First, mark that the Apostle entitleth the
shameful running away of Onesimus, the Servant of Philemon, by the Name of a
departure. If we will speak properly, a departing is one thing, a running away
is another thing. For albeit, every one that runs away departs: yet every
one that departs, runs not away from his Master, because he may depart by
consent, either having leave and license, or that the time of his service is
expired. So a little before, verse 11. he called him [ Vnprofitable] whereas
he might lawfully have given him an harder Title. This was not done in regard
of the offense, because it was small; but in regard of his repentance, because
it was great. So he speaks afterward ver. 18. If he have hurt thee, or if he
owes thee any thing; whereas he might have said, he had robbed him, and
stolen his goods from him: declaring that we should deal friendly and
favorably with those that are truly converted to God, we are not to augment
and agrauate a Penitents offenses, but to be gentle and merciful toward him,
as often as we make mention of him. Such as have repented, are by all means to
be favored, we cannot be of too mild a spirit toward them.

Secondly, in the Apostles answer to Philemons objection, we may mark; that we
are bound to forgive and forget the injuries and offenses done unto us, when
once God has forguien and covered the sins committed against him, and
received the Sinner that repents to mercy: when God makes all things turn
to our good that love him, and thereby recompenceth by a double benefit, the
loss and damage that we have sustained.

Thirdly, we may observe, that Christian Religion does more strongly bind all
persons to their particular callings, and makes the knot greater then it was.
For that which he speaks here of a Christian Servant, even a Brother, is
true of all callings in the Family and Commonwealth. For as a faithful
Servant is more then a bare Servant: so a Christian King is more then a King; a
Christian Master, is more then a Master; a Christian Father, is more then a
Father; a Christian Husband, is more then an Husband: so on the other side, a
Christian Wife, is more then a Wife; a Christian Subject, is more then a
Subject; and so of all the rest. Great is the Dignity and pre-eminence of our
Christian calling, Col. 1, 13.
which (as the Apostle speaks) is a translating of us from darkness, into
the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, so that it is a royal prerogative which they
want that are unbelievers.

Fourthly, the Apostle, notwithstanding the great account he makes of this
Servant, does not deny subjection to his Master, nor exempt him from the
condition of a Servant, but he adds, [ More then a Servant.] He says not,
he is no more a Servant, but he is more then a Servant: so that our Christian
1 Cor. 7, 20.
calling does not abolish policy, and politic Constitutions, and Domestical
government: but rather does strengthen and sanctify them. He that is called to
the truth being a Servant, must not be discouraged and discontented, but
rejoice in this, that he is the Lords Freeman.

Fifthly, when he styles him [ A Brother] he does after a sort signify he is
equal unto him. For albeit, in the Commonwealth and private Family, it be
necessary that some should be Superiors, and others Inferiors; and that this
disparity and in-equality among men, be the ordinance of God: yet in the
Kingdom of God and in Christ Jesus, there is no distinction; Gal. 3, 28, Col.
3, 11.
There is neither Jew nor Grecian: there is neither Bondman, nor Freeman:
there is neither Male, nor Female: for we are all one in Christ Jesus. When God
will punnish sin and the breach of his Law, he does it without respect of
persons. Such as are in greatest Dignity and highest place of authority upon
the earth, are subject to sicknesses, to diseases, to death; so that (as the
Psalm. 82. 7.
Prophet says) Ye Princes shall fall like others. That which God laid in the
beginning upon mankind; Ge. 3, 19, 16
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy Bread, until thou return to the
Earth: And to the Woman he said: I will greatly increase thy sorrows and thy
conceptions, so that in anguish thou shall bring forth Children: What Man, or
what Woman, can free themselves from this burden, or deliver themselves from
this punnishment? We see the high, subject unto them as well as the low, the
rich as well as the poor, the Prince as well as the people. So on the other
side, when God will bestow the graces of his Spirit that accompany salvation,
he distributeth them according to his pleasure, and respects not the outward
person, he makes no difference between Bond and Free, between Master and
Servant, but gives where it pleases him: which serves to teach patience and
contentation to those that live in lower places. God looks upon them, when he
passes many times by those that Luke 1.
are greater in the world; yea, he fills them when he sends the other empty
away.

Sixthly, we may observe, that he joins love with Christian Brotherhood, and
calls Onesimus [ A beloved Brother] not only a Servant, not only a brother,
but a Brother dear and beloved; signifying thereby, that where a Christian
calling is found, there Charity and Love is as a due debt required: so that if
any man be converted, to become a true Christian indeed, and thereby is made
our Brother (who before was a Christian only in Name and naked profession) even
for this cause we are bound to embrace him with the greater love. Every man in
his order to be loved, even he that is no Christian, if it be Turk or
Infidel: but whosoever is a right Christian, not only in title, but in truth,
must more specially be loved of us, and be dear unto us, who is nearly
joined unto us as a member of the same body with us, and is to be esteemed of
us, not so much another man from us, Ephe. 2, 15.
as one and the same man with us. He that is out of Christ, is another from us,
he is diverse to us, and yet is to be loved as a man, as one that bears the
Image of God.

Lastly, observe, that the more causes there are of love and conjunction one
with another, the deerer and deeper ought our love to be. There are many
degrees of uniting us together, now the more there are, the more degrees should
there be of love between us. The conjunction between the Master and the
Servant in the private society, ought to be a cause of mutual love: but when
to this natural respect there is added a spiritual fellowship and communion
in Christ, whereby the Servant becomes more then a Servant, even a Brother
with his Master; this requires a farther degree of love in them one toward
the other. Thus we see sundry observations, and all very profitable offered to
our considerations out of these words: we cannot stand upon them all, and
therefore we will only select some of the prinpall and cheifest of them.

Verse 15. [ It may be that he therefore departed for a season, that thou
should receive him for ever.] In these words we see, how he goes about to
mitigate the wrath and displeasure of Philemon, by teaching him to consider;
that those things which were done peruersely and corruptly, are by the
direction and determination of God turned to another end. For a joyful end and
good issue in evils, is as it were a remedy offered unto us by the hand of God,
to blot out offenses. Paul therefore admonishes Philemon, that he ought not
now to be so greatly offended at the flight and running away of his Servant,
because it fell out to be the cause of good, not to be repented off. So then he
warns, that this departure of Onesimus from his Master, is not to be waied
and pondered by his purpose and meaning, but by the end and event which was
most wholesome and profitable. For by this means he was brought to the
Apostle, and by hearing of him, was instructed in the way of salvation, to the
end that afterward he might be made more diligent and faithful to his
Master. Whereby we see, that when he says [ Therefore he departed for a
season, that thou should receive him for ever:] It is not to be referred to
the purpose and intent of Onesimus flying away, who had no such thought or
determination ever to come back to his Master again, much less to come
back better or a believer: but it has relation to the providence of God,
disposing of his fault and flight to a good and gracious end. Doctrine 1. All
things, even sin it self, are turned by the providence of God, to the good of
the elect.
Hereby we learn for our instruction, that all things (even sin it self)
are by the high providence of God turned to the good of the elect. Such is the
infinite wisdom and power of God, that he brings evil to a good end.

We see in this place how the Apostle makes the providence of God to turn the
sin of Onesimus to good, and to the benefit of himself and many others. For
by running from his Master, he came to Rome: by coming to Rome, he lighted
upon Paul: by falling into his company, he heard the Gospel preached: and by
hearing the word, he was converted, which had not fallen out if he had not
departed: so that his stealing and running away, turned by the goodness of God
to his great benefit. So the sin of Adam turned to the greater gain and
glory of the elect. To this purpose we may profitably consider the vile and
villainous act of Iocobs Sons against their Brother Joseph, Genesis 45, 5. Acts
7, 13.
who considers that it was done by the maruailous providence of God, that
being sold for a Bond-slaue, he might be advanced to that honor and Dignity,
whereby he might nourish both his Father and Brethren in the years of Famine:
therefore he said unto them when he made himself known: Be not sad, neither
grieved with your selves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before
you for your preservation. The like we might say of the crucifying of the Lord
of Life, he was delivered into the hands of Sinners through the Treason of
Judas, and other wicked and curssed Instruments; for Judas betrayed him, the
Jews accused him, and Pilat judged him, whereof the Apostles say. Acts. 4.
Act. 4, 27, 28
Doubtless against thine holy Son Jesus whom thou have anointed, both
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel,
gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had
determined before to be done. So then, albeit they wickedly intended nothing
but to show their hatred, and testify their envy in the death of Christ, yet
God brought another matter out of their malice, and made his endless mercy to
man appear in his work of Redemption. God would have him dye, Caiphas would
have him dye, Pilate would have him die, Judas and the Jews would have him
die; but God for our Redemption, they for other ends, as Judas for
covetousness; and the Priests for envy. The History of Job is a plain and
direct proof of this point that now we have in hand: he was robbed of his
goods, deprived of his Servants and Children, through the rage and
covetousness of his Enemies, and by the cruelty of Satan: the Job 1. and 2.
enemies intended herein to satisfy their own covetousness; the Devil
purposed to bring the Servant of God to despair: neither of the^ aimed at any
good to Job: but God that ouer-ruleth and over swaieth all, had another end, to
try his patience, to make known his Faith, to try his obedience, and to give
the devil the foil and overthrow. Thus then we see, that all things
(whatsoever they be) are ordered and disposed by the providence of God, to the
good of those that belong unto him, even then when they do not intend it.

Reason 1.
The reasons of this Doctrine are apparent, to settle our hearts and
consciences therein. The first is, the infinite wisdom and unsearchable power
of ^od, who, as the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor. 4, 6.
brings light out of darkness, and works by contrary means, such as men
count foolishness, 1 Cor. 1, 21.
as to save men by the foolish preaching of the Gospel, that is; which is
esteemed among the wise men of the World no better then foolishness. When
Christ would make a blind man see, and restore his sight unto him; John 9, 6, 7.
He spat on the ground, and made Clay of the spittle, and anointed the eyes of
the Blind with the Clay. A natural man would think this had been a way and
means (judging by human reason) rather to make a man that sees to be blind,
then a man that is blind to see. Christ was able to have healed him with a
word, or to have given unto him new eyes: but he chose rather to use these weak
means, that in themselves had no power or strength in them.

Thus was Naaman the Syrian cleansed of his foul Leprosy, whereas he imagined
the Prophet would come 2 Kings 5.
forth unto him, lay his hands upon him, and call upon God for him, it pleased
God to work by other means, and to cleanse him by washing seven times in
Jordan. We see this in nothing plainer, then in the glorious work of our
Redemption. The Lord Jesus, Hebr. 2, 13.
By death, overcame death; by humbling of himself beneath all, Phil. 3.
he was exalted above all. By making himself poor, he made many rich. By
suffering himself to be condemned, he has brought us to be justified and
saved. Thus he also deals with his own Children; he brings men to Heaven
by Hell; he leads to immortality by corruption; he guides them through fire
and water to set them in a wealthy place. He works not by ordinary ways, by
extraordinary, so often as it pleases him. When he would comfort, he
terrifieth; when he would raise up, he casts down; when he would revive, he
mortifieth; when he would exalt, he brings low; when he would make a man
rich, he makes him poor.

This it is which Hannah sets down in her Song of Thanksgiving; 1 Samuel 1,
6, 7, 8.
The Lord makes poor, and makes rich; brings low, and exalts; the Lord
kills, and makes alive, brings down to the Grave, and raises up. This
also the Prophet Esaias 28, 21.
Esaias signifies; The Lord shall stand as in Mount Perazim, he shall be wrath
as in the Valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work: and
bring to pass his Act, his strange Act. This is one of the works, of the
strange works: one of the acts, of the strange acts of God, when he turns
evil into good, and orders the wicked actions of men to the glory of his
Name, and the good of his Children.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is the pleasure of God to confound the wisdom of Man, that
cannot attain to great matters, but by great means. For 1 Cor. 1, 27
God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the wise, and GOD
has chosen the weak things of the World, to confound the mighty things, And
vile things of the World, and things which are despised has God chosen, and
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should
rejoice in his presence. God disposes of all things as pleases him, and
oftentimes crosses the devises of men. They intend one thing, but God brings
to pass another: they purpose one end, but he will have another come forth, to
teach man's wisdom to be but foolishness.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, he expresses his wonderful love, making all things that fall out in
the world to serve his Church. True it is, the Church of God is beset with many
enemies, that as wild Boares seek to root it out of the Earth, as the Devil
which is the Captain of this Army, under whose Banners are gathered together
the wicked world, the flesh, hell, death, sin; all which multitude as a great
host muster together, to work the utter overthrow thereof: yet God that
sits in heaven, makes all their endeavors and enterprises further the
salvation of his Church. This the Apostle teaches; Romans 8, 28.
We know that all things work together for the best unto them that love God,
even to them that are called of his purpose. He blesses their troubles and
afflictions, and works in them patience under the cross, humility in
suffering, and experience of his mercies, and makes them confess, that it was
good for them that they have been afflicted. We see this evidently in the
example of Jobs troubles and torments that he endured, there were many workmen
set on work to wast his goods, to destroy his Children, to kill his Servants,
to afflict his Body, to torment his Soul, all aiming at this to bring him to
despair, and all these Wheels were set to move by the Devil: but the Lord
out of their sins wrought his great good; James 1, 3, 4 Romans 5, 3, 4.
Making trial of his Faith to bring forth patience; and patience, experience;
and experience, hope; and hope makes not ashamed. So then, seeing God is able
to work, and does work, both above, and contrary to means that men imagine,
seeing he confounds the wisdom that is in man, and makes manifest the
abundance of his love to his people, in turning al things that fall out to
their good, and making them serve them: we conclude, that Gods providence
disposes and orders all actions, whether they be good or evil, for the
benefit of such as fear him, he will make all things that come to pass, to
serve them that serve him.

Objection 1.
This doctrine of Gods providence is a firm pillar of our faith, and a
fundamental point of our Religion, and therefore it is thoroughly to be
cleared, and the questions to be answered that they may be raised against it.
First, it may be objected, that if God govern all things by his providence, it
skilleth not what we do, whether we do good or evil, seeing his will must
come to pass, and we cannot change it. It seems no matter whether we hear
the word, or pray, or labor to do well, inasmuch as his will must be
accomplished. Answer:
I answer, that this is a false and wicked conclusion, which is founded upon
our own devise, but does not follow upon his providence. For albeit, he order
all things, yet he has appointed us to use the means. It is a great error
and ignorance to separate the decree of God, and the endeavor of man which he
would have coupled together. Rebecca the wife of Isaac, had heard it from the
mouth of God that could not lie, Genesis 25, 23. Mal. 1, 2, 3. Romans 9, 12, 13
that her two sons should make two Nations, and the elder should serve the
younger; whereby she knew that Esau could not kill Jacob, howsoever he
threatened, and whatsoever he intended, yet did she not tempt God, nor presume
carelessly upon his providence, but she used the ordinary means to save and
preserve the life of Jacob, and sent him to her Kindred out of his Brothers
reach: which she did not in distrust, but in faith. The like we see in Paul
when he was in the Ship, and the Angel of God had told him there should be no
loss of any man's life, but all should come safe (though with much danger) to
the land: yet he says unto them; Acts 27, 31.
Except these abide in the ship ye cannot be safe. Christ our Savior prays
to his Father John 17, 5.
to glorify him, and yet he was sure and certain of it before, to teach us,
that as we believe Gods providence, so we must use, and not refuse the means
that he has ordained. But of this we have spoken else where Number. 20, 13
more at large, and therefore will pass it over.

Objection 2.
If all things come to pass by the unchangeable decree of God, then nothing is
done freely: and so the liberty of the Creatures will is taken away. Answer.
I answer, a thing may be done by the unchangeable counsel and necessary
decree of GOD, and yet changeably, and contingentlie, and freely, in respect of
diverse causes by which it is produced: so that Gods unchangeable purpose and
man's free will may stand together. We see this in the History of Christ's
Passion; John 19, 36.
the Soldiers brake the bones of the Thieves that were crucified with him, but
his bones were not broken. How came this to pass? In their own nature they
might have been broken, as well as not broken, as well as the Thieves were:
and if we consider the Soldiers, in respect of the Nature of their will, they
might have chosen the one or the other. But in regard of Gods will and purpose,
it was necessary they should not be broken, that the Type might be fulfilled,
and that the Scripture might be accomplished.

Objection 3.
If God rule all by his providence, how is it that there is so great confusion
and disorder under the Sun? How is it, that evil men prosper and flourish,
and the godly are driven to the wall, and to the worst? How is it, that there
are so many Murders, Blood-sheds, Cruelties, and Riots. Answer.
I answer, the faithful are afflicted in this World for their good; 1 Cor.
11, 32
That they should not be condemned with the World, as the Prophet confesses it
in his own experience. On the other side, the ungodly receive Gods blessings
for their farther condemnation, and to make them in-excusable before the
judgment of God.

Moreover, there is no disorder in the World in respect of God, albeit there
be confusion in respect of Men. For there is order in the greatest disorder
that happens among us. Hence it is that the Wise man says, Eccle. 3, 11.
God has made all things beautiful in his time. Even those things that seem
most foul and deformed in our eyes, are yet fair and beautiful, being sent
as just and due punishments from God, as the execution of his wrath and
vengeance, for the wickedness and unthankfulness of the World, and for the
trial of the Faith, patience, and obedience of his Servants. When peace makes
us secure, and security brings a forgetfulness of GOD, an abuse of his
blessings, and a breaking out into all excess: are not the Sword, the
Pestilence, and Famine, justly sent upon us of GOD? When we see men thrive by
oppression, and get their goods with Covetousness, unjust dealing, deceit, and
unmercifulness to the poor; is it not a just revenge from Gods own hand,
that an unthrift should arise, and ryotously was the goods that have been
naughtily and wrongfullie gotten? Mark a little (I beseech you) the example of
David, the dear Child of God, so often commended in Scripture. He committed
Adultery with the Wife, and caused her Husband to be slain by the Sword of
the Ammonites, wherein he sinned grievously, and provoked the Lord
exceedingly. For he is threatened by the Prophet, and the threatening is
performed. Nathan is sent unto him to show him his sin, to denounce the
chasticement of God, and so to bring him unto repentance; he said: 2 Samuel 12,
10, 11.
The Sword shall not depart from thy House; Behold, I will raise up evil
against thee out of thine own House, and will take thy Wives before thine
eyes, and give them to thy Neighbor, and he shall lie with thy Wives in the
sight of the Sun, etc. This was the punnishment that was threatened, which was
most just in respect of God that did decree it, in respect of Nathan that did
denounce it, and in respect of David that did deserve it. See now, how it was
brought to pass in the house of David. First, Amnon his Son 2 Samuel 13, 14
and 16, 22.
defiles his Sister Tamar: then Absalom another of his Sons, in revenge of
that Incest, slays his own Brother, and afterward rebelleth against his
Father, gathers a power of Men, and drives his Father out of Jerusalem, and
when he comes thither, by the counsel of Ahithophell, he causes a Tent to
be spread, and in the sight of all the people, went in and lay with his Fathers
Wives. Here are sundry deuillish and wicked practices, Incest, Murder,
Rebellion, treason, all abominable enormities: and yet God says; 2 Samuel 12, 12
He did all these things. These sins were most foul and filthy to look
upon, as they were the inventions of the Devil, the persuasions and practices
of evil men: but as they are punishments sent of God upon David for his
offenses, they were beautiful in their time, they were the righteous sentence
of a just Judge, who cannot deal unjustly in judgment. Thus much of answering
these few Objections: Now let us proceed to conclude some Uses out of this
truth.

Use 1
The Uses that will arise from hence, are many, but we will only touch the
principal. This Doctrine serves for reproof, for comfort, and for obedience.
For, it serves to reprove and convince sundry persons, that either know not,
or knowing, do abuse this providence of God, whereby he takes care of all
things that are in the World, and directs them to a right end. And first of
all, we set against it, and oppose unto it, the dreams and dotages of
Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, and such like Wretches, who either deny wholly
there is a God, or make him sit as idle in heaven, as themselves are upon the
earth: so that, albeit he know and see all things, yet he works or orders
not the special actions of men that fall out. These are they that pull God out
of his Kingdom, and set up Chance and Fortune as an Idol, and make it their
God. We must all learn and confess, that the Lord, that is the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, is also the Ruler and Governor of all (even the least)
Creatures. The whole world, from the highest heaven to the center of the Earth,
is subject to his providence. He works all things according to the counsel
of his own will: he gives life and Acts. 17, 28
breath, he preserves them: so that nothing comes to pass without his
appointment. Whether they be things with life or without life; with reason, or
without reason; general, or particular; evil, or good; Angels, or Men;
necessary, or not necessary; all are ruled by his decree. So then, Chance and
Fortune are words of the Gentiles, and are blindly used by such as are called
Christians, whereas nothing can be done without his will and working, who is
omnipotent. What seems more casual then the Lot? Yet, The lot is cast into
the lap, but the whole disposition is of the Lord. Prou. 16. 33. This is it
which our Savior teaches: Math. 10, 29 30. and 6, 26.
Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of the^ shall not fall on
the ground without your Father? Yea, and all the hairs of your head are
numbered. So that we see, Chance and Providence cannot stand together, but the
one ouerturneth the other. Secondly, it reproves such as from hence take
encouragement to commit sin, to break out into sundry outrages, or to live
securely, because God can turn it to our good, and makes it serve to set
forth his mercy. This is that presumption and sin of rebellion touched by the
Apostle. Why do we not evil that good may Romans 3, 8.
come thereof, whose damnation is just. So in another place; Romans 6, 1, 2.
What shall we say then? Shall we continue still in sin, that Grace may abound?
How shall we that are dead in sin, live yet therein. We confess indeed, that
God is the Sovereign cause of all events that are brought to pass, and
whatsoever the enemies of the Church intend and enterprise, whether the Sons
of Men, or the Devil and his Angels, he staieth and hinders, or represseth
and disappointeth, and always disposes it to the good and salvation of his
children. Nevertheless, this does not excuse or free the Instruments that he
uses from fault. They do the will of God blindly and ignorantly, but they do
cross his will openly and purposely: so that his providence does not exempt
the wicked from their evil doing. David knew well enough, and confesses as
much, that Shemei was sent of God most justly to curse him, and to rail upon
him, when he fled from the face of his son Absolon: yet in his last speech to
the King his Son, he does not defend him or excuse him, 1 King. 2, 8, 9
But gives charge and commandment to be revenged of him, and not to account
him innocent. If then evil instruments cease not to be guilty before men, much
more faulty shall they be before the judgment Seat of the Almighty, and much
less shall they escape punishment for transgressing the Law of God. For
howsoever wicked men be well moved by God to execute his work by them, who may
use any of his creatures according to his own power and pleasure; yet in
as much as they (being moved of God) do peruersely and crookedly, and wickedly
move themselves, to will and work evil, so that themselves are the workers and
causers of their own evil works; whereby it comes to pass, both that they
grievously offend God, and afterward severely punished of him. Wherefore such
as resist God, and rebel against his law, and strive against his will, cannot
say they have done his will, inasmuch as they had no purpose to keep his
ordinances, and therefore make themselves subject to all his judgments.
Lastly, this reproves the Church of Rome, that among many slanders cast out
against us, are not ashamed to lay to our charge that we mainetaine, that God
is the author of sin. We hold, we teach, privately, publicly, by word, by
writing, in Schools, in Churches, that God is not the author of sin, but the
devil and man's own corrupt will: and whosoever teaches and preaches otherwise,
if it were an Angel from heaven, we hold him accurssed. Hence it is that the
Prophet says, Psalm. 5, 4.
Thou art not a God that loves wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with
thee. So the Prophet Habakuke, Hab. 1, 13.
Thou art of pure eyes, and can not see evil: thou can not behold
wickedness. Likewise Zephany says; Zeph. 3, 7.
The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will do none iniquity. In like
manner the Prophet Zachary says; Zach. 8, 17.
Let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love no
false Oath: for all these are the things that I hate, says the Lord. Thus we
hear that he loves righteousness, and hates wickedness, so that he is the
author of all good, of no evil. If we would hear this farther opened, the
Apostle James is a witness of it; Iam. 1, 13, 14
Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man: but every man is tempted, when
he drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised. This is the
conscionable Doctrine of piety, and the contrary we renounce and abhor as
open blasphemy. This also is the opinion of all our Teachers that ever were
among us, as were easy to show Calu. instit. lib. 1. cap. 18.
by infinite Testimonies out of their writings, if it were necessary: Nay,
which is more, we teach no more then the Schoolmen of their own side, the
Men of their own Religion, the Doctors of their own profession. First, I will
declare what we hold touching Gods providence ordering all things, even sin
it self, which is out of order: and then confirm the same out of Popish
Writers, thereby to stop their mouths, and to answer the false imputations
that are laid upon us, that if they will not see what we hold, yet they may
understand themselves; or if they will needs condemn us, let them condemn
their own Prophets. That which we God works in sin three ways.
teach of Gods actions concerning sin, may be reduced and referred to these
three heads. First, he is the Universal cause of all things, he sustaineth
mankind, that in him he lives, and moves, and has his being; yea, he
vpholdeth the being and moving of all his Actions, good and bad: insomuch
that no Man could move hand or foot to an Action, no nor have being
himself, if God sustained and supported not: so that the act is of God, as
also the actions of all Creatures.

Now, if they will not be ignorant, but take knowledge of their doctrine,
Occham. qu. 5. lit. K.
many among them affirm full as much, that God is immediately the first cause
of all things, produced by the second causes: but of things evil, he is the
mediate cause, in that he produces and preserves the Creature that is the
mediat cause of evil. So likewise another says; Bartol. Med in ^. 2. qu. 93.
art. 6. page 496.
A Sinner when he sins, does against the law and will of God in one sense,
and in another not against them. He does indeed against his signified will,
and against his precepts and prohibitions, etc. but against the will of his
good pleasure he does not, nor against the effectual ordination of God. In
this manner and meaning write many others, Bann. 1. part. qu. 49. art. 2.
that no sin falls out beside the will and intention of God.

Secondly, we teach that God being free to bestow where he will, to restrain
where he will, and being bound to none, does withold his Grace, and withdraw
his spirit, and leave the wicked to themselves: whereupon it follows, that
their minds are blinded, their hearts are hardened, and they cannot choose but
sin. But how, may some man say, does God harden? I answer, not by inspiring
evil into men, not by creating any sin or corruption in their will, which was
not there before (as he does grace in their heart) but by denying them the
power of his grace which might mollify them, and by offering them sundry
objects, which they convert into occasions of sin, and by delivering them
over as a just Judge to the tentations of Satan; whereby they are overcome,
and have neither power nor will to stay themselves. For when God departs, how
can it be but Satan should come in place? This is not strange Doctrine among
the Papists themselves. One says; Occham. 3. qu. 12. lit. yy.
that GOD is a debtor to no man, and therefore he is bound neither to cause
that Act, nor the contrary, nor yet not to cause it: but the will of the
Creature by Gods Law is bound not to cause the act; and so consequently sins
by doing it.

Lastly, we teach that God does both order or ordinate the sin that is
committed, which is nothing else but a directing of it as pleases him, that it
go not beyond his will, neither otherwise then seems good in his wisdom.
Sometimes he restrains it that it shall not pass nor proceed farther then he
appoints, who gives bounds unto the Sea. Sometimes he turns it to another
end then the person intended that practiced it. Both these we see evidently in
Jobs tentations. The Devil desired nothing more then to destroy body and
soul, but God restrained his rage, and appointed how far he should go, and
what he should not do, and wrought Jobs greater good by his greatest malice.
Sometimes also he makes way for sin to pass, that thereby he may punnish
one sin with another. And does not the Church of Rome teach as much? Yes,
fully as much. Bellarmine in the third Tome of his Controversies, says as
much, Bellar. de amiss. great. lib. 2. cap. 13.
that God not only permits the wicked to do many evils, neither does he
only forsake the godly, that they may be constrained to suffer the things
done against them by the wicked; but he also ouer-seeth their evil wills, and
rules and governs them, he boweth and bends them by working inuisibly in
them. Thus we see, that if our Adversaries look well into their words, and
know their own voice, t^y shall not need to exclaim and cry out against us,
that we make God the Author of sin, seeing the same speeches in the same
cause are used by themselves. We freely confess, that God wills nothing that
is formally sin, as he wills that which is good; but he hates it, and
forbids it absolutely; Esaias 30, 21. Romans 2, 15.
within us by the light of his holy spirit, Deuteronomy. 27, 26
and without us by the light of his holy word.

The first entrance of sin into the World, was by the voluntary action of
man's will corrupting it self, God inspiring or infusing no evil into it. To
conclude, let us know, that as we all agree that every Act is of God, so we
must take a difference between the action, and the evil that is in the action.
The action it self is of God, but the defect or disorder of the action, is from
the Instrument, which being corrupt, can it self bring forth nothing but
that which is corrupt. If a man spurn forward a lame Horse that halteth down
right, in that he moves and goes it comes from the Rider, but in that he
halteth, it is from the Horse himself. If a man cut with an evil Knife, he is
the cause of the cutting, but not of evil cutting, but the badnesse of the
Knife is the cause. Or as a cunning Musition, that plaieth upon an Instrument
that iarreth and is out of tune, the sound is from him that plays, who
observes due proportion of time, and a right order of striking, but in that it
iarreth, it is in the Instrument it self. The like we must hold of Gods
providence over wicked men and Angels, and all their actions, he puts no
wickedness into them, but he orders and governs that which he finds in
them, and bends it by his infinite wisdom and power to a far other end
then the evil Instrument intended. The whole cause of sin is truly and
properly in Satan, and in our selves.

Use 2.
Secondly, this Doctrine serves greatly to comfort us, both in prosperity and
adversity, and that for the time to come we should repose our whole hope in
God. For seeing all things come to pass by the providence of God, so that not
so much as sin it self is committed without his will, it is a great comfort
many ways to Gods Church and chosen Children. We know that he can moderate,
and will moderate the rage of the Devil, and the malice of wicked men, that
they shall not hurt or hinder their Salvation. For the Devil is the Lords
Servant or slave, to work his will, albeit he do it unwillingly and by
compulsion. The Prophet David says, Psalm. 16, 8.
The Lord is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide. And when his
Soldiers were purposed to stone him to death, he was in great sorrow and
heaviness, 1 Samuel 30, 6
But he comforted himself in the Lord his GOD. If then we cast up our eyes,
and behold the providence of God evermore watching over us, we shall not doubt
of the love and goodness of God, nor of deliverance to come from his hand,
albeit we see no ordinary means, but all things go a contrary way. This
made the holy Man Job say; Job 13, 15.
Though the Lord would kill me, yet will I trust in him. And the Prophet,
Psalm. 23.
Though thou cast me into the place of Dragons, and into the shadow of death,
yet will I fear none evil. The church being in great perplexity and danger in
the days of Mordecay, he was not without comfort, he lived not without hope,
he ceased not to use lawful means for the delivery of it, he was not at his
wits end, nor dispaired of an happy issue, because his heart was grounded and
established in the Doctrine of Gods providence, as appears by his words to
Ester: Est. 4, 13, 14
Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings House, more
then all the Jews, for if thou holdst thy peace at this time, comfort and
deliverance shall appear to the Jews out of another place, but thou and thy
Fathers House shall perrish: and who knows whether thou art come to the
Kingdom for such a time.

Again, this providence of God in every thing, teaches contentation of mind
in every estate; yea, in adversity when we lie under the Cross, so that all
things go against us; forasmuch as Gods providence has appointed us our lot
and portion. When we live in peace, and have abundance of outward means to
maintain us; as plenty, riches, health, pleasure, friends, liberty, and such
like, we must remember from whom they come, and so be put in mind to be
thankful for them, because they come not to us by chance, but by Gods
providence: so that we must not barely look upon them, nor wholely rest upon
them, but behold his goodness and blessing in them. For if we consider that
all prosperity comes from him; as Meat, Drink, ease, peace, and all
plenty, who is not pricked forward, and stirred up unto Thanksgiving toward
so loving and bountiful a Father? Hence it is, that the Apostle says, 1 These:
5, 18
In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus. The
Prophet Esaias, complayneth of the unthankfulness of the Jews toward GOD,
Esa. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7
I have nourished and brought up Children, but they have rebelled against me:
the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribbe, but Israel has
not known me, my people has not obeyed me. The Prophet David dealt
otherwise, and behaved himself with greater duty, teaching us all what to
do, when he says, Psalm: 116, 12
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
up the cup of salvation, and praise the name of the Lord. But when these
outward things, whereby life is maintained do fail us, we must not fail to
remember whence famine, war, pestilence, sickness, trouble, and affliction
come, that there is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done.

Moreover, let us depend upon him for the time to come, assuring our selves
that he will not leave us, nor forsake us. He gives us every day experience of
his mercies, so that by remembrance of benefits received from him, we cannot
doubt of his favor toward us. Lastly, this should be a very strong reason
unto us, not to be vnmeasurably dismayed, nor excessiuely offended, when
offenses and great evils break out among us, as oftentimes it falls out;
whereby many are ready to shrink back, and others are much disquieted to see
the Church of God so troubled. We are not to think it strange, or to forsake
the faith through these scandals: for God would not suffer any evil to come to
pass, unless out of that evil he were able to bring good; and out of that
sin to bring forth righteousness, to the glory of his great name, and for
the salvation of his dear Church. He would never have left Adam unto
himself, if he had not determined out of his fall, to gain praise to himself,
and to provide better for his people. It is necessary that offenses come, but
woe to that man by whom they come: Let us not therefore fret our selves
because of the wicked men, neither be envious for the evil doers, for they
shall soon be cut down like grass, and shall wither as the green herb.
And we must rest, and be resolved assuredly, that God does not allow or favor
their sin, nor purposes to free them from the guilt and punnishment of sin,
howsoever he turns their wicked purpose to a good end. For sin 1 John 3, 4
John 8, 44.
is the transgression of his Law. But God never swarueth nor stays from the
strait rule of his own will, neither puts wickedness into man; but as the
earth affoording sap and moisture as well to the evil trees, as the good,
cannot be reproved, because the cause why the evil trees bring forth evil
fruit is of themselves and their own nature, or as the Sun that rayseth
evil smells, and noisome favors from unsavory puddles, cannot justly be found
fault withal, because the reason thereof is not in the Sun beams, but in
those corrupt places; even so, when God disposes to good ends the sins of men
that proceed from the instigation of the Devil, and abide in the ungodly
themselves, he cannot be called the cause or author of sin, although by his
providence he moves all things, yea, even the ungodly, that are not able to
move or remove themselves.

Use 3
Lastly, seeing Gods providence extends to every thing that is, and disposes
it according to his own pleasure, it directs us in our obedience, and
puts us in mind of a Christian duty; namely, to be patient in all adversity.
If we consider that nothing can befall us, but that which is sent by the
fatherly will and counsel of God, who has always just causes to exercise his
children with chastisements, either to try them, or to humble them: we shall
learn to submit our selves to him, Psalm: 39, 9
to hold our peace because he has done it, and to keep silence that we offend
not against him. This will keep us that we do not rage against second causes,
that we do not mutter and murmr against God, that we seek not revenge
against our enemies. We are ready in sickness to complain, in poverty to
repine, in injuries and oppressions to retaile and return like for like, and
in all troubles to be impatient, and to use unlawful means to deliver our
selves, not attending the Lords leisure; and the reason is, because the
providence of God is not learned of us, we cannot depend upon him, we know not
that he has all things in his power to employ them to his glory, and to use
them to our good. We heard before, that Joseph was sold by his own brethren,
and made a servant and slave to the Egiptians. If he had only called to mind the
unkind and unjust dealing of his unnatural brethren, could he have retained a
brotherly affection toward them? Could he forgive the wrong offered unto him?
Could he have repressed his rage, and staid him self from revenge and
recompense, to give them according to their deeds and deserts toward him? But
when he lifted up his mind to the Lord, and saw how God had disposed their
treachery to another purpose then they meant or imagined, he forgave them their
offense, he inclined to mercy, and of his own accord did comfort his
Brethren, saying; Genesis 45, 3, 7, 8.
But now be not sad, neither grieved with your selves that ye sold me hither,
for God did send me before you, to save you alive in this land, and to preserve
you by a great deliverance: Now then, you sent me not hither, but God himself,
who made me a Father unto Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, and Ruler
throughout all the Land of Egypt. So the holy man Job, if he had rested in the
roberies of the Caldeans and Sabeans, by whom he was hurt and annoyed, had by
and by bin kindled with wrath, and set on fire to work revenge; but because he
ascended higher, and acknowledged the work of a superior hand, he possessed his
soul with patience, and comforted himself with this notable saying, left unto
us for our imitation, Job. ^ 21. and 1, 10.
The lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, as it pleases the Lord, so
is it com to pass. The like we might say of David, when Shemei cursed him, as
he fled to save his life, 2 Samuel 16, 9, 10, 11.
And Abishai the son of Zeruiah said unto the King, Why should this dead Dog
curse my Lord the King? Let me go now I pray thee, and take away his head. He
answered again, What have I do with you ye sons of Zeruiah? For he curses,
even because the Lord has bidden him curse David; Who dare then say, wherefore
have thou done so? Behold, my son which came out of mine own bowels, seeks my
life, then how much more now may this son of Iemini? Suffer him to curse, for
the Lord has bidden him. He knew that Gods providence would turn this to the
best, and therefore he was ready to forgive the wrong which this wicked man
measured unto him. Thus does the Apostle Peter speak comfortably to the people
that gave their consent to the killing and crucifying of Christ whom God raised
from the dead, Acts 3, 15, 17, 18.
Now brethren, I know that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your
Governors; but those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all
his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has thus fulfilled. Such
therefore as are malicious, to desire revenge and cannot be entreated to
moderate their anger, never understood the Doctrine of Gods providence. We have
indeed many excellent reasons, and notable Meditations to move us to put up
wrongs that are done us, and to root out of our hearts the weed of revenge;
and instead thereof, to set the sovereign plant of patience and
long-suffering, brought out of the Garden of God, which is the Scripture, that
it may grow and flourish among us. And never was there more need of them,
never was there less practice of them; for now the manner is, (as one Perk.
on Gal. 5, 22.
truly speaks) a word and a blow, a word and a stabbe, a word and a Writ.
He that hates his Brother, 1 John 3, 15. James 1, 19.
is a Manslayer, for rash anger, is the Forerunner of murder, and a degree
and step to murder. God is of a patient Nature, and slow to anger; Christ
Jesus Math. 11, 29
is meek and lowly, whose example we ought to remember, that we may repress
all choler, and so find rest unto our souls: for he forgiueth more to us,
then we can forgive to others. The wrath of God hangs over all their heads
that retain wrath; for such as will not forgive, are in danger never to be
forgiven, seeing we ask forgiveness, as we our selves do forgive. It is a
property of love to suffer and bear, and it is a note of injustice to revenge
our own quarrels; for we take away the honor of God, and make our selves the
parties that receive wrong, the witnesses that accuse, the Judges that
condemn, and the Executioners that punnish, which is against all Law of God
and Man.

Lastly, al wrongs done to us by wicked men, come by Gods providence, to which
we are to submit and subject our selves, knowing what he is able to do, and
what he has promised to do toward us, even make all things fall out for our
comfort and salvation. When Saul persecuted David in the wilderness, and had
enclosed and compassed him round, ready to fall upon him, 1 Samuel 23, 27, 28.
there came a Messenger to Saul saying, Have thee and come, for the Philistims
have invaded the Land: Wherefore, Saul returned from pursuing David, and went
against the Philistims. They were the means of David's deliverance, but they
had no purpose to do him good, or to deliver him out of the hands of Saul, or
to free him out of trouble; for their intent was wicked, ambition moved them,
malice carried them, revenge furthered them, and covetousness resolved them to
go to work, and invade the Israelites. Nevertheless, the Lord used their
unlawful act to his own glory, and ouer-ruled them to do that which they
never dreamed, even to be the Instruments of preserving David, that was near
to death.

To conclude, by all these things it appears, that the Doctrine of Gods
providence, is the ground of all godliness; but where it is denied, the
foundation of Religion is pulled asunder. For, until we know and consider, that
nothing happens by hap-hazard, but all things are swayed by the determination
of the most highest, Psalm. 29, 3. and 147, 8. and 136, 25. and 33, 16. and 75,
7. Job. 37, 5, 6.
so that a drop of rain does not fall, a puff of wind does not blow, a clap of
thunder does not sound, a flash of lightning does not shine, an Arrow of
famine cannot fly, a plague of pestilence cannot destroy, a judgment of War
cannot arise without his appointment; we shall never be thankful for his
benefits, we shall never be patient in troubles, we shall never conceive hope
of delivery out of our adversities. And thus much of Gods providence in the
departure of Onesimus out of the house of Philemon, which being evil, God
turned it to good as well of him that departed, as of him from whom he departed.

[ That thou should receive him for ever.] Here we see, that the Apostle to
a loss of small continuance, opposes a perpetual use, that the Master
should gain of his servant. For to persuade him to patience in regard of his
loss and hinderance, and to prevail with him to be reconciled toward him that
had so offended him, and caused his loss; he does assure him of gain and
advantage; namely, that his short departure should recompense him sufficiently,
with a continual possessing of him, being assured to retain him for ever.
Doctrine 2. God takes from his Servants outward commodities, to bestow upon
them greater.
We learn from hence, that God does oftentimes take away from his servants,
many outward and earthly commodities, to the end he might bestow upon them,
both mo and greater blessings. When the Mother is determined to weane her
child, and take away the breast from him, it is not to famish him, but to give
him a diet and food that is fitter for him. So when it pleases God to deny to
his servants such blessings as they desire, he recompenseth the wants of them
with benefits of a more high and heavenly nature. This we see in the example of
Abraham, when he was sent by the calling of God out of his Country, from his
Kindred Genesis 12, 2.
and Fathers house, there was given to him and his posterity, the whole Land of
Canaan; yea, God entered into a Covenant with him to be his God, and to
acknowledge his posterity to be his people; so that albeit he wanted the
pleasure of his Country, and the delight of his Kindred, yet he gained the
friendship and favor of GOD by obeying his calling and commandment. We see
this in Jacob, he was robbed of his son Joseph, by the treachery of his sons,
and lived a long time without him whom he so much desired; yet in the end he
beheld him in glory and dignity, and blessed him and his posterity. We see the
same in Joseph himself, he was cast out of his Fathers house by his brethren,
he was sold into the hands of strangers, he was cast into close prison, he
endured many slanders, Genesis 37, 28
troubles, and crosses that fell upon him, but he bare them patiently by Faith,
and in the end he was delivered, and became Ruler over the Land of Egypt. He
wanted his Father, and his Father wanted him for a season, but in the end they
were restored either to other, with full advantage. Let us set before our eyes
the example of Job, he lost his Goods, his Children, his Servants, his Cattle,
he became poor, and yet was patienr, Job. 41, 10. James 5, 11.
and in the end God made an happy issue of all his afflictions, so that he
had them doubled and restored unto him two fold. Our Savior Christ beats
upon this point, teaching his Disciples, Math. 19, 29 Mar. 10, 29, 30
Whosoever shall forsake houses, or Bretheen, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother,
or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my Names sake, he shall receive an hundred
fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life. For when Peter said to the Lord,
Lo, we have forsaken all, and followed thee, Christ answered him; Verily, I
say unto you, there is no man that has forsaken Lands or house, etc. for my
sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now at this present,
houses and brethren, and Sisters, and Mother, and Children, and Lands, with
persecution, and in the world to come, eternal life. This appears farther
unto us, in the Parable of the rich Glutton, and poor Lazarus, Luke 16, 20.
one of them was clad in Purple, and fared deliciously every day; the other,
lay at the rich man's gate, who was not admitted to his Table, and continued
without the doors, who was not admitted into his house: God denied unto him
the blessings of this life, but he gave him the riches of faith, and received
him into eternal glory. All these places of Scripture, and examples of the
godly, teach us, that God denying unto his Children the things of this life,
does it not, because he hates their persons, or enuyeth their good, or
purposes their destruction, but rewards the lack and loss of bodily things
with spiritual; of earthly things with heavenly; of transitory things with
eternal; of lesser things with greater.

Reason 1.
Thus the Doctrine is made plain by these testimonies, but will be made much
plainer, if we consider the Reasons following. First, the loosing of these
outwatd things for a good cause, is as the seed season when we sow our
Corn, looking for a plentiful Harvest, as an after blessing. There is that
scatters, and more is increased, as the wiseman speaks. So the scattering
away, and loosing of the commodities of this life, and the pleasures thereof,
when God requires it at our hands, and calls for it, shall be no loss, but
a gain; no hinderance, but a benefit; no pulling of us down, but a setting of
us up; no undoing of us, but an enriching of us for ever. This is it which the
Psalmist sets down, speaking of the return of the people out of captivity,
Psalm. 126, 1, 5, 6.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, they went weeping, and carried
precious seed, but they shall return with joy, and bring their sheaues. Where
he compares the people going into captivity, to needy Husbandmen, who cast
into the ground for seed, that which was left them for succor and
sustentation of their life, and returning out of captivity, to reapers which
rejoice at the abundance of increase which they find: as if he should say,
the Jews, who were sad and heavy, when they were carried Captives into
Babylon, shall be joyful when they obtain the fruit of their hope, which is
a glorious deliverance.

Reason 2.
Secondly, God is our exceeding great reward, with whom it is an easy thing to
bless and increase, to restore and multiply the good things given unto us.
When God would comfort Abraham whom he had brought out of Vr of the Caldees,
to dwell in the Land of Canaan, he said unto him, Genesis 12, 2, 3.
I will make of thee a great Nation, and will bless thee, and make thy name
great, and thou shall be a blessing; I will also bless them that bless thee,
and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed. If then he will restore that which he has taken away, and make up the
breach that his hand has made, we cannot doubt of his liberality toward us.
The poor widow had but an handful of Meal in a barrel, and a little Oil in
a Cruze, but they were increased, not wasted; multiplied, not diminished, unto
the time that the Lord sent rain upon the earth, 1 Kings 17, 14. Whether
therefore we consider, that the loss sustained for Christ's sake, and the
Gospel, is rather a sowing then a loosing, and a laying up, rather then a
scattering abroad; or whether we consider, that God is rich in mercy, and the
most bountiful rewarder of his servants; in both respects we conclude, that
lesser blessings are sometimes taken from us, that we may have greater supplied
unto us, whereby our gain is made better then our loss.

Use 1
This Doctrine being duly waighed, will be very profitable both to comfort such
as are in trouble, and to instruct such as are ignorant, and to direct such in
their obedience, as wander out of the right way. First, let this be our
comfort, when we sustain any losses, or feel any wants, though they be never
so great, though we must depart from land and life, yet in this case, it shall
be a gain and advantage unto us. For to gain and save where we ought not, is a
certain loss. This gain is little, but the loss is great; it is to enjoy
temporal things, and to loose eternal; it is a getting of the earth, and a
loosing of heaven; a getting of substance, and a loosing of the soul.
Miserable is this gain, and wretched is the lucre that is thus dearly bought
and purchased. On the other side, to be content to forsake and renounce all
for Christ's sake, shall in the end bring with it assured and perpetual riches.
For, what is it that we have not received? It is God that has made us, and not
we our selves; it is he that has enriched us, and not we our selves; and
whatsoever we have, whether it be much or little, we have it not of our selves;
and therefore we hold all of him, as Tenants at will, he may re-enter and
dispossess us of them when it pleases him, so that we must render them up
into his hands, when he calls for them, and be resolute to leave them, when
he demands them of us.

Let us not therefore shrink back for fear of trouble and persecution, but
set before us the example of Christ, who has gone before us, Heb. 12, 2.
he for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the
shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. The servant must not
be above his Master, nor the disciple above his Lord. We must account it an
honor to bear about us the marks of Christ Jesus in our body. If we be
partakers of his afflictions and patience, we shall also be partakers with him
of his glory. This is it which he exhorts us unto unto. Math. 16. If any man
Math. 16, 24, 25, 26.
will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross, and follow
me: for whosoever will save his life, shall loose it; and whosoever shall loose
his life for my sake, shall find it: for what shall it profit a man, though he
should win the whole world, if he loose his own soul? Or what shall a man
give for recompense of his soul? Whosoever is not thus persuaded and resolved
for the profession of the Gospel, and the faith of Christ, and the witnessing
of the truth, to endure tribulation, and to suffer persecution, is not yet a
Christian in deed, but in name; not in heart, but in show. So then, howsoever
we be afflicted and made sorrowful for a season, yet the time will come, when
our souls shall be comforted, and we have our heads lifted up, which blessed
day, we ought to attend with all patience, and desire with earnest Prayer.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing God sometimes depriueth his dear Children of outward and
earthly blessings, but rewards them with heavenly; it serves notably to
instruct us in the right meaning and understanding of the reason annexed to the
fifth Commandment, where such as Exodus 20, 12. Ephesians. 6, 2, 3.
Honor Father and Mother, have a promise of a special blessing made unto them,
that they shall live long upon the earth. Where we see, that godly Children have
the promises of this life made unto them. For Godliness 1 Timothy 4, 8.
is profitable unto all things, and has the promises both of this life, and of
the life to come. And on the other side, the fearful Judgments of GOD are
oftentimes upon rebellious and disobedient Children. The Wiseman says, Prou
30, 17
The eye that mocketh his Father, and despises the instructions of his Mother,
let the Ravens of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat him.

Objection
But we see it come to pass many times, otherwise then has bin spoken of; and
some will object, that wicked persons, and disobedient Children live long, and
contrariwise, good men and obedient Children, do oftentimes die quickly, they
prolong not their days to old age, but depart hence in the prime of their
youth. Answer.
I answer, first touching the ungodly, then concerning the godly. The ungodly
indeed do continue long upon the earth, and die full of days, but it is to
their farther vengeance, and to heap up wrath against the great day of the
fierce wrath of God, and to fill up the greater measure of their sins, that
God also may fill unto them the greater measure of his Judgments. This we see
in Caine, who was tormented with fear of punishment, and gripings of
Conscience, and horror of hell, and feeling of sin, which was worse unto him
then many deaths. It had been a great benefit to him, if he had died so soon
as he had bin borne, for then he had not sinned so horribly, then he had not
murdered his natural brother so shamefully, then he had not offended God so
outragiously; but now, the longer he lived, the more sins he committed, and
the greater judgments he deserved, and the heavier tormeats he endured. This
we may say of all the ungodly, who commit sin with all greediness, and
consequently live to their heavier punishment. But concerning the godly, The
reasons why the godly oftentimes die quickly.
he calls them many times out of this present life betimes unto himself,
and provides far better for them, then if he had given them a long life. For
he takes and translateth them from the miseries of this world, to the joys of
eternal life. And it is often good for us, that the Lord take us soon from
hence; for as thereby he brings us to a better place, so we reap a double
benefit.

First, we are kept from the corruptions of the world, for living in a corrupt
air, we are ready to gather infection, and to take the scent as quickly as
flax is apt to take the fire. But by taking us from hence into a sweeter
dwelling, we are prevented and kept from many sins which otherwise we would fall
into. This is it which the Prophet David shows, Psa. 125, 3, 4
The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, least the
righteous put forth their hand unto wickedness: do well, O Lord, unto those
that be good and true in their hearts. He knows whereof we are made, he sees
our infirmities, and how prone we are to decline after evil examples that are
set before us; so that it is a benefit unto us, to go hence before we have
corrupted our hearts, and defiled al our ways. Enoch lived in a most dangerous
time, when wickedness began to cover the face of the earth, but because he
walked with God, he was taken away, that malice should not change his heart.
This is 1 Cor. 11, 30 31, 32.
it which the Apostle Paul testifies. For this cause many are weak and sick
among you, and many sleep: for if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged: But when we are iduged, we are chastned of the Lord, because we should
not be condemned with the world.

Secondly, God deals mercifully with his people, in removing them out of this
life, that they should not feel the present miseries, nor see the iminent
calamities which he knows hang over them, and is determined to bring upon
the sons of men, and be ouerborn and swept away by them with others. This we
see in the example of Abijah the son of Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, who
is branded with this note of reproach in sundry places of the holy history, 1
Kin. 14, 16
That he did sin, and made Israel to sin: the Prophet said of this one only
good son of this wicked father, that he should die being a child, and al
Israel should mourn for him, and he only of Jeroboam should come to the
grave, because in him there is found some goodness toward the Lord God of
Israel in the house of Jeroboam. God in great mercy toward him, took him away
being a child, that he should not be infected and afflicted. For if he had lived
to see the white hairs of his old age, he had bin in great danger of the
fearful sins of his fathers house, and bin in great affliction to behold the
horrible judgments that were to fall upon that godless and graceless family.
The like might be said of 2 Kin. 22, 20.
good Josiah, he was gathered betimes to his fathers, and was put in his grave
in peace, that his eyes should not see all the evil which the lord would bring on
the land. He took him out of this world, before his wrath fell upon the
ungodly. This is it which the Prophet Esaias tells us, Esaias. 37, 1, 2.
The righteous perishes, and no man considers it in heart: and merciful men
are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is taken away from
the evil to come: Peace shall come, they shall rest in their beds, every one
that walks before him. Lastly, God calls away his children out of this
transitory life, to make them partakers of a blessed life, Revel. 14, 13
Seeing they are blessed that die in the lord, they cease from their labors and
their works follow them. Neither do the godly lose by this bargain, neither
does God falsify his word, but is better then his promise. For if he take away
a short and frail life, and reward with a long and eternal life, the promise
fails not, but changes for the better. Change (as we commonly say) is no
robery; but this change is a commodity. If a man promised yard of cloth, and
perform an ell; if he promise silver, and pay gold; if he promise to give a
cottage, and put him in possession of a Palace; if he promise little, and
perform much, he breaks not his promise, but performs it with advantage;
and thus does the Lord deal with us, who is not as man that he should lie, nor
as the son of man that he should deceive, who ofttimes grants more then we
ask, and bestows more then we beg, but never denies that which he promises.
If any farther reply, how then is God true in his promises, yt promises long
life in this life. I answer, that al Gods promises concerning earthly
blessings, must be understood with a condition, namely, so far forth as he
shall see them to be expedient for his glory, and our salvation. But so far as
long life shall be a benefit unto us, so far he will give it; but if in his
all-seeing, and al-serching wisdom he know it to be better for us to die then
to live, to be gathred to our fathers, then to continue with our children, he
takes us away, and recompenseth the want of temporal life, with a kingdom of
eternal glory. This is it which the Apostle expresses, Ephe. 6, 2, 3
who repeating this blessing to come upon them that honor father and mother,
does not only say, That thou may live long on earth, but adds, That it may
be well with thee, and thou may live long upon earth. So then, long life is
not always a blessing, for sometimes it is better to leave the world then to
live in it; to depart out of it, then to enjoy it. The ungodly man, the longer
he lives, the greater is his sin, and his condemnation for sin. This the
wiseman sets down, Eccl. 8, 12, 13
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and God prolongeth his days yet I
know that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before
him: but it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days,
he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not before God. Heerunto agrees
the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 65, 10.
There shall be no more there a child of years, nor an old man that has not
filled his days, but he that shall be an hundred years old, shall die as a young
man, but the sinner being an hundred year old shall be accursed. Thus then we
see how to expound the promise of long life, which God performs really, or if
he take away such as are godly and obedient, he recompenceth it more fully
with a better life, and so he bestows a great deal more then he takes away,
and grants a better measure then he withheld from them.

Use 3
Lastly, we learn for our obedience when we suffer losses, not to be vexed
through impatiency, nor to break out in storming, fretting, and fuming manner
against God, but to rest our selves upon him, being ready to bless his name,
and not to cast away al hope and confidence of being restored. It is a worthy
saying of the Prophet to Amaziah K. of Judah, being like to loose a great sum
of money which he had disbursed for the leuying of foreign forces, 2 Chr. 25, 9.
The Lord is able to give thee more then this. If he see it good and profitable
for us, he can and will repay it in the same kind; for who loses for Gods
cause, and does not get? but if he do not recompense earthly things with
earthly, he will assuredly bestow upon us such riches as are immortal and
immutable, and such a treasure as is eternal, not fading, but enduring for ever
in the heavens. A notable practice heerof we have in Job, chapter 19. in all his
troubles (which were exceeding great) he comforted himself in this, I know that
my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him in the last day. Sometimes he does
restore in the same kind, that which we have left, and seems to be lost: we
see in the former example of Job what a blessed end the Lord made; so if we will
wait with patience, and tarry his leisure, and be content with his works, we
shall behold the end better then the beginning. Moreover, we see the merciful
dealing of god toward his children, from who^ he withholdeth personal
blessings. To some he gives strength of body, swiftnes of foot, quickness of
sight, readiness of hearing, and aptness of the hand, together with a due
proportion and comeliness of every part. But to others, he denies these
things, so yt we see some blind, others lame, crooked, deaf, deformed.
Notwithstanding, God ofttimes supplyeth these wants, and recompenseth these
infirmities with a most plentiful measure of better, that is, of heavenly
graces. We see this in the example of the blind man mentioned by the Evangelist
John, he wanted the sight of his bodily eyes, John 9, 29, 30, 31, 32.
but he had a greater light shining in his heart, and a deeper insight into the
doctrine of salvation, then the chief of the Pharisees that were accounted the
only Rabbis and masters in Israel, so that we may truly say, that the
blindman did see, and they that thought themselves to have their eyesight were
stark blind. For when the Pharisees said of the Messia, We know not from
whence this man is, the blind man answered and said unto the^, Doubtless this is
a marvelous thing, that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine
eyes: now we know that God hears not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper
of God, and does his will, him hears he, etc. if this man were not of God, he
could have done nothing. This was a worthy and open confession of the great
work of God that had bin wrought upon him, wherein he saw more true and
heavenly light then al his enemies, who then boasted of the name of the church,
and cast this simple man out of the Synagogue. But if we consider the poor man
of the one side, and the proud pharisees on the other side, which of them was
most blind, and whither of the^ was a member of the true Church? Surely, God
gave a marvelous light of knowledge to his weak servant, that he was not
ashamed to confess Christ Jesus, acording to the measure of grace given him:
whereas the blind Pharisees were blind, leaders of the blind, and saw nothing.
Heerupon Christ says, John 9, 39, 40, 41.
I am come unto judgment into this world, that they which see not, might see:
and that they which see, might be made blind. And when the Pharisees which were
with him heard, these things, and said unto him, Are we blind also? He
answered, If ye were blind, ye should not have sin, but now ye say, we see:
therefore your sin remains. Let us not therefore despise such as have
infirmities or deformities of the body, nor vpbraid them with them, which are
not in their powers to put away; rather let us take heed of the blots and
blemishes of the soul; to wit, of sin, which makes the greatest scab and
scarre, and brings reproach unto the person. Let us beware of the blindness
of the mind, of the hardness of the heart, of the wounds of the soul, and of
halting with God. The blindness of the mind is a sin, and the punishment of
sin, so that God is offended with it: whereby it differs from the
blindness of the body, which indeed is a certain affliction, but it is no
transgression; it is a kind of misery, but no iniquity; it is a cross, but it
is no sin. But the inward blindness of the mind is in it self a sin and
breach of Gods Law, and makes a man culpable of judgment, and guilty of
eternal death: because none is so blinded, but he has first pulled out his
own eyes, and refuses the light of the Gospel offered unto him Ephesians. 4, 18.
through the hardness of his heart. Again, this ought to be a special
comfort unto us, and to suffice to assuage all grief conceived for the want of
earthly blessings, if God have denied unto us the use of one or many of our
members, as of our eyes, our ears, our tongue, our hands, our feet, and have
made us blind, or dumb, or deaf, or lame, or maimed, let us not be
discomforted or sink down under the burden; but rather considering the
recompense that he gives us another way, and the supply that he makes by
spiritual graces, let us humbly give him thanks, Mat. 5, 29, 30
remembering that it is better for us, that one of our members perish, then the
whole body should be cast into hell. We see the holy man Job, having had great
losses and damages brought upon him to his great hinderance and decay in
earthly things, acknowledged the hand of God in it, and gave him the glory,
saying, Job. 1, 21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord
has given, and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord. Hence
it is, that the Apostle says, Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen
the poor of this world, that they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom which he has promised to them that love him, James 2. If God have made
me blind, yet if he have given me the eyes of my mind, to see the mystery of
faith in this life, and the excellency of glory reserved for me and all his
Saints in the life to come, I have wherewith to comfort me abundantly in the
want of bodily sight. If God have made me lame, and to halt with my foot, and
thereby want many outward pleasures, that many seek and find; yet if he have
vouchsafed this mercy unto me, Gal. 2, 14.
to make me walk with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel, I cannot want
sound comfort and inward peace to my own soul. God looks not upon the person
of man, he accepts no man for his outward form and feature of the body, but
looks upon the grace and garnishing of the heart; so that albeit we be every
way deformed, yet if we be thoroughly reformed in the inner man, we shall be
accepted before him a thousand times more, then such as have the greatest
Ornaments of the body, but have nothing to deck and adorn the soul.

[ It may be he departed for a season.] Note here how the Apostle describes
the sin of Onesimus committed against his Master: he does not aggrauate and
exaggerate his offense with big and swelling words, to show the greatness of his
sin, but does lessen it by gentle and mild terms whereby he calls it. His
running away he names a departing; his absence from his Masters house and
service, the missing of him as it were an hour. This the apostle speaks,
Theophyl. in Philem.
not so much to assuage the anger of Philemon provoked thorough the offense of
his servant, as to testify his unfeigned repentance, whereby he had buried and
blotted out the wickedness which he committed by running from his Master, and
by robbing of him. Doctrine 3. The false and sins of our brethren that repent,
are not to be increased and amplified with odious and extreme words.
We learn hereby, that the false and sins of our brethren that repent, are not
to be increased with odious and extreme words. Whenever (I say) we see the
fruits of unfeigned repentance in any of our brethren that have fallen into
sin, and been overtaken through the weakness of the flesh, we are to bind
up their wounds, as careful Surgeons, and to comfort them with the sweet
promises of the Gospel; not to revile them, or rail at them, or reproach them
for their former falls: we must not speak the most, or the worst, or the
hardest of them, but in mildness of spirit mollify the greatness of the
sin what we can. This Doctrine is made evident unto us, by many testimonies
and examples in the word of God. When Joseph saw his Genesis 45, 5, 8.
Brethren sad and grieved with themselves, because they had sold him into
Egypt, he comfort them with the providence of God, whose work it was to
have him sent and sold into the hand of strangers, Now then you sent me not
hither, but the Lord, who has made me a father unto Pharaoh, and Lord of all
his house, and Ruler throughout all the land of Egypt. This we see in the Lord
himself toward Job, who reproved him for much weakness that he had showed in
the combat and tentation: yet Job. 39, 37. and 42, 6.
when he had repented in dust and ashes, and laid his hand upon his mouth, the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against his three friends, because they had not
spoken of him the thing that is right, like his servant Job. The like practice
appears in Nathan, toward David, whom he reprooueth: first covertly and
closely under a parable, then openly and evidently he charge him with adultry
and murder, together with great unthankfulness toward God that had bin so
gracious to him; but when he repented and humbled himself under the stroke of
the two-edged sword of Gods word, saying, 2 Samuel 12, 13
I have sinned against the Lord; the Prophet does no more vpbraid him with
those foul and filthy sins of committing Whoredom, and shedding of blood,
but said unto him, The Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not die.
Thus did Christ our Savior deal with the woman taken in adultery, even in the
very act, brought before him by the Scribes and Pharisees, he preached unto
her the Gospel upon her repentance, John 8, 11.
I do not condemn thee, Go and sin no more. The like we see in the Apostles
dealing with the incestuous Corinthian; before his conversion, the Apostle
charge him with fornication, 1 Cor. 5, 1, and 2. Cor. 2, 6, 7.
and Such fornication as is not named among the Gentiles, that one should have
his Fathers wife, and reprooueth the whole Church that they had not put him
away from among them: yet when he had confessed his sin, and testified his
repentance by his unfeigned sorrow for his sin, the Apostle would have his
sin forgiven, and his person comforted, Least he should be swallowed up with
overmuch heaviness. Likewise remembering the Corinthians what they were in the
time of their ignorance, Thieves, Oppressors, Fornicators, Idolaters,
Drunkards, Railers, and riotous persons, by their conversion to the Gospel,
and Faith in Christ, they were changed to a better life, and so could no longer
be charged by such sins, 1 Cor. 6, 11.
Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Whereby we see this truth plainly proved
unto us, that it is our duty not to aggrauate and amplify the sins of such as
have repented them of their sins.

Reason 1.
To this duty we shall be better directed and strengthened in the truth of it,
if we mark the reasons. For first, we are not to increase in words the sin
of a penitent person, because love works softness and gentleness in us, a
care of the good name of our Brother, and banisheth all evil surmises and
suspicions from us. Hence it is, that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13, 4
Love is patient. When Peter exhorts us, that above all things we should have
fervent love among us, to the end he may confirm his exhortation, and show that
there is nothing more profitable unto the faithful, then to maintain mutual
Charity; he brings this reason, 1 Pet. 4, 8, Prou. 10, 12.
For Love covers the multitude of sins. If this love rule in our hearts, and
remain among us one toward another, it brings excellent benefits, and we
avoid inumerable evils. But if hatred bear sway, men in biting and tearing one
another, are ready to consume one another, to reproach and detract one from
another, to slander and defame, to strike and quarrel one with another, without
measure or mercy.

Reason 2.
Secondly, we are not always to vpbraid our Brethren, and cast them in the
teeth with their former falls, because we must account it sufficient, that they
have been checked and teproued by us, or by the mouths of many witnesses. The
nature of God himself, is gentle toward us, Ps. 103, 9, 10
that he will not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever. So ought we to
deal one toward another. For, if he does not deal with us after our sins
nor reward us according to our iniquities, we should have compassion one toward
another. If he know whereof we are made, and remember that we are but dust, we
must also learn, that we have all need to be forgiven, as there is no man but
desires to be forgiven. If then it be available to our Bretherens good to
have them reproved, we ought not to proceed to reuiling of them, and railing
upon them for those offenses which they have forsaken. This is the reason
touched by the Apostle, mentioning the transgression and conversion of the
incestuous person, who washed away with his tears, the guiltiness of his
sin, he says; 2 Cor. 2, 6, 7
It is sufficient unto the same man, that he was rebuked of many, so that now
contrary-wise, ye ought rather to forgive him and comfort him, etc. If then, it
be sufficient to reprove; then to revile and reproach, is more then sufficient,
even superfluous, and unprofitable, and uncharitable, as we noted before.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, whenever our Brethren repent, we are bound to testify our
forgiveness of them, and to bring a cloak to cover the foulness and
deformity of their offense. But so long as we publish them abroad, and
proclaim them in the ears and audience of others, it is very plain we do
not forgive them: so long as we remember them to their discredit and reproach,
we do not cover them. It is that reason which we heard before out of the
Apostle, where he instructs the Corinthians in Christian meekness and
moderation toward him that offended and repented that had fallen, and was risen
again; and charge them to esteem it enough that he was reproved, 1 Cor. 2,
7.
so that now they should confirm their love toward him, and freely forgive
him. Seeing therefore, that love covers the multitude of sins, seeing it
suffices to reprove the sinner, and that it is a duty belonging unto us, to
testifye our forgiveness of him that sins; we may from all these
considerations, as from evident consequences conclude, that the sins of our
brethren, committed and repented of, ought not above measure to be stretched
and augmented, but rather mittigated and lessened by us.

Objection.
Before we come to the Uses of this Doctrine, it shall not be amiss, to
answer some Objections. First, the Evangelist Matthew, called to be an
Apostle, Math. 10, 3.
calls himself a Publican, for in numbering up the twelve, he mentions
himself, Matthew that Publican. Answer.
I answer, the office of a Publican was no unlawful calling, and therefore
not of that Nature that falls within the compass of this Doctrine that we
have in hand. True it is, in regard of the abuse of the Office, the name of the
Officer was become odious, Math. 9, 11.
and therefore the Publicans and Sinners are oftentimes joined together. Now
their Office was, to be Collectors of the Toll and tribute imposed upon them by
the Romans which was as lawful for the^ to gather, as for the people to pay.
Hence it is, that John the Baptist does not exact of the Publicans that came
unto him to leave their office, but exhorted them to beware of bribery and
oppressions, Luke 3, 13.
Require no more then that which it appointed unto you. So then, the condition
of a Publican, and the prosession of a Christian, may both stand together; so
that a man converted to the faith, may hold the office, and be called by the
Name, without any disgrace of his outward or inward calling.

Objection 2.
The Prophet denounces a fearful woe against al those that call Esaias 5. 20.
evil good, or good evil; which put darkness for light, and light for darkness.
If then, we are to speak of a penitents sins favorably, and not to deal
rigorously with a Convert, it seems to give liberty to utter a lie, and to
smother the truth. Answer.
I answer, it is one thing to speak of the nature of the sin, and another
thing to speak of the converted sinner. The sin is one thing, but the
Conversion makes it another. When we speak of the Nature of the sin, and the
offense against God, we are not to lessen or diminish it; but when we consider
it in the person that has repented, the shame and reproach is done away, so
that we may speak of it with all gentleness and mercy toward them.

Objection 3
The Scripture often mentions the unclean life of Rahab, and albeit she
turned to God, forsook her filthiness, and joined her self to the people of
God, yet she is branded evermore with the name of an Harlot. So the Apostle
says to the Hebrews, Heb. 11, 31.
By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them which obeyed not, when she
had received the spies peaceably. In like manner James speaks, James 2, 25.
Was not Rahab the Harlot justified through works, when she had received the
Messengers, and sent them out another way? Answer.
I answer, this is not mentioned to her reproach, but spoken to their praise:
she is not vpbrayded with it, but commended, because she had forsaken it. We
see hereby, what she was before her calling, she is not reproached with it
after her calling. Thus our Savior speaks in another place, to the chief
Priests and Elders of the people, Verily I say unto you, Math. 21, 31
that the Publicans and the Harlots go before you into the kingdom of God.
Where he means, that they were such (as the Apostle speaks of the
Corinthians) but now they had given over that life. Thus he says of his
Miracles that he had wrought, Math. 11, 5.
The blind receive sight, the halt do walk, the Leapers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, and the dead are raised up. These men, while these infirmities
were upon them, could not be delivered from them; but he shows what they had
been, and what they were: they had been diseased, but now were restored. So in
Rahab, the Apostles testify, what she had been, to wit; an Harlot: and what
she is, not any longer an Harlot, but a true believer with the people of God.
It is added therefore, not any way sounding to her defaming, but to show the
greatness of Gods compassion, and the soundness of her conversion.

Use 1
The Uses remain to be stood upon, that the Doctrine may serve to our comfort
and instruction. First, we learn from hence a notable point of Christian
wisdom, to esteem of all men as they are, and not as they were, according to
their present estate wherein they remain, and not according to the condition
wherein they lived in times past. It skilleth not what they have bin, we must
consider what they are. The Apostle reckning up many horrible sins committed
by the Corinthians in the dark night of their ignorance, he says, 1 Cor. 6, 11
Such were some of you, but now ye are washed, now ye are sanctified. Where we
see, he makes a flat opposition between their former estate before their
calling, and their estate after their conversion; and sets a difference
between that which they were once, and that which they are now. He says, such
they were, he does not say such they are; they were, but now are not, because
they had repented. The like we see in his affection toward one particular
member of that Church (of whom we spoke before) while he continued in his
Incest, he charge them to cast him out from among them; but when he heard of
his sorrow for sin, and of his repentance from dead works, 2 Cor. 2, 8.
he exhorts them to confirm their love toward him more and more. We see this
offered unto us in the example of God and his elect Angels. When we have
sinned against the Lord, and fallen into horrible offenses, whereby he is
dishonored, and our Consciences wounded, he sends means to turn us from
our sins, and is ready to forgive us when we repent; he never vpbraideth us
with our iniquities that we have forsaken, but accepts of us as we stand in
the state of regeneration. This serves to reprove two sorts of men: First,
such as are so uncharitable and malicious, that they never forget the falls of
their Brethren, but ever remember them, and reproach them for them. If any of
the faithful have suddenly fallen into any sin, it shall always be laid
to their charge, and hit in their teeth, and spread abroad from one to another,
and be made far greater then it is. Wherein, see the peevishness and
partiality of wicked men, who love their own, and bear with a boulster up
one another in wickedness. If the ungodly that make a continual practice of
sin, and have their whole delight therein, do run out of one evil into
another, without touch of conscience, without shame of men, without fear of
God, without turning of the heart by repentance: they shall find those that
will defend them, justify them, speak well of them, as if they had committed
no sin. But if any that are true Believers, have been ouer-taken by the
suggestion of the Devil, and the corruption of the flesh; one fall of theirs
shall never be forgotten, it shall always be kept on foot, it shall run in
the minds and mouths of profane men, as if it had not been forgiven them:
whereas a thousand enormities of lewd and ungodly men are passed over, and
never spoken off. The World loves her own, and speaks well of her own,
even of such as God abhors. As for the Godly that desire to please God, it
cannot abide them, all their actions are narrowly pryed and searched into, and
never were they so much hated as in these our days. Seeing then we have to do
with such sharp sighted Eagels, that behold all, and more then all that we do,
who like deceitful Worke-men, are ready to stretch them upon the
tender-hookes, and like slubbering Surgions, spare not to make the wound wider
then it is, whereas they ought to seek to cure and heal it: let us look more
earnestly into our own ways, and know that we have a thousand eyes fixed upon
us, and a thousand mouths that will be opened against us, and ten thousand
ears that are prepared to listen to any slanders and surmises that shall be
reported of us. Thus shall we take profit and reap a benefit even by our
enemies. Thus we see how they are reproved that vpbraide men with their sins
which they have repented off, and do not acknowledge the change that is
wrought in them; not by Men, but by God. He that is truly converted, is made a
new man, and has a new work begun in him, so that his old works are
renounced, and no man abhors them more then himself, no man is grieved for
them so much as himself. If then we truly love our Brethren, especially
whom we see to be sorry for their sins past, we will think of them with all
Charity, we will speak to them with all gentleness, we will have no evil
suspicion of them, we will not hinder their good Name: so that when they are
evil spoken off by others, we will endeavor to excuse them, to bury their
faults, and to save their credit.

True it is, we must not allow of wickedness, Esaias 5, 20.
nor call evil good; but such as have offended us, we must bear with them,
and deal with them by admonitions, exhortations, reproves, and threatenings,
laboring thereby to heal them, and to give a remedy unto them. Now, if such
be worthy reproof and reprehension, that remember the offenses of their
Neighbors, which before they have practiced, and now have renounced: how much
more are they to be condemned, that mock and deride such as have unblameable
infirmities, and are blind, or deaf, or lame, or any way blemished in their
bodies. The Wiseman teaches in the Book of the Proverbs, Prou. 17, 5.
That he which mocketh the poor, reproacheth him that made him. So it may be
truly said, that whosoever reproacheth his Brother for his blindness, or
lamenesse, or deafness, or deformity, reproacheth God that has made him so.
And who knows what hangs over his own head? Or what judgment may fall
upon himself or his? The little Children that came out of Beth-ell, mocked the
Prophet, and said unto him; 2 King. 2, 23, 24.
Come up thou Bald-head, come up thou Bald-head. Where we see they scoffed at
him for his infirmity: but what followed? He turned about and looked on them,
and curssed them in the name of the Lord; and two Bears came out of the
Forest, and tare in pieces two and forty Children of them. A grievous
judgment fell upon them, notwithstanding the tenderness of their age: and they
are made an example unto us, to teach us to beware, that we make not a mock at
the miseries of others. It is our duty rather to pity them, and show
compassion toward them; to defend them, not to offend them; to comfort them in
their affliction, not to lay an heavier burden upon them. This is a notable
comfort unto all Parents, when they have Children borne unto them any way
blemished and deformed, that they do not therefore cease to love them, that
they ought not to be ashamed of them, that they should not neglect the
education of them, but rather be the more careful to train them up in the
fear of God, which shall more beautify them, then their blindness or
lamenesse shall be able to blemish them. For it may be, that God will give
unto us more comfort by them, then by all the rest that have the ornaments of
Nature. And if we think them to be greater sinners then other men, because
they suffer such things, and have those infirmities, we are deceived. When the
Disciples asked Christ concerning the blind man, John 9, 2, 3.
Who did sin, this Man or his Parents, that he was borne blind? Jesus
answered; Neither has this man sinned nor his Parents, but that the works of
God should be showed on him. So then, these wants that appear in many; as the
blindness of the eyes, the lamenesse of the foot, the deafness of the ear,
the baldness of the head, the maymednesse of the hand, the stuttering of the
tongue, the crookedness of the body, the deformity of the face, or other
defects of nature, are not in themselves sins, but infirmities without blame or
blot, which are not to be charged upon those that have them. If we be careful
to eschew the blemishes of the Soul, that make us ugly Monsters, and misshapen
Creatures in the sight of God, we are blessed and happy: as for outward
deformities, they shall all be done away, when this Mortal shall put on
immortality; and this corruption put on incorruption, so that we shall be made
like unto Christ our Savior in glory.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing the faults of Brethren repenting, are not to be exaggerated
and increased with odious Names, but rather covered with the cloak of
Charity; as Sem and Iapheth did the nakedness of their Father. It teaches us
to rejoice at their conversion, to foster and cherrish good things in them,
that are Prosolites and Conuerts to the Faith. The Scribes and Pharisees Math.
23, 15.
Would compass Sea and Land to make one of their Sect and profession: they
spared no labor to win them unto them. How much more then ought we to
endeavor to encourage all that be coming on, and to kindle good things
appearing in them? Our Savior teaches; Luke 15, 10.
That there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, for one Sinner that
conuerteth. Thus it ought to be with the members of the Church, when they see
the increase thereof, nothing should so rejoice them, as when an access is
made and added thereunto. If the body had long lacked the use of one part, and
should see the same restored unto it, would not the rest of the members much
rejoice? Yes, no doubt. So when we see one of the Sheep of Christ, that has
wandered far from the Sheepe-fold, brought home, and following the true
Shepherd, we cannot but receive great consolation by it. It is a true saying,
that there are many Wolves within, and many Sheep without. Some there are that
lurk in the bosom of the Church, which depart out of it, and are found to be
indeed no better then Wolves. Others, are for a time out of the Church, and
are as savage and cruel Wolves, who in the end are gathered home, and are in
the number of the Sheep of Christ. Such a one was Saint Paul, who was a
Persecuter: such were many that were the Crucifiers of Christ, yet were the
Sheep and Lambs that belong unto Christ. When these join themselves to the
Church, and are converted unto the Faith, their former life led in ignorance
and blidnesse, must be forgotten, and we are to rejoice at their conversion.

Did any of the Church ever reproach Paul with his blasphemy against God, with
his oppression of the Saints, and breathing out threatenings against the
Disciples of Christ, when once he became a believer? Did any tell Peter in
scorn and contempt, that he was a denyer of his Master, a Swearer and cursser
that he knew him not, after that he had testified the truth of his repentance
by the bitterness of his tears, for his weakness that he had showed? Did
any object to Noah his drunkenness, or to Lot his Incest, or to Solomon his
Idolatry? No man laid any of these things unto their charge, neither were they
hated for them.

Hence it is, that the Prophet Daniell having denounced a great judgment to be
accomplished against Nabuchadnezzar, for his cruelty and oppression, says unto
him; Dan. 4, 24.
O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor: Lo, let there
be an healing of thine error. Where he shows, that howsoever he grievously
sinned and provoked God to wrath, yet if he could repent of his former ways,
all his wounds should be healed, and the judgments of God should be reuersed
and revoked. This serves to reprove those that regard not the repentance of
those that have sinned, nor esteem of them any whit the better. These were the
Nouatians, Magdeb. Centur. 3. cap. 5.
that gloried of a kind of purity and perfection in themselves, and denied
Salvation to those that denied Christ in persecution, and to such as fell into
sin after Baptism; yea, albeit they did repent. But God delights not in
the death of a Sinner, but that he should live. It is our duty Cyprian. epist.
2. lib. 4.
to raise up them that are fallen, and to heal the brokenhearted, after the
example of Christ, who will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax. And if we be commanded to leave ninety and nine in the
Wilderness, seeking that which is lost, and bearing it home upon our
shoulders: how much are they to be reproved that keep them from the Sheepfold
that are come unto it, and bar the door against them that desire to enter?
The Apostle says; 1 Cor. 9, 22.
That to the weak he became as weak, that he might win the weak; and he
was made all things to all Men, that he might by all means save some. The
Lord Jesus calls the Church of Ephesus Revel. 2, 5.
to repentance, To remember from whence they were fallen, and to do their first
works: Now he would never have exhorted them to repentance, except there had
been pardon and forgiveness for the Penitent. If any should say to the
Husbandman, follow thy business, till thy ground, plough thy fields, sow thy
Corn, but thou shall see no increase, thou shall gather in no harvest, thou
shall have no fruit of thy labor: do we think that by this means he could
be encouraged or stirred up to labor? Or if the Master of a Ship should bid
the Mariners in a tempest and storm to look to their Tacklings, and every
one to work with his hands in his place wherein he was set, and withal should
tell them (when they had done all) that they should neither save the Ship, nor
the lives of such as were in the Ship, it were a cold comfort, or rather a
certain discomfort.

In like manner, what should it avail to exhort and excite any to repentance,
and to call upon them to turn unto God, when in the mean season, we bar
them from salvation, and hedge up the way that leads unto eternal life, that
they cannot enter into it, albeit they do repent and return unto him? So then,
there is greater mildness and moderation required of us, and we must labor to
suppress hatred and malice toward our Brethren, If any be sudainly overtaken
Gala. 6, 1, 2.
by the snares of Satan, and the subtilty of sin, let us restore them with
the spirit of lenity, considering our selves, least we also be tempted. Let us
not be glad at their falls, nor triumph at the victory which Satan seems to
have gotten, but rather mourn for them, and help them out of their danger. We
are commanded in the Law, when we see the Ass of our enemy to couch down
under his burden, Exodus 23, 5.
not to cease or fall to lift him up: how much more ought we to support the
weakness, to assuage the sorrow, to bear the infirmity, and to relieve the
misery of our Brother? It is the manner of ungodly persons, to make it their
daily sport in their deuillish meetings, to insult over him, and to leap upon
his back with all the reproach and infamy that they can devise to lay upon
him. But it skilleth not what such foul mouths do utter, they shall one day
reap the reward of their malice, and the penitent person that holds his
peace, shall find in the end the fruit of his patience.

Use 3.
Thirdly, it teaches us for our obedience, to repent betimes, and not to delay
the time thereof, but while the acceptable season is to bring forth the fruits
of amendment of life. For seeing we are not to make the most, or speak the
worst of the falls of our penitent Brethren, it serves as a good
encouragement, and a profitable inducement to lead us and guide us unto true
repentance, that so our sins may be put away. Sin is as a most filthy
Leprosy, but when we repent, we are cleansed of that Leprosy. It is as
unsavory Dung that stencheth the earth, and the evil savor thereof ascends
up to Heaven; but when we repent, we smell pleasantly, as a sweet perfume in
the Nosthrils of God. It is as filthy Mire, that soyleth the Soul, corrupts
the Body, and spotteth the Garment; but when we repent, the stain and
blemishes of sin are put out of his sight, and blotted out of his
remembrance. For when God forgiueth iniquity, transgression, and sin; Mich. 7,
19. Ier. 31, 33, 34.
he throws it into the Sea, into the bottom of the Sea, that it may never
arise again to our confusion and condemnation, and he remembers it no more.
As far as the East is from the West, Psalm. 103, 12. and 32, 1, 2.
so far has he removed our sins from us, as the Prophet speaks, so that
they are so far taken out of his sight, that they and we shall never meet
together. He covers them, and will not impute them unto us; Col. 1, 21, 22
So that we which were in times past strangers and enemies, are now reconciled,
being made holy and unblameable, and without fault in his sight. If then God
do cover them when we repent, who are we that go about to uncover them? If he
do not impute them, why should we lay them to their charge, who have a
discharge from God, who has cancelled the band and handwriting that was
against them? If God have washed and wiped away the filthiness of them, why
should any man cast the mire of them in their faces again? The most expert and
excellent Physician, cannot cure a deep wound and a festered sore, but some
scarre will remain, and some print in the flesh is left behind: but God so
heals our infirmities, that he takes away the stain, the guilt, and the
punishment, that no token, no mark, no sign of his wrath and indignation ever
appears to appall us, or dismay us. This is the great love and unspeakable
mercy of God toward the broken heart and contrite Spirit. He that has been an
Adulterer, and has repented of his uncleanness, is no Adulterer. He that has
been a Drunkard, and repents of the beastliness and abuse of the good
Creatures of GOD, is no longer a Drunkard. He that has been an Enemy and
hinderer of Gods word, and now loves it above Silver and Gold, is no more an
enemy, but a friend of the Gospel. He that has been a Swearer and
Blasphemer, and repents of his blasphemies, is not a blasphemer. He that has
been a prophaner of the Lords Sabbaoths, and now is careful to sanctify
them, and spend them in holy exercises, is no longer a profane person. True
it is, these men have been such, but when they see their sins, hate them,
forsake them, are grieved for them, and are departed from them, true repentance
is as the Fullers Soap to wash them, and to make them whiter then the Snow. We
must therefore make a great difference, between that which they have been,
and that which they are. Shall we say, that he, who is come to man's estate, and
has put away childishness, is still a Babe and Suckling, as Infant and Child,
because once he was so? Or shall we say, that he, who is made a Freeman, and
had served out his Prentishippe, is a Bondman still, and under the
jurisdiction of another, because that once he was so? In like manner, shall we
change our Brethren to be Children in knowledge, to be the Servants of sin,
and Bond-slaues of Satan, because they were so in the time of their ignorance,
before God gave unto them repentance, that they might come out of these snares
wherein they were holden Captives? Nay, I will say more, whosoever reuileth and
reprocheth him with his Adultery, Idolatry, Blasphemy, Drunkenness, or
Profaneness, that has fallen into these offenses, but dwells not nor
delights in them, is a malicious enemy, a false accuser, a slanderer and
liar against his Brother. The Apostle Peter Math. 26, 69.
denied his Master (as we showed before) he forsware him, and curssed himself
if he knew the Man, which he did through fear to save his life. But because he
went immediately out of the Highpriests Hall, and wept bitterly, did any of
the rest ever vpbraid him, and reproach him with Apostasy, with swearing, with
curssing, with his infirmity and presumption? All they therefore are led by
another Spirit then the Disciples were, who despightfullie cast them in the
teeth with their sins, which are more odious and grievous to them, then to
those that set them afoote, and blaze them abroad to their disgrace.

This is a great comfort, and brings wonderful peace of conscience to all
those that truly repent of all their sins past, which they have followed
with greediness: seeing, that as God forgiueth them, so he will not have
others to charge them with them. For if the Lord and Master of us all remit
them, we are not to charge our Fellow-Seruants with them. If the Prince
forgive, upon the sorrow and submission of his Vassal, the Treason intended
against his person, shall the subject dare to call him Traitor, seeing the
Princes pardon is the Subjects protection and discharge? If the Father forgive
the Child his disobedience, Luke 15, 29.
shall the rest of his Brethren speak evil of him, and always keep it in
fresh remembrance? If these things were duly regarded and rightly
considered of us, we would not lie one hour in our sins, but make have to be
reconciled unto God, that so we may abolish the guiltiness and greeuousnesse,
together with the infamy of them. Hence it is, that the Apostle says; Romans 6,
19, 20, 21, 22.
As ye have given your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, to
commit iniquity, so now give your members servants unto righteousness, in
holiness: for when ye were the Servants of sin, ye were freed from
righteousness. What fruit had ye then, in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death, but now being freed from sin,
and made Servants unto God, ye have your fruit in holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

Where he teaches, that such as continue in their sins, are as dead trees,
or as rotten branches that brings forth no fruit: but they that are made free
from sin, are made the Servants of righteousness. The Tree that has a long
time brought forth no fruit, when once it begins to bring forth good fruit,
cannot be called an evil tree. The ground that begins to yield plentiful
increase, cannot be called barren, whatsoever it has been in times past. So is
it with every one of us, we are accounted Trees of righteousness, and
fruitful ground, so soon as we lay aside the unsavory fruits of wickedness.
Wherefore, whenever we hear the taunts and reproaches of uncharitable men,
cast out against us for such sins as we have long ago left, let us not be
grieved at them, nor sorrowful for them, nor seek revenge against them, but
rather comfort our selves in this, both that God has given us repentance to
see and forsake our sins, which before we made our chiefest pleasure, and
that he has pardoned them in his Son, and will never lay them to our charge,
so that he accounts them as if they had never been committed, and accepts
of us, as if we never had offended him. As for the ungodly, that have sin
reigning in them, and never truly repented of heir sin, they may and ought
to be charged with their sins, and as we find them in the present time to be,
so we may justly account of them, so we may truly call them, and so we may
censure them and pronounce of them. For as it is lawful to call a Spade, a
Spade: so he that is known to live still in Adultery, may be named and noted
to be an Adulterer, and a filthy liver. He that makes a continual practice of
drunkenness, and is resolved to remain in it, may be called a drunken beast,
a drunken sot, a drunken companion, and we need crave no pardon if we give him
that style. He that regards not the hearing of Gods word, but lives in open
contempt of God, and of his ordinances, may be justly branded with the reproach
of his sin, and may be called the enemy of all righteousness, and the Child
of the Devil. We know, that Judas through covetousness betrayed his Master,
and when he had done, he dispared of pardon and hanged himself: the reproach
of this fact and offense, remains to this day, and shall never be blotted
out, but he is called Judas the Traitor, and Son of perdition. Math. 10. 4.
Acts 1. 16. 17. And thus the case stands with all other unrepentant Sinners,
that use not the remedy appointed of God to bring them out of the state of
damnation, into the way of salvation. Hereupon we see the Prophet Esaias, Chap.
1. calls them Esaias 10, 4, 10. and 57, 3.
the Princes of Sodom, and the people of Gomorah, a sinful Nation, a people
laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children, Witches Children,
the seed of the Adulterer, and of the Whore. Christ calls the Pharisees Math.
3, 7. John 8, 44.
a brood of Vipers, blind Guids, Hypocrites, such as were of their Father the
Devil. This appears in the Psalm, where the Prophet speaking of such as
hated to be reformed, and cast the words of God behind them, says; Psalm. 50,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
When thou see a Thief thou runnest with him, and thou art partaker with the
Adulterer: thou give thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest
deceit: thou sit and speak against thy Brother, and slanderest thy
Mothers Son: these things have thou done, and I held my tongue: therefore thou
thoughtest that I was like thee, but I will reprove thee, and set them in order
before thee: O consider this, ye that forget God, least I tear you in pieces,
and there be none that can deliver you. Where we see, he lays to their
consciences their sins, and applies unto them the judgments of God that did
hang over them: so that thereupon he calls them to serious and earnest
consideration of their former works, thereby to draw them to repentance.
Diverse sorts of men are reproved.
Hereby are reproved diverse sorts of evil and corrupt minded men. First,
such as aggrauate and augment the sins of the godly, and make those that are
no sins, to be taken for sins: and such as are lesser, to seem the greatest
of all.

These are they that broach and belch out of their envious hearts and filthy
mouths, and stinking breathes, all the venom that lies hidden within them
against the godly, when they can espy any of them (who have their weakness as
other men, and being left unto themselves, cannot but fall) to be overtaken
with the frailty of the flesh; Oh (say they) these are the holy men, these are
the holy Brethren, these are the godly folk: see, see what they are, none are
worse people then they. These men have quick eyes to see their sins, but they
are blind and cannot see their repentance. They know what they have committed,
but they are ignorant and will not know that their sins are remitted, and that
whatsoever the Son of God remitteth, ought not to be retained and remembered of
the Sons of men. It is no disgrace to a man to have been wicked and infamous
for his offenses, if he be thoroughly changed and altered: for their
reformation gives them more grace and honor with God and all good men, then
their former life does shame and discredit. The Apostle says; Act. 17, 30, 31.
The time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now he admonishes all men
every where to repent, because he has appointed a day in which he would judge
the World. Secondly, they are reproved that lessen the sins of the
impenitent, and mollify them with gentle Plasters, thereby hartning and
hardening them in their sins, thereby fawning upon them, and flattering them
in their wickedness. They are men of the profane World like themselves; and
therefore their sins shall be no sins, and their great sins are little
motes that cannot be seen. It has always bin a Thucid. lib. 3. Plutarch. in
Solom. Ovid. Nominibus mollire licet mala.
practice and ancient custom among evil Men, to lessen odious vices, and to
abate them with softer and milder terms: and that fraud and fashion was
never never more frequent, then where the vice was most common. Thus it is,
when Thieves are called Taking-men: Covetous persons, Thrifty-Liuers: Thus
Adultery is accounted but a trick of youth; fighting and quarrelling is named
manhood; drunkenness is reputed good fellowship, and Drunkards the only good
fellows. Thus is sin extenuated and diminished by those that know not the
Nature of sin; and therefore seek to blaunch the foulness and filthiness
of it, to which they are so continually accustomed. But howsoever these men
account of sin, and whatsoever they call it, they shall find that the
lessening of it, is the way to increase it, and the diminishing of it, is the
means to make it greater. If we would have our sins and offenses not to come
into account, we must forsake them, and repent of them.

Thirdly, it reprooueth such as disclose and reveal a Penitents confession.
When our Brethren in the anguish of their Souls, and in a feeling of the
horror of sin, have sought peace and comfort at our hands, and have
discovered their offenses that trouble them to us, as the sick man does his
disease to the Physician that he may be healed: it is our duty to comfort
them, not to disgrace them; to conceal them, not to reveal them; to hide
them, not to publish them and blaze them abroad, to their disgrace and
discredit. True it is, when evil is opened unto us, Alexand. Hal. part. 4.
Quest. 28. membr. 2. art. 2. Siluest in Confess. 3. nume. 2.
not past, or present, but to be done afterward, as if a man confess his
determination and resolution to commit Murders, we are not tied to cover and
conceal it, but are bound to manifest and make it known. This shows the
wonderful abuse of the Church of Rome committed in holy things, and things
supposed by them to be holy. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is most
horribly profaned of them, which being instituted in remembrance of the death
of Christ, to assure us of our spiritual communion in him, and of our
spiritual nourishment from him, is often received of them to combine them
together in wickedness, and to take security thereby one of another, not to
reveal the Treasons and Conspiracies that are plotted among them. Thus it is
in the supposed Sacrament of Penance, when they would reveal the hidden
mischief and poisons of their hearts, to the Priests and Jesuits their
Confessors, they will seem to do it by way of confession, that so it might be
(as it were) locked up and sealed with this Seal, as a secret never to be
disclosed and discovered. Thus is confession become nothing else but a cover of
Treason and Rebellion. But when our Brethren being afflicted in Conscience, and
wounded with the Darts of Satan, and the poison of sin, shall accuse
themselves, and confess some heinous sin committed that lies heavy upon
them, and can find no comfort in concealing of it, but greater horror, and
thereby are brought to the gates of Hell; and like to be swallowed up in
despair, when they shall (I say) confess to the glory of God, and the
shaming of themselves, the wickedness of their hearts and hands, we are not
to utter it to others to their disgrace, but by all means we can to cover it
in secret and silence. For as we Iam. 5, 15.
are to acknowledge our faults one to another, and to pray one for another: so
we are in love to conceal the falls one of another, and not to open them in
choler and malice to their reproach.

Lastly, this reproves our remissness and wretchlesnesse in dealing with
recusant Papists, the members of the Pope and Popish Church, who because we
would not offend them, we speak of them honorably, and give them the Name of
Catholics, and honor them with the Title of the Church: whereas we should
give them their right, and call them by their propper Names, of Idolaters, and
enemies of the Grace of God, and disturbers of the State. We have many among us
that are ready to join with them, and to give them the right hand of
fellowship, who can be content to mingle together God and Baall, Christ and
Beliall, light and darkness, the Temple of God, and an Idol. But as we
believe the High Priest of Rome, to be the very Antichrist described in the
Scripture, so we also hold that the Church of Rome is a false and
Bastard-Church, and no true Church of Christ Jesus, who not only have shaken,
but razed down the very foundations of Religion, maintaining the worshipping
of Images, and the merrits of works, by making a mock of Christ's merits and
satisfaction, by devising other Mediators, and by presuming to offer him up an
unbloody Sacrifice to God the Father. Let us not therefore halt between 1 Kin.
18, 21
two opinions, nor go about to reconcile those things which can never hold or
hang together. The false Apostles would join the Law and the Gospel together,
the works of the Law, and the grace of Faith in the matter of Justification,
which can never be, the one destroying and pulling down the other: because Romans
11, 6.
if it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else were grace no more grace:
but if it be of works, it is no more grace, or else were work no more work.
So we have those that dream of an union between Christ and Antichrist, but if
the Lord be God, follow him; if Baall be he, then go after him. No man can
serve both these Masters so contrary one from the other, so that whosoever
cleaves to the one, forsakes the other.

Verse 16. [ Not now as a Servant, but above a Servant, even as a Brother,
etc.] Here is a singular commendation of Onesimus, expressed by many steps and
degrees; the one ascending and climbing above the other. He was not only as a
Servant, but above a Servant; not only as a Brother, but a beloved Brother;
not only dear to Paul, but much more to Philemon himself. This is so much
the more worthy praise and commendation; nay, of wonder and admiration, as the
disposition of Servants in those times was lewd and licentious, who albeit they
had good and godly Masters, yet they were light-fingered and light-footed, and
upon every occasion they were apt to run away from them, Genesis 16, 6.
as appears in Hagar that lived in the house of Abraham, when Sarah began to
deal roughly with her, immediately she fled from her. Seeing therefore it was
so rare a thing among those kind of men, to find any well minded and
disposed, the Apostle makes the more account of him, and would have his
Master to make account of him. As if he should reason thus: Him, who in Christ
Jesus is become thy Brother, thou ought carefully to tender, and dearly to
love: But Onesimus is now by his unfeigned conversion become thy Brother;
Therefore receive him.


Here we see the Apostle reasons for Onesimus, to have him received and
respected above an ordinary Servant, because he was truly converted, and had
in him a good measure of Grace, and was become a true and sound Christian.
Doctrine 4. The more grace appears in any, the more should they be tendered
and regarded of us.
We learn from hence, that the more Grace appears in any, the more should
they be tendered and regarded of us, whether they be Servants, Children,
Neighbors, Pastors, People, Wife, Kinsfolk, or Acquaintance. In whomsoever
the greatest store of heavenly things is to be found, such as most of all to be
loved and regarded; tendered, and respected. The Prophet David teaches, when
the Lord, who had anointed him to be King over his people, should bring him
unto the Kingdom, and make him Ruler and Governor over a great and mighty
People, what they were that he would most of all regard, and upon whom he would
cast his eyes; Psa. 101, 6, 7
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with
me, he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me, etc. Solomon has
many heavenly sentences, and Divine Proverbs Prou. 14, 35. and 17, 2. and 16,
13.
to this purpose: as Chap. 14. 35. The pleasure of a King is in a wise servant:
but his wrath shall be toward him that is lewd. So in the 16. Chapt. The
righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and the King loves him that
speaks right things. Likewise, in the Chapter following, A discreet Servant
shall have rule over a lewd Son, and he shall divide the heritage among the
Brethren. The practice of this duty we see in Abraham, he had a faithful
Servant, whom he made the Steward and Governor of his house, and made more
reckoning of him, then he did of Ismaell his Son, or of the rest that did
attend about him; Genesis 15, 2. and 24, 2.
and therefore purposed to have made him his heir. When he purposed to provide
a Wife for his Son Isaac, he called him, and employed him to go to his Country
and to his Kindred to bring a wife for him. The like we see in Jacob, Genesis 37,
2, 4.
Who loved Joseph above al his Brethren, because he saw most grace in him.
This was in Elkanah toward his wife Hannah, 1 Samuel 1, 8.
he comforted her in her affliction, and said; Why weepest thou? And why eatest
thou not? And why is thy heart troubled? Am not I better to thee then ten
Sons? This appears in Jonathan toward David, 1 Samuel 20, 17 and 18, 1, 2.
He loved him as his own soul, and made a covenant of peace, and a league of
friendship with him, not in any worldly respect, not for any earthly
commodity, not to enjoy any temporal benefit (for he seemed thereby to loose a
Kingdom) but because he saw the Lord to be with him. So the Apostle writing to
the elect Lady and her Children, testifierh; That he loved them in the truth,
and rejoiced greatly that he found them walking in the truth. Hereby we see,
laying all these testimonies together, the truth of this doctrine, that it is
our duty to regard them most, that have greatest grace shining in them.

Reason 1.
The reasons hereof are plain to inform us. For first, where Grace is, it
brings blessedness to that society, kingdom, congregation, family, and
person; as appears by the confession of Joseph's Master. Genesis 39. 2. 3. whom
he served. Now who are more to be regarded, or better to be thought off, then
such as are blessed, and cause blessedness to others? The wicked man is
accurssed of God, Josh. 7, 1, 2.
and draws the curse of God upon the places where he dwells, and upon the
persons with whom he dwells. But such as have found grace with God, and have
grace laid up as a precious Treasure in their hearts, do bring the blessings
of God to others, and serve to convey them to them, as we see by infinite
examples in the Scripture.

Reason 2.
Secondly, we see that God is most gracious to such as have most Grace in their
hearts, he tendreth them as the apple of his eye, and loves them as own Sons.
Indeed he loves all the works of his hands as they are his Creatures: he
makes his Sun to shine, his rain to fall, his fruitful seasons to refresh
them: he has not left himself without witness among the Infidels, that he
might make them without excuse. He gives to Psalm. 144, 13 and 147, 19. and
76, 1.
Beasts, and to beastly men their food, their Corners and Garners are full,
and abounding with diverse sorts, and their Sheep bring forth thousands, and
ten thousands in their Streets: but GOD is specially known in Judah, his
Name is great in Israel: he shows his Word and his Statutes among them, he
has not dealt so with every Nation, neither have they known his judgments.
As this is the dealing of God toward those that are his, whom he makes
partakers of the secrets of his Kingdom: so it is our duty to follow his
example, and to show our selves like unto him in our brotherly kindness toward
his chosen Children, and our beloved Brethren.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the more grace appears in any, the nearer he does resemble God, the
more evidently does the Image of God show it self in him. The Image of God,
stands and consists, Ephe. 4, 24.
especially in holiness and true righteousness. The ungodly are stamped and
marked with profaneness and wickedness, John 8, 44. and 1 John 3, 8.
which is the Devils badge and impression. The more they grow in evil, and
bring forth the fruits of impiety and unrighteousness, the nearer they come
to Satan, and are like unto him. On the other side, such as bear the Image of
their heavenly father, must be exceedingly respected and regarded, as the
Apostle teaches; 1. John 5, 1.
Every one that loves him which begat, loves him also which is begotten of
him. He that loves the Father, will for the Fathers sake, love the Child. And
he that loves God, will (for his sake) love the Child of God. Seeing therefore
it is blessedness to every society and Congregation, to have men therein
endued with grace, seeing God delights to rest among them that seek after
grace; and lastly, the more grace is found in any, the nearer he draws to
God: in all these respects we conclude this as a certain truth, that it is our
duty to respect them above all others, that have the greatest measure of grace
abiding in them.

Use 1
Let us gather the uses that arise from this Doctrine. First of all, this ought
to stir us all up to labor to grow in grace and in the gifts of the Spirit,
that thereby we may procure and deserve the love of men. They that grow in
grace, are truly to be reputed and accounted gracious. It is noted in Christ,
Luke 2, 52.
That he increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.
When a man grows in strength of body, it is a sign his meat nourishes him,
and does him good. So when we profit in knowledge and understanding, in
holiness and sanctification of life, it shows that we are good hearers of
the word. Solomon says in the Proverbs, Prou. 1, 5.
A wise man shall hear and increase in learning: and a man of understanding
shall attain unto wise counsels. We must therefore proceed in good things,
that we may be well pleased, that we may be enriched in his graces, and
established more firmly in the ways of godliness. For there cannot be a
better means to keep us from a fearful Apostasy, and to preserve us from a
dangerous backsliding, then to go forward in that journey into which we are
entered, and to make strait steps to the place of our rest. So long as we walk
to the end of the race set before us, there is no fear of fainting or falling
backward. But when once we begin to stand still, and do not go forward, our
case is to be pitied, we have given room to Satan, and taken the foil, who
will not rest there, but take farther hold of us. Whosoever stands still, and
remains at one stay in matters of Religion, will shortly turn backward. The
heavenly bodies are ever in motion, it is the earth that stands still at one
stay: so such as are heavenly minded, are always going and growing toward
heaven; whereas such as think upon nothing but the earth, are so cloyed and
clogged with that gross matter, that they cannot move a foot forward to lay
hold of happiness. Hence it is that the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians, 2.
Cor. 7, 1.
Seeing we have these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of Flesh, and spirit, and finish our sanctification in the
fear of God. Likewise, writing to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 1.
He stirs them up, and exhorts them in the Lord Jesus, that they increase
more and more, as they had received of them, how they ought to walk and to
please God. Thus also speaks the Apostle Peter,; 2 Pet. 3, 17, 18.
Ye therefore (beloved) seeing ye know these things before, beware least ye be
also plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own
steadfastness: but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

This serves to reprove those that either stand still or go backward, and and
are not proficients in the School of Christ, who hear much and learn little;
who know somewhat, and practice nothing at all; who think they have gotten
enough, and that now they may be idle and slothful. It was not so with the
Apostle, who was a better Scholar then these Drones; he labored evermore to
be better and better, as himself testifies; Phil. 3, 3, 14.
I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that which is before,
and follow hard toward the mark, to the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. He was not like unto a foolish Runner, who running in a Race for
a great price, will every foot be looking back how much ground he has run
and rid, but his eyes were fully fixed upon the mark, considering how far
he had yet to pass, and waighing how much he was distant from perfection. It
had been better, that we had never made profession of Christ, or been called
by his Name, then to stand at a stay, or to start aside, whereby it may be
probably suspected, if not rightly gathered, that we never had any soundness
in us. Let us therefore Romans 15, 14.
labor to abound more and more in wisdom, and in all godliness. Whosoever
glories that he has so much Grace as he desired, did never truly desire
any grace. Whosoever sits still, and never intends to go forward, shall
never come at his iournies end. And whosoever thinks himself to be good
enough, and purposes never to be better, will presently grow to be worse, and
never cease until that he be stark naught.

On the other side, such as have a care to proceed, and are at the mending
hand, though they do it slowly and slackely, though they have many defects and
defaults, though they feel in themselves many infirmities and imperfections,
yet it is a notable comfort and testimony unto their hearts, that GOD will give
them grace to continue unto the end, and to persevere in the Faith unto the
death. For such do get ground of their enemies, do weaken the force of sin,
do strengthen the gifts of the Spirit, and do profit daily in the exercises
of Religion which they frequent. Secondly, this reproves such as regard most
of all, and bestow the greatest fruits of their love and compassion, upon the
most ungodly and ungracious, which are most unworthy to be respected. For the
more men grow in wickedness and profaneness, the less they ought to be loved
and liked of us. It is true godliness that should join us in mutual
friendship one with another, and unite our affections one toward another. The
more godliness appears to be in them, the nearer ought our conjunction to
be with them. And as they grow in good things, so ought our love to increase
toward them. This the Prophet David teaches. Psalm 15. 4. Lord, who shall
dwell in thy Tabernacle, who shall rest in thy holy mountain? Psalm. 15, 4. and
16, 3.
He in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear
the Lord. And in the Psalm following, Thou art my Lord, my well doing
extends not to thee, But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent: All my delight is in them. But how many are there among us, that
have no society or familiarity with the faithful, and such as fear the name
of the Lord? That think themselves in a Prison or in Hell, so long as they are
among them? That can be merry and pleasant among profane Companions, but
hang down their heads when they are with the godly, and never rest till they
be gone from them. If a Man or a Woman should always delight to be in the
company of Bears and Wolves, and to converse among Dogs and Swine, that when
you seek for them, you should never find them but among the Beasts, as if they
had abandoned the company of reasonable Creatures, we would think them strange
bodies, we would wonder at their humors, and be ready to say they were of a
wild and woluish Nature, and (as it were) transformed into the qualities of
Beasts, like unto Nebuchadnezzar, who had his understanding taken from him,
and his dwelling appointed among the Beasts of the field. Dan. 4. 30. So is it
with those that frequent no company but of wicked persons, and use no society
with any, but of such as are as blind as Beetels, and as senseless as stones,
and as brutish as beasts in matters of Religion: may we not truly conclude of
them, that they are beastly minded, and like to them with whom they sort, and
to whom they resort? The Prophet says, I am a Companion of all that fear
thee: but these may say; I am a Companion of them that forsake thee. He says;
Do not I hate them that hate thee? 2 Samuel 6, 16.
But these men say, Do not I love them that hate thee, and hate them that love
thee? They hate the godly in their hearts, and the more grace appears in
them, the more they despise them; as Michall did David, when she saw his zeal
in bringing home the Ark of the Lord into his own City. They esteem more of
their dogs and Swine, then they do of the dear Servants of God, bought with
the precious blood of Christ, and therefore they say! Oh, these are the little
flock, these are Saints, these are holy folks, we are not for their company.
But if we belong to God and to his Kingdom, we must of necessity be of the
Communion of Saints. And if indeed thou think them holy, thou ought to
conclude; therefore we are, and must be, and will be for their company. For
either we are holy, or unholy; either godly, or profane; either righteous,
or unrighteous. If we be not true Christians, we are no better then Devils
incarnate: and therefore shall have our portion and reward among the Devils. So
then, either they utter those words with a scoffing spirit, and then we leave
them to his judgment that will take vengeance of all such taunts that he
accounts cast out against himself: or else they make a fearful conclusion
against their own Souls, disclaiming themselves to be Members of the Church,
renouncing the sweet society and communion of the Saints, refusing the
forgiveness of their sins, and accounting themselves unworthy of eternal life:
or else they speak ignorantly, as poor silly blind Souls, who are to be
pitied and prayed for, and this all the hurt we wish unto them for all the
malice they bear against us, being bold to crave more good for them, then
they do for themselves, saying; Luke 23, 34 Acts 7, 60.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge. Thus we desire God to give them them eyes that are blind, and
to open their hearts that have shut them against the truth, and the professors
thereof.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing it is our duty to respect every one of the faithful,
according to the grace of God measured out unto him, it is required of all men
to look always to the best things in the choice of the companions of their
life. We learn not to enter rashly into any near society with such as have
not the graces of Gods holy spirit to commend them. When any of us are to
seek friends, to match our selves with a Wife, to entertain Servants, to
make choice of teachers, our care must be to enquire after such as have true
piety in their hearts, and may yield unto us sound comfort. And whenever we
have made that happy and heavenly choice, we must labor to cherish, to
increase, and to strengthen them in all their ways, and for our parts, must
delight and rejoice in them above all other. One good Friend, one godly Wife,
one religious Servant, is worth ten thousand others, what privileges of the
flesh soever they bring with them. Hence it is that the Apostle says; 1 Cor.
7, 39.
The Wife is bound by the law, as long us her husband lives: but if her
Husband be dead, she is at liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the
Lord. We see how David among all the Sons of Saul, made choice only of
Jonathan, to join with him in a strong league of sure friendship, because he
knew him to have an upright and faithful heart toward God: These two did take
sweet counsel together, and had their souls knit in a fast and firm knot of
mutual love. Likewise, concerning the servants of his house that he would
receive and retain, he says; Psalm. 101, 6, 7
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with
me, he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me: there shall no
deceitful person dwell within mine house, he that tells lies shall not
remain in my sight, etc.

The Apostle Paul, called to be an Apostle, and teacher of the Gentiles, having
converted many to the faith, did take the greatest delight, and reaped soundest
consolation in them, he accounted them his Crown, he esteemed them his Sons,
he called them his glory, he rejoiced in them as his hope. This appears in
the example of Onesimus, whom he had begotten in his bonds, the greater fruits
of Faith he found in him, the greater account and reckoning did he make of him.
The like we might say of others, even of whole Churches gained to the Gospel;
the more they increased in godliness, the more his bowels were enlarged in
care and compassion toward them. This affection ought to be in all true Pastors
toward their people, they must love such above the rest, as exceed and excel
the rest in the knowledge and practice of true godliness. This affection
should be in the Father toward his Children, he should love them most, he
should give them most, he should provide and prepare for them most, that have
most Religion in their hearts, most grace in their souls, most soundness in
their lives. Let them be used best that are best, and find most favor, that
show the greatest faith. The Scripture teaches us, that Isaac had two sons;
Esau was the first borne, yet Jacob had the blessing. Godliness makes the
younger to be the elder, the second to be the first, the lowest to be the
highest, the least to be the greatest; but ungodliness causes the first
borne to be last, makes the elder to be younger, and easteth down the highest
into the lowest room. So we see, that among the sons of Jacob, 1 Chro. 5. 1.
Genesis 49, 3, 4.
Joseph had the double portion, albeit he were the youngest of them all saving
one, because the rest of his Children had stained themselves with some gross
sin, which did put them out of their proper place, and disinherit them of the
blessing.

This point here to be learned and practiced, reproves two sorts of men, as
well such as make choice of such as be wicked, as those that hate them which
are good and godly. We must not delight our selves in those that be carnal and
corrupt, albeit they be never so near unto us. Ahab did repose and rejoice
himself 1 King. 21, 7 1 Samuel 22. 9. 1 Ki. 12, 8, 31
in Iezabell against Naboth; Saul in Doeg, against David, when he saw that God
was with him, and his spirit departed from himself. Rehoboam made choice of
youthful, vain, and vicious Companions, and refused the Counsel of the
prudent, and the advice of the Elders, and the friends of his Father. Jeroboam
made choice of the ignorant multitude, of the scum of the people, and of the
Rascal sort, to be the teachers of Israel, and their guides and Governors in
the matters of Gods worship. It is a common evil to delight in evil company,
in profane persons, in Idoll-shepheards, in carnal friends. The delight that
men take in these is vain, and of no value; nay it brings in the end Gall
and Wormwood, and biteth as a Serpent. If thou delight in thy Wife, Children,
Servants, Friends, and Familiars in the flesh, in a worldly and wicked manner,
and never considerest from whence thou have them, nor receiuest them as the
guiftes and blessings of God, that thereby thou may have sound joy, and true
happiness heaped upon thee, it is extreme folly and madness. What was the end
of Ahabs joy in his wife, in his sons, in his posterity? They were at the
last, though multiplied exceedingly, cut off from man to beast, and none of them
left to water a wall. How many are there, that being free and at liberty to
make choice of Friends, of Wife, of Servants, of Companions, do never set the
Lord before their eyes, who having little grace in their own hearts, make an
election of such as are most ungracious and graceless. They desire not to be
Companions of such as love the Lord and his Law, but respect riches or beauty,
or honor, or such outward Ornaments, as perish with the use, and cannot
cleanse the soul. Wherefore, let all superiors know and understand, that it is
a duty and instruction belonging unto them, to delight themselves, and set
their hearts upon such as are religious and virtuous, and to show their anger
and displeasure against those that are faithless, and fear not to offend the
Lord with their wicked lives and ungodly behavior. For this shall be our
praise and commendation in the choice of our friends, and in the government of
our houses, to follow the example of God our Creator, who is the most prudent
and perfect Governor. His favor does embrace, and his goodness compass on
every side, such as faithfully serve him, and sincerely worship him: but his
wrath and angry countenance is fierce against those that walk rebelliously in
the contempt of his Laws, and live licentiously in the profession of his
service. Thus ought it to be in his people that govern in his fear, such as
they see fear God they must honor, they must commend, they must encourage,
they must countenance; but such as are stubborn against themselves, and
stiff-necked against God, they must reprove and reject, they must discommend
and discountenance by all means they can. For, all such as suffer disorders
and misbehauiour in their charges, without check and controulement, shall
find the faults of their Inferiors turn to their own reproach and
reproof. The Wiseman teaches, Prou. 14, 34
that sin is a shame to a whole people, and to a great company; much more
then shall it turn to be infamous and ignominious to a house, and to the
Master of the house, as we see in Eli and his sons.

Secondly, it reprooueth such as hate and abhor those that show the seeds of
Faith, and the sparks of grace, and the fruits of the spirit to be in them.
It is an evil (as we heard before) not to prefer and make choice of such as
are good; but it is a great deal worse to loath and dislike such as are godly,
when they have made choice of them, and brought them home into their own
doors. They that have obtained this mercy to find grace with God, do bring
the blessings of God with them into the house, they come not empty and alone,
but full fraught and furnished with great Treasures, if that we had spiritual
eyes or hearts to discern it. A Religious and a virtuous Wife is Prou. 31, 10,
11.
a great Jewel, her price is far above the Pearls, for she will do her
Husband good, and not evil, all the days of her life: and yet many repine and
murmr that their wives have so much knowledge, and that they are too zealous
in the truth. They never think they bring them to much riches and substance,
but if they labor to be rich in God (which is the true Treasure) they think a
little to be too too much. They never complain that they are in favor with
great men, from whom they may reap a commodity; but if they seek to be in
favor with God, from whom every good giving, and every perfect gift
proceeds, they make a scoff and a mock at it. They ought to encourage them,
and stir them up to good things, and not hinder them in their course. They
ought themselves to teach and instruct them, and not discourage them from
learning of others. Thus it is also many times with many Fathers, that pretend
a love to their children, but it is in the flesh, not in the spirit; in the
world, not in the Lord; in earthly things, not in heavenly. If their Children
have embraced the Gospel in sincerity, and seek after the means of their
salvation with diligence, they think they are too forward, and fear they will
prove too praecise, and so make more account of others, that are more loose in
life, and profane in conversation.

This fault was in good Isaac, who preferred his son Esau hated of God, before
Jacob that was loved of him. So do the Fathers of our times, delight themselves
most in their Children that are most lewd, and show least favor to such as
most deserve it. And thus it fares with many Pastors and Teachers of the
people, who ought to go before them in soundness of Doctrine, and uprightness
of life, and by all means to bring forward such as are coming on, to spur
and stir up such as are sluggish, to comfort such as are careful and
zealous, and to discountenance such as are open or secret enemies. But how many
are there that would be called and accounted faithful shepherds and true
Teachers sent of God, who are afraid their hearers should be too forward:
like envious Masters, that are loath to have good Scholars, and repine at it
to have any profit too much under them. Thus they nuzzle them in ignorance that
are blind, they strengthen the hand of iniquity, they encourage evil doers,
and discourage those that would feign walk in the ways of godliness. It was
the earnest desire of Moses, Number. 11, 29
That all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his
spirit upon them. If we have this spirit, let us never reproach those with
learning too fast, that are under our charge, who ought to be our comfort in
this life, and shall be our crown in the life to come.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing it belongs as a special duty unto us, to show our greatest
affection to such as have in their hearts most religion, it serves as a comfort
and encouragement to al callings, even the lowest that are among men, to labor
after good things, and to seek to serve and fear the Lord, seeing such as are
the meanest, and of basest reckning with many, are respected and recompensed of
him. This is a notable encouragement, to consider that God takes care of us,
and requires of men to do us good. The least member of the body is honored,
and not despised; cherrished, and not contemned; tendered, and not abhorred of
us. So it ought to be in the members of Christ's body, which are all dear to
him (which he bought with an equal price) and therefore ought to be dear
unto us, if we believe our selves to have our part and portion in his body.
Notwithstanding, if thorough the pride, contempt, disdain, and unthankfulness
of men, we find our selves little regarded, made as a footstool for men to
tread and trample upon, and as a ball to spurn at with all reproach, and so
scorned for our well doing: let us not be dismayed with this dealing, but
consider that the poor servants of God have tasted of the like measure that
have gone before us, so that we are not the first that have been thus used,
and we are not like to be the last that are in this sort to be abused.

Mark a little how it fell out with Joseph, one that performed the best
service, and yet one that received the worst recompense. When he was brought
down to Egypt, and bought and sold as a slave, Genesis 39, 1, 2, 4, 5, 20.
or as Ox in the Market from one to another; at length he came unto the hands
and house of Potiphar, whom he served faithfully, so that the Lord was with
him, and made all that he did to prosper in his hand; his Master put all that
he had in his hand, and made him Ruler of his house; nevertheless, not long
after, thorough the false suggestion of his Mistress, and the hasty and
ouer-rash credulity of his Master, his good service was forgotten, he is cast
in prison, and lies bound in setters. The like we might say of Jacob, who
served for his wives in the house of Laban. Who could do better service, or who
could show himself a more painful and profitable servant, then he had done?
He speaks it before Labans face, and does not whisper it behind his back,
he avouches it before him, that he might take exception to it, if he had
ought to object against it, Genesis 31, 39, 40.
Whatsoever was torn of Beasts, I brought it not unto thee, but made it good
my self: of mine hand did thou require it, were it stolen by day, or stolen
by night, I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the Night,
and my sleep departed from mine eyes. This duty and diligence did he perform,
and yet what was the wages of the work, and the recompense of his labors? It
follows in the next words, Verse 41.
I have been twenty years in thine house, and served thee fourteen years
for thy two daughters, and six years for thy Sheep, and thou have changed my
wages ten times. Thus we see, how good and gracious servants have bin served in
former times before us, and what hard measure has bin rendered and repayed unto
them.

The examples of the Israelites is fit to be thought upon, and worthy to be
considered in this case, when they soiourned and served in the land of Egypt,
according as the Lord fore-shewed unto Abraham, Genesis 15, 13.
Know for a surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not
theirs four hundred years, and shall serve them, and they shall entreat them
evil. They never plotted any rebellion, or attempted act of hostility against
them, but served their taske-maisters that oppressed them, and labored in
making brick, and gathering straw, and finishing their task, yet they were
blamed and beaten, and laden with many sorrows. Let us therefore by all these
examples be encouraged, and know that nothing can happen unto us, which has
not fallen out to others that have lived before us, who have done as good and
faithful service to their superiors, as we have done or can do, and yet have
been euilly entreated, and wrongfully pursued, and cruelly handled, and
unjustly rewarded. Let us not suffer for evil doing, 1 Pet. 4, 15, 16. and 2,
19, 20
and as evil doers; but let us suffer as Christians, that so God may be
glorified, and we not ashamed of our afflictions. For this is thanke-worthy, if
a man for Conscience toward God endure greef, suffering wrongfully, it is
acceptable before him, and is respected of him, albeit among men it go away
unrewarded. We herd before of the good service of Jacob, of Joseph, of the
Jews; of Jacob toward Laban, of Joseph toward Potiphar, of the Jews toward
the Egyptians, and how euilly they were rewarded and recompensed of their
cruel and covetous Masters. But they knew they served a better Master in
Heaven, who would not suffer them to want the fruit of their labors, nor to
loose the work of their hands. Hence it is, that he increased Jacob in
substance, he brought Joseph out of prison, he gave the Israelites favor in
the eyes of the Egyptians, that gave them Jewels of Silver and of Gold, and
sent them not empty away. Thus will God deal with us, if we suffer with
patience, and will honor them that are careful to honor him.

[ Above a Servant, even as a Brother beloved.] We heard before how the
Apostle commends Onesimus to his Master, that he was to be received of him
not so much as a servant, as one that was more then a servant; that is, not an
Infidel, but a Christian. This point, is in these words declared by the
special, or by a word of Relation, a beloved Brother, which was more then a
simple servant. For if he had any unbelievers (that were not of the household of
Faith) either borne in his house, or bought with his money, they were his
servants, but they were not beloved Brethren. But this man converted to the
Faith was above the rank and degree of such persons, he was both a Servant
and a Brother. True it is, there was great difference between Philemon and
Onesimus, between the Master and Servant in things of this life; one, was
Superior; the other, Inferior: one was to command, the other to obey; one was
to rule, the other to be subject in the Lord; yet we see, how the Apostle in
this place is not affraide to call Onesimus his Masters Brother, and would not
have the Master ashamed to acknowledge it in words, and to show it in his
practice. This is not spoken, as if they were natural Brethren in the flesh,
and descended of one Father, according to the common generation of the rest of
the sons of men; but they were Brethren in Christ, partakers of the common
Faith, equal in the participation of heavenly graces, alike in the favor of
God, one not dearer to him then another. Hence it is, that the Apostle before
Verse 7. and afterward, verse 20. calls Philemon his Brother in Christ,
though he were his son in the Gospel, because he had begotten him unto God
by the immortal seed of the word, Verse 19.
as we shall see in the words following, where he challenges as his own, and
as a due debt unto him, whatsoever Philemon had.

Doctrine 5. Although christian religion, do not take away the degrees of
persons, yet it makes us all equal in Christ.
From hence we learn, that we are all of us equal before God and our
Brethren in Christ Jesus our Lord. Although Christian Religion does not take
away the difference of persons, and conditions before men, but aloweth some to
be high, and some low; some above, and others beneath; some to be Masters, and
others to be Servants: yet, it makes us alike and equal before God, inasmuch
as it causes us to be brethren in Christ. This truth has plentiful
confirmation out of the books of Moses, where all the Jews, of what quality and
condition soever they were, are oftentimes called brethren. The poor are named
the Deuteronomy. 15, 7, 2 11, 12. and 17, 20.
Brethren of the rich: the Debtor is called the Brother of his Creditor: the
Servant is Brother to the Master: the King set over them, must not lift up his
heart above his Brethren. This is it which David confesses in many places of
the Psalms, Psalm. 22. 22. and 22, 8, 9.
I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren: in the midst of the Congregation I
will praise thee. And in the 122. Psalm, he wished prosperity, and would
procure the good of Gods house, for his Brethrens and Companions sake. Where
we see, that albeit he were the King of Israel, and sat in the throne of
glory and seat of dignity above them, yet he refuses not to cast himself into
a common condition with others, and to give them the honor of his brethren.
This is it which the Prophets teach every where, Ier. 31, 34.
They shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his Brother,
saying, Know the Lord for they shall all know me from the least of them unto
the greatest of them, says the Lord. This is it which Christ speaks to his
Disciples, Math. 23, 8.
Be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Doctor, even Christ; and all ye are
Brethren. The like precept the Apostle enioineth and the same rule he
delivers to the Romans, chap. 12, 16. Be of like affection one toward
another, be not high-minded, but make your selves equal to them of the lower
sort: be not wise in your selves. And to the Phillippians, Chap. 2, 3. Let
nothing be done through contention or vainglory, but that in meekness of
mind every man esteem other better then himself. Again, to this purpose he
writes to the Galathians, Gal. 3, 27, 28
All ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; there is neither
Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. All these Testimonies of the Old
and New Testament, do fully and evidently teach us, that howsoever the Gospel
permits and prescribes the differences and degrees of persons, that some be
Lords, and others bear themselves as servants, yet it allows and makes them
to be equal in Christ, to be brethren and Sisters in the common faith, all
members of Christ, all pertakers of the same hope, al heirs of the same
kingdom.

Reason 1.
And what can be more plain then this principle? First, it is the nature and
property of God to accept no man's person. An high place, a noble birth, a
comely personage, are much respected amongst men, and such persons are highly
advanced and preferred. But it is not so with God: for, in his election of us
to life, in his calling of us, in his justifying of us, in his sanctifyeng and
saving of us, he respects not whether we be high or low, rich or poor,
learned or unlearned; he chooses, he calls, he justifies, he sanctifies,
he glorifieth the bond as well as the free; the low as well as the high; the
Servant as well as the Master. This is it which the holy man Job sets down,
Job 34, 18, 19.
Will thou say unto a King, thou art wicked? Or to Prince, ye are ungodly? How
much less to him that accepts not the rich more then the poor, for they be
all the works of his hands. To this purpose the Apostle Paul speaks, Romans
2, 9, 10 11. Gal. 2, 6. Act 10, 34, 35 Deuteronomy. 10, 17. 2 Chro. 19, 7. Prou. 24,
13.
To every man that does good, shall be glory, honor, and peace, to the Jew
first, and also to the Grecian, for there is no respect of persons with God.
Likewise, the Apostle Peter teaches this in the Sermon that he preached unto
the Gentiles, Of a truth I perceive, that God is no accepter of persons, but in
every Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted
with him. Seeing then, this is the Nature of God, that he regards not the
outward apearance and countenance of men, we must know that he respects all
as equal and alike.

Reason 2.
Secondly, Christ Jesus accepts all that believe in him as his Brethren and
members of his body, even flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. This is it
which he speaks to Mary Magdalen, after his resurrection, when he had
appeared unto her, and manifested himself unto her; John 20, 17.
Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and to your
Father; and to my God, and to your God. Where he shows, that God is a common
Father, and that all the godly are as brethren one to another. Likewise, the
Apostle writes to the Hebrews, Heb. 2, 11, 12
He that sanctifies, and they that are sanstified, are al of one, wherefore he
is not ashamed to call them Brethren, saying; I will declare thy name unto my
Brethren, in the midst of the Church I will sing praises to thee. The Lord
Jesus is infinitely above us, Phil. 2, 6.
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
and we are poor, wretched, and miserable men; yet he is ashamed of no man,
except we first be ashamed of him. He will deny no man, he will reject no man,
except we first do deny and reject him. If then, Christ do vouchsafe to
account and accept us as his brethren, we must needs acknowledge an equality
and brotherly fellowshippe among all the faithful that are in Christ.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, all the godly that are truly regenerate, are adopted to the hope of
the kingdom of glory, and are redeemed by the blood of Christ. It is not Gold,
or Silver, or Pearls, Psalm. 49, 7. 1 Pet. 1, 18.
or the treasures that are in the world, could pay a price sufficient to
redeem and ransom our souls; it is the precious blood of Christ alone, that
must purchase our peace, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot. Now, he came
into the world to seek and to save that which was lost; he came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance. How mean soever our places, how
simple soever our persons, how base soever our conditions are, we have as good
a title, and as great an interest in the death and passion of Christ, as they
that shine in the world, that are clad in Purple, and fare deliciously every
day. And as these have redemption by him, so God affords to them the means
of salvation, as well as the mightiest Monarkes upon the earth. The poor man
has the word of God offered to him, read unto him, and preached unto him as
well as the rich: he has the Sacraments of God provided for him, as well as
for them that are of high place: he may pray unto God as freely, as
comfortably, as chearefully, as the great men of the earth, and he has a
gracious promise to be heard and respected, as well as they. Though thou farest
hardly and meanly at home, Prou. 9, 2. Math. 22, 1.
yet God has prepared thee a feast, and bids thee to his Table richly
furnished, and plentifully stored with all provision. Though thou do not iet up
and down in Silks and Veluets, and have no gorgeous attire to put on, yet God
has Romans 13, 14
provided thee a better garment, he gives thee his own son to put on, and
clotheth thee with his righteousness, which shall cover all thy shame, that
thy nakedness shall never appear in his sight. So then, seeing God accepts
no man's person, seeing Christ vouchsafes to call us Brethren; and lastly,
seeing the faithful have redemption by his blood, it follows necessarily,
that our Christian Religion, and Faith in Christ, do make all persons after a
sort equal, as Brethren and Sisters of one and the same Father and Family,
and Ioynt-heyres of one and the same Kingdom, that is immortal and never
fades.

Use 1
The Uses of this Doctrine are many, putting us in mind of sundry good
duties. First, seeing that in Christ, who is the elder brother of the house, we
are al made Brethren and Sisters together, having one Father, which is God; one
Mother, which is the Church; one inheritance, which is heaven: it is our duty,
being nearly joined by so strong bands, and in so fast and firm a society, to
love one another, to seek the good one of another; and to cut off all
occasions of discord and division that may arise among us. For, shall such as
are members of one body be divided one against another? Or shall such as are the
dear Children of the same Father, nourish hatred and hart-burning among
themselves? Or shall such as are parts of the same family, foster malice in
their hearts, and follow contentions and emulations, to the ruin one of
another. My Brethren, we see these things are, but these things ought not so to
be. How shall God be our common Father, if we live not together as loving
Brethren? Or how shall he call us his children, if we behave our selves as
strangers or enemies one to another? This Brotherly love, is the root of all
good duties to be performed; where it is wanting, there is nothing but strife
and sedition, and all manner of evil works. This is the old commandment,
Leuit. 19, 18
That we love our Neighbors as our selves. This is the new commandment given
unto us, John 13, 34
That we love one another. Seeing therefore, there is one body, and one spirit;
one Faith, and one Father; one Church, and one Baptism, let us support one
another by love, and endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of
peace. This is it which the Apostle proves, when he has showed, Colos. 3,
11, 12, 13.
That there is neither Grecian nor Jew, neither circumcision, nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond, free, but Christ is all, and in all
things; he adds, As the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on the bowelles
of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meeknes, long-suffering, forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel unto
another, even as Christ forgave, even so do ye: and above all these things,
put on love, which is the bond of perfectness. When a Controversy and
contention arose in the houses of Abraham and Lot among their servants, though
there were a great difference and disparity between them, yet Abraham said,
Genesis 13, 8. Exodus 2, 13. Acts 7, 26.
Let there be no strife I pray thee, between thee and me, neither between thy
Heardmen and my Herdmen, for we are Brethren. This is that whereof the Prophet
puts us in mind, and offers to our consideration, Psalm. 133, 1, 3
Behold, how good and comely a thing it is, Brethren to dwell even together,
there the Lord has appointed the blessing of life for ever. To this purpose
the Apostle says, To. 12, 10, 11
Be affectioned to love one another with Brotherly love, in giving honor go
one before anothee; not sloathfull to do service, fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord. It cannot be denied, but many occasions of iarres and ianglings
arise among men, and the more they are given to the world, the more they are
wrapped and entangled in them, and the less desire and delight they have to be
loosed from them. He that is given to contention, shall always feed himself
upon it, and never want matter to keep him in it. But would we know what is
the cause of so much hatred and malice that remains among us? Hereupon it
arises, even from hence, that we forget that we are Brethren, and do all look
for one and the same inheritance.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing the Gospel of Christ teaches us to account our selves as
brethren, albeit it take not away the degrees of persons, and the differences
of Callings, it serves as a good instruction to all Superiors, to use all
mildness and moderation, patience and meekness toward those that are their
Inferiors, and placed under them, and to teach them not to contemn and
abhor them, not to despise and disdain them. For howsoever there be one way
a great inequality between them in matters of this world, and in the things of
this life, inasmuch as God set superiors above us, in an higher place and
requires subjection, reverence, and obedience of those that are beneath, yet
in another respect they are matches and equals, having a like portion in
Christ, and a like interrest in the means of salvation. We see in many things
of this life, the Lord makes no difference between high and low, between
Prince and people. True it is, their food is daintier, but are their bodies
stronger? Their attire is costlier, and their apparel finer, but are they
kept the warmer? They may have greater help of the Physicians, but can they
deliver them from death? They may have a more costly Coffin, a a more sumptuous
Tomb, and a greater train following them to the grave, but can these things
help the soul? No, no, the Prophet is plain, and experience should make us
able to see it, and wise to confess it; they have great names, and high Titles
of honor given unto them, Psalm. 82, 6.
I have said, ye are Gods, and ye are all Children of the most high, But ye
shall die as a man, and ye Princes shall fall like others. If then, there be
so little difference in the life, and less difference of the death of rich and
poor, of Master and Servant, of Magistrate and Subject, we shall find a greater
equality and parity between them in holy and heavenly things. We allow them to
be as the elder brethren, but they must know and consider that other are as the
younger brethren of the house, and have the same privileges given unto them.
For if the Lord Jesus be not ashamed to call us all brethren, shall they be
ashamed to confess one another to be equal in the matters of our redemption
and salvation? Shall the rich man disdain the poor, or the Prince his people,
or the Master the servant, or the Freeman him that is bond, seeing the Lord
of life, that is equal with his Father in might and Majesty, vouchsafes to
repute us al in the place of Brethren? Hence it is, that he says in the
Gospel (speaking of lodging the stranger in our houses, of clothing the naked
with our Garments, of feeding the hungry with our meats, of visiting the
prisoners with relief, of refreshing the sick with our comfort.) Math. 25, 40.
Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Who are more disgraced and
contemned in the world, then such as are Strangers, or Prisoners, or naked and
in necessity? Yet these poor contemptible ones are dear in his sight, tender
as the Apple of his eye, and acknowledged of him to be his Brethren. We are
not worthy therefore to be esteemed of Christ, if we regard not such as are in
greatest price, and cheifest account with him.

So then, we must take heed, that we never despise, and deride, and disdain
those that are called the Brethren of Christ, nor refuse to embrace them as our
own Brethren. This is that use which the Apostle urges, in setting down the
duties of Masters, Ephesians. 6, 9.
Ye Masters, do the same things unto them, putting away threatening, and know,
that even your Master also is in heaven, neither is there respest of persons
with him. Where we see, how he moves all Masters to cast off all pride and
high conceit of themselves, and to Love their faithful servants, as their
faithful Brethren. It is not far from this purpose, which Job speaks
touching his practice and behavior toward his Servants, Job. 31, 13, 14, 15.
If I did contemn the judgment of my servant and of my Maid, when they did
contend with me, What then shall I do when God stands up? And when he shall
visit me, What shall I answer? He that has made me in the womb, has he not
made him? Has not he alone fashioned us in the womb? Where the holy man
commends mildness in all Governors, and reprooueth the exercise of cruelty
toward their servants. He gave them free liberty to declare and debate the
matter with him, to allege what reasonable excuse soever they had, considering
with himself, that we have one common Creator and maker, and are partakers of
the same Nature, and concluding thereuppon, that albeit such as are bound to
serve us, be of low degree, and despised in the world, yet they nevertheless
are our brethren. So then, such as are advanced unto high places, and set in
authority over others, are not to trample them under their feet, to despise
and set them at naught, to account them as vile persons in their eyes, but to
use them with mildness, and to behave themselves in all lowlines, and to rule
their houses with all gentleness. We must remember that we have a Master in
heaven, so that albeit he has exalted us on high, yet God stands above all,
and is the Master both of the Master, and of the servant. O that this were
well waighed, and wisely considered, and thoroughly learned of all Superiors,
that sit at the stern* and guide the ship. The higher and greater our places
are, the lower and lesser ought our hearts to be. If we be made Magistrates and
Masters, and Rulers, to govern others, let us confess they be Brethren with
us. This yields a profitable meditation to all Christian Governors, when we
behold any of our Inferiors (though they were our bondmen) in any trouble or
distress, to think earnestly upon these things. If God have made me never so
high, when I see the people pinched with dearth and famine, that they are ready
to perish and famish in the streats for want of Bread, I must know they are
not Dogs, (though many make no better nor farther reckoning of them) alas,
alas, they are my Brethren.

When the Pestilence walks in the darkness, and the plague destroys at
noone day, that God strikes down with his fearful hand; that thousands fall
at our side, and ten thousands at our right hand (for he oftentimes makes
havoc, and brings desolation into many houses and families) I must think
it is no Murraine of Cattle, they are my brethren. When I behold the
oppression of the poor, and the grinding of the faces of the needy, that they
are eaten up as bread, and sold as old shoes, for nothing; I must have this
feeling of their affliction, they are not as Horses or Asses ouer-laden with
their burden (whom yet, if it were so, Exo. 23, 4, 5.
we were bound to pity and raise up, though belonging to our enemy) they are my
poor and dear brethren, whom God has created, whom Christ has redeemed, whom
the holy spirit has sanctified, whom the word has regenerated, whom the
church has nourished, whom the Angels have guarded, and who, together with
me, in the last day, shall be glorified. At that day shall God be all in all,
when Christ Jesus shall abolish all power and authority among men, when Princes
must resign their kingdoms, and cast down their crowns at his feet, then
there shall be no more Prince and Subjects, Pastor and people, Master and
Servant, Father and Son, Husband and Wife. These degrees endure but for a
season, which must have end, when Christ shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. If God have made me a Master, and committed Servants to my charge, they
must not be respected as my Swine or Oxen; they are my Brethren, and therefore
I must look unto them in time of their sickness, and use all good means for
their deliverance. The Centurion in the gospel is commended, that when his
servant fell sick, and was in danger of death, he came to Christ Math. 8, 6.
for help and succor. If a man have a Bullock and beast that is diseased, he
will ask counsel, and seek remedy, much more ought we to deal mercifully
with our servants which God has made our brethren, and not to show more mercy
to our Cattle for our commodity sake, then to man made after the Image of God
for his sake. To conclude, let us from this Christian equality, learn
Christian mercy, and know the estate of them that suffer any kind of misery.
For what is the cause that we tyranize over those that are our Inferiors, but
because we forget that we are their brethren, and that in this respect they
are equal unto us?

Use 3.
Thirdly, this Title of Brethren communicated to all the faithful, serves as
a comfort and consolation to all Inferiors, and to teach them this duty, that
they ought not to grudge, or to be grieved that they are placed in a low
estate, as though they were therefore less esteemed and regarded of God. For
seeing God has thus far provided for them to call them their Brethren, and
to make them equal with those of greater Callinges, they are to be contented
with their places. It is a great Honor, to be so greatly in his favor, and to
be so highly regarded of him, who rejects no man for his poor degree, for
his low estate; for his mean condition. This is it which the Apostle Paul
sets down, 1. Cor. 7, 21, 22. Art thou called being a Servant? Care not for
it: but if yet thou may be free, use it rather: for he that is called in the
Lord, being a Servant, is the Lords freeman: Likewise also, be that is called
being free, is Christ's Servant. Where he shows, that no man's poor calling
should be his discouragement: but this must be his comfort, and bring peace
unto his soul, that if he be a true believer, although he be man's servant,
yet he is Gods free man. And whomsoever the son John 8, 34, 36.
makes free, he is free indeed. For, we must know, that whosoever commits
sin with greediness, and draws iniquity as with Cart-ropes, he is the
servant of sin, though he were the Master of a family, or the Ruler of a
kingdom. And on the other side, whosoever is freed from the bondage of sin,
and the slavery of the Devil, he is a right freeman, although he be a
Captive, a Prisoner, or a Servant. If we have our part in Christ, we have our
part in this comfort, seeing the Servant is saved as well as ^e Master, if he
believe.

Furthermo^, we must consider these two things, both that whatsoever our
calling be, wherein we abide, whether it be high or low, we have it from God,
we are allotted unto it by his appointment, and that he sees it, and knows
it to be the fittest place and best calling for us under the Heavens. For, he
respects in all his purposes, his own glory, and our profit. If he saw any
condition of life to be better for us, or a means to further us in our holy
faith and salvation, he would not keep us from it, he would not deny it unto
us, he would not restrain us of it. It is a spice of the Devils poison, which
he inspired and instilled into the minds of our first parents, to conceive
hardly of Gods dealing toward us, as if of malice or envy he had held us from
the greater good, and bestowed upon us the lesser. He came to them in the
Garden, and told them, Genesis 3, 5.
That God does know, that when they should eat of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, in the midst of the Paradise of God, their eyes should be
opened, and they should be as Gods knowing good and evil. So when we grow
discontented, and dislike our callings which God has appointed unto us, we
begin to be inueigled by the subtilty of Satan, and shall be always aspiring
higher, then God has judged to be meet for us. Let this serve us, and suffice
unto us, that how low soever in our own eyes, and little in the eyes of
others, our condition is, yet God has made them equal with us, and us
Brethren with them, to our great and endless comfort. This is that use which
the Apostle makes to encourage and strengthen servants in their duties, Ephesians.
6, 5, 6 7, 8.
Servants, be obedient unto them that are your Masters, according to the flesh
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto Christ. Not
with service to the eye as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart, with good will serving the Lord and not men, And
know ye that whatsoever good thing any man does, that same shall he receive of
the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Whereby he declares, that the obedience
of such as are bond, is no less acceptable to god, then the obedience of such
as are free: he looks not so much to our persons, as to our actions, nor so
much to our actions, as to the manner of our doing of them. He likes and
allows that which is done of the servant, as well as that which proceeds
from the Master: and he that is of low degree, pleases God in the duties of
his calling, as well as the man that is of greatest reputation in the world,
and highly magnified for his Riches and Honors.

Use 4.
Lastly, seeing God respects all alike, and has made all as one, and as
Brethren that are in Christ, it serves as a reproof, and threatening, and
terror, to all drowsy and secure persons, that think they shall escape the
judgments of God for their high places. There is no difference with God, there
is no inequality with Christ, to them that are in Christ, high and low are all
alike with him. None are saved for their highness, none are condemned for
their lowness. Christ Jesus accepts no man for his glory, he rejects no
man for his ignominy. Let us therefore not bear our selves bold and confident
upon our outward excellency, but stand in fear of his judgments, and prepare
our selves with all reverence and diligence, that we may be found worthy to
stand before the great God in that great day of account. For we must 2 Cor. 5,
10.
all appear before him, when he will judge every man according to his works.
When we shall come personally before his Throne of glory and seat of judgment,
he will have no respect to the Nobleness of our birth, to the greatness of
our learning, to the beauty of our faces, to the strength of our bodies, to the
largeness of our livings, to the abundance of our Riches, or to any outward
privileges and dignities of our persons. Then shall all flesh be gathered
together from the four winds, and stand before the Judge of all the world.
God will respect us as we are, not as we appear to be; not as others have
accounted of us, but as he shall manifest us to have bin, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed, and hidden things shall be revealed. Then must
every man answer for himself, and plead guilty or not guilty, when no
pretenses, or excuses, or delays shall avail us. Then shall the poor beggar
appear without his rags; the rich Glutton without his Robes; Covetous Indas
without his bags; Crafty Gehazi without his money; Proud Haman without his
Honor; Aspyring Absolon without his Ambition; Murdering Caine without his
Weapon; Cunning Achitophell without his Policy. The Kings of the earth must
lay down the glory of their Crowns, and the dignity of their Scepters, the
Nobles must renounce the Ensigns of honor, and all persons must set aside
outward respects of honor and dishonor, of glory and shame, of favor and
contempt. Nevertheless, it is to be observed, that albeit these men must stand
before the throne of God, without these respects that they made their chiefest
felicity; yet they shall not appear without their cruelty, bribery, treachery,
blasphemy, covetousness, and such like impiety, for their evil works shall
follow them, and cleave fast unto them. Let us therefore never think to escape,
when we shall com naked before the eternal Judge, as ever we came into the
world, and more naked then we departed out of the world; for whereas some have
their Coffins to cover them, others their Tombs to beutify them, and all men
their winding sheets to wrap their Carcasses in, when the Lord shall descend
with thousands of his Angels, they shall not have a rag, or a poor fig-leafe to
hide their shame. Let us seek while we have time to put on Christ's
righteousness as a Garment, that we may be able to stand before the son of
man, and receive the glory prepared for us, before the foundations of the earth
were laid.

[ Specially to me, how much more then unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the
Lord.] We have heard how the Apostle accounts, and how he would have Philemon
account of Onesimus; to wit, above a Servant, even as a beloved Brother. In
these words, he urges him farther, and shows that he had more cause to
respect him, and greater reason to love him then himself had, because he was
joined to him by more bands, whereof two he names; one of the flesh, as being
his servant; the other in the Lord, as being his brother. Paul was moved to
respect him, only in regard of the common faith, and therefore he says; if
he were, not so much a Servant as a Brother to him, much more he ought to be
so to his Master; not because he was his servant as other servants are, but
because he was the Lords servant, so that he was bound to love him, both for
the Lords sake, and for his own sake. Doctrine 6. The more bands and reasons
are given us to care for any, the more we are bound to care for him
Hereby there is offered to our considerations, this Lesson to be learned,
that the more bands and reasons are given unto us of God to care for any, the
more we are bound to care for him, and to respect him. A professor of the
Gospel, is more to be regarded then he that is wirhout: One of the same
Nation, more then a stranger; one of our own Kindred, more then another farther
from us; a Neighbor, more then one that dwells many Miles from us; one of a
man's house, more then him that is out of his house; a Kinsman converted to the
faith, and become a true and perfect Christian, more then a Kinsman not
converted. A Child that has the sparks of grace in him, more then a Child
void of them; a Servant fearing God, more then a Servant in the same family,
that does not fear God, nor regard his word, nor make Conscience of the
means of his salvation. Abraham loved Isaac, the son of Promise, having more
graces in him, Genesis 21, 9, 10 14. and 25, 5, 6.
more then Ishmael, the son of the bondwoman, and a scoffing wretch, and more
then all the Sons of Keturah, to whom he gave gifts, and sent them away. We
see this in the dealing of Abraham toward Lot his Nephew, he would suffer no
contention to rest among them, and when he heard he was taken prisoner, he
would not have stirred for the wicked sinners that dwelt in Sodom, but he
armed his servants to recover him out of the hands of his enemies. This is it
which Solomon teaches, Prou. 27, 10
Better is a Neighbor that is near, then a Brother far off. The Apostle
teaches this truth, when he gives this precept, While we have time, let vt
do good to all men, Gal. 6, 10.
but especially to them which are of the household of faith. And in another
place, Tim. 5, 4.
If any Widow have Children or Nephews, let the^ learn first to show
godliness toward their own house, and to recompense their Kindred. To this
also we are directed in the fifth Commandment, when we are commanded to Honor
Father and Mother. Whereby appears the truth of this doctrine, that it
stands with Gods ordinance, to have the most care of those, and to show the
greatest fruits of love unto them, to whom we are bound in the greatest and
nearest bands.

Reason 1.
The Reasons being wisely considered, will make this plainly to appear unto
us. It is a general sentence delivered by Solomon, in the book of
Ecclesiastes, Eccl. 4, 9, 10.
Two are better then one, and a threefold Cord is not easily broken.
Wheresoever there are stronger Cords to tie us, and more bands to join us
together, our Love ought to be the more greater one toward another. Many
sticks make the greater Fire, and many stringes, the better Music.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is a thing very well pleasing in the sight of God, to consider
what means he has affoorded to increase mutual love and society, one with
another. This is the reason urged by the Apostle, to persuade the Children and
Nephews of poor Widows to take care for their Parents, according to their
ability, 1 Timothy 5, 4.
Because that is an honest thing, and acceptable before God. Now, we are bound
unto them by many effectual Reasons, as it were with bars of Iron, and
bands of Brass, to nourish those that have nourished us, that have fed us,
that have clothed us, that have begotten us, and brought us into the world, so
that we must acknowledge it both right and reasonable.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, such as break these bands, and cast away these Cords from them, do
set themselves against the Doctrine of Christ, and may be sent to school to
the Infidels, nay to the brute beasts, which are not void of a certain
natural affection. This the Apostle teaches, 1 Timothy 5, 8.
If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. For howsoever
they profess the Faith in words, yet in deed and in truth they deny it. But
God is delighted with our works, not with our words, and looks upon the
substance, not the show of our Religion, according as the Apostle speaks,
Titus 1, 16.
They profess that they know God, but by works they deny him, and are
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work Reprobate. This
profession is vain and hyppocritall, and no more regarded of God, then the
leaves of a Tree of him that looks to find fruit upon it. So then, seeing
two are better then one, seeing it is a thing well pleasing with God; and last
of all, seeing the Faith is denied of those that regard such as are nearest to
them nothing at al, we learn howsoever, we owe somewhat to all mankind, and
there is a common band that knitteth us fast together, yet where the debt is
greatest, there we are bound to pay most, and where the Obligation is
straightest, there we are to perform the greatest duties.

Use 1.
The Uses remain to be considered. First of all, if it be a duty of man
toward man, to require most where most is committed, and to yield the greatest
love again, where are the greatest occasions to couple and combine us
together: then much more are we bound unto the Lord, of whom we have received
all, to whom we do own all, and by whom we do enjoy all. We must do homage
to him as to our King; we must give honor to him, as to our Father; Mal. 1, 6.
we must yield him fear, as to our Master; we must perform subjection to
him, as to our Creator; we must show obedience to him, as to our Lawgiver. He
would be holden as a man utterly void of all wit and wisdom, who being
indebted unto many men, and owing to some more, and to others less; bound to
some in one band, to others in two; to others in many bands; to some owing all
that he has, and to others more then he has, or is able to pay: would begin
to pay his debts without difference and discretion, delivering much to whom he
owes little, and little to whom he owes much; satisfying two bands where he
is bound in one only, and regarding only to have one cancelled, where many
other are required at his hands. Thus it fares with every one of us; to one,
we owe one Talent; to another, three Tallents; to another, five Tallents; but
to God we are above all others most deeply indebted; we owe unto him, our
goods, our good Names, our substance, our liberty, our lives, our selves, our
souls, our bodies, and when we have given him all, all will not serve to pay
him, seeing we owe unto him more then we have.

Hence it is that our Savior says; Math. 22, 37 38, 39.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy Soul, and
with all thy mind: this is the first and the great Commandment: and the
second like unto this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. We see then
the order of the Commandments set down by the God of order, that God has
the first place, and man the second; the duties we owe unto him, are preferred
before the duties we owe to our Brethren. And if we mark the Lords prayer, and
the order which we are taught to observe in our Prayers and Petitions, we shall
find those ranged in the first place that touch the honor of his Name, before
such as belong to our necessities: so that the duties are greater, the Chains
are stronger, the bands are faster, and the reasons are firmer to bind us, and
knit us unto God. In him Acts 17, 28. and 14, 17.
we live and move, and have our being. He sends Rain and fruitful seasons,
he fills our hearts with joy and gladness. He made us, and not we our
selves, he made us of nothing, and when we became deformed, he reformed us. He
has written his Laws in our hearts, and our sins and iniquities he will
remember no more. What wrong and injury has the Lord done us, that having
received so many pledges of his favor, and sealed so many bands, acknowledging
the infinite debts that ws owe unto him, we should prefer Dust and Ashes
before him, and set up proud flesh in disgrace and despite of him? We see what
mighty and weighty reasons we have to magnify him above all Creatures in
Heaven and Earth, and to advance him above all excellency that is in man, whose
breath is in his Nosthrils: and yet who is it that gives him his due, and does
not extol the Creature above the Creator, who is blessed for ever?

True it is, every man will pretend love to God, as to him that has elected
him, created him, redeemed him, called him, adopted him, justified him,
sanctified him, and preserved him. But do we love his word above our own
pastimes and pleasures? Our Savior says; John 14, 23.
If any Man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and
we will come and dwell with him: he that loves not me, keeps not my word. If
then we prefer the following of our own vanities before the hearing of his
truth, we plainly bewray the hypocrisy of our hearts, and show that our love
is fastened upon the Earth. We will all seem to love the Lord, and his word,
least all men should condemn us, and cry shame of us: but this our love
continues no longer, then till some profit or pleasure round us in the ear,
and come in comparison (as it were) to be waighed in the balance together;
then farewell God, and his Word, and his Sabbaoths, we will none of them, so
long as we have the other to follow after. What is more common in continual
practice then this? Will not a drunken Feast, a ryotous company of profane
Fellows, sooner draw us to their Lure, then a conscience of our duty to God to
keep us at home, to attend to his ordinances for the salvation of our Souls?
Every man almost can say the Commandments, and pronounce the words, but they
consider not the meaning of them, and how large they are. They know the Law;
Exodus 20, 3.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me: and they would complain of the injury
done them, if they should be charged to break the same. Nevertheless, if we
love the World more then we love God, or delight in our Riches more then in his
Worship, if we trust in the Creature more then in the Creator, or if we fear
men more then God, we offend him, and transgress his Commandment. Let us now
consider with our selves, how deeply we are indebted unto God, and remember
that we owe many duties unto him: he has given us much, so that he may require
much of us again; he has bestowed many blessings upon us, and therefore he
looks for the greater service at our hands.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing the Band and Obligation, is much more powerful and
astringent to some, then unto others (albeit we are required and charged to
love all men as they are men, and to wish well unto them) according to the
diverse degrees whereby they are coupled together, both by the sense of Nature,
and by the Commmaundement of God, it serves to reprove sundry abuses, and to
meet with many disorders that are most rife and common among us.

The first reproof.
First of all, it reprooueth the blind superstition, not only of elder times,
but of the present days wherein we live, and the wicked sniftes of Popish
Monks, which being wise in their Generation, would persuade it as meritorious
to foolish and sinful men, to give away all their Lands and possessions, and
means of maintenance from their Children and Kindred, and bestow them upon the
feeding of idle Drones, and unprofitable Beasts, that live by the sweat of
other men's: labors to this end, to say Masses for the quick and the dead, and
to pray for the puling Souls that languish in Purgatory. For such as was
their cruelty over men's bodies, and their Dominion over their consciences, and
command over their goods, that the poor people have been, and at this day are
besotted and bewitched by them, that they are ready to give a thousand
Sacrifices of Rams, and ten Micha. 6, 7.
thousand Rivers of Oil, and to forgo their first borne for their
transgression, even the fruit of their body for the sin of their Souls. The
spiritual consenage and deceit of the fraudulent Jesuits as greedy Cormorants,
is notorious and famous, or rather infamous in this kind and case whereof we
speak, who make have to the sick person that is rich (as the Eagle flies to
the Carcass) to make a prey of him, See the Quod lib. and other Books of the
priests, for this purpose.
and the Priests themselves, greeuing that such a fat Morcell should go by
their mouths, and so great a booty should escape their hands, have lamentably
complained of their briberie, hypocrisy, cruelty, and iniquity. These are
they that eat Men's sins as Bread, and regard not to dam their Souls, to fat
their own Bodies, and fill their own pusres.

The second reproof.
Again, this reprooueth the impiety and unnaturalness in men that regard not
their own flesh, nor have a respect to their own Kindred, but are strangers
from them, unkind unto them, and void of love toward them. The Apostle
prophesies and complains, that in the last days shall come perrilous times,
2 Timothy 3, 1, 2, 3.
when men shall be cold in Charity, and destitute of natural affection. He
would be accounted a stark fool that would seem to show compassion to feed
another, and yet starve his own body; to be liberal abroad, and miserable at
home; to see other men's miseries, and to take no notice or knowledge of his
own; to quench the fire kindled in another man's house, and to suffer his own
to be turned down stick and stake, and nothing left to cover his head, and to
give him shield and shelter from the wind and weather.

So stands the case with all such as open their hands to those that are
far off from them, and turn away their eyes from such as are their flesh,
and bone, and blood, to whom God and Nature has made them more indebted, then
to other men. It was not so with Joseph, Gene. 47, 12.
when he lived in wealth, and Jacob was in want: he was stored with plenty,
and his Father tasted of scarsitie, he gave him Corn freely, and sustained his
Kindred willingly. The like care we see in Ruth toward Naomi, the Daughter in
Law toward the Mother in Law, she labored and travailed for them both, Ruth.
2, 6, 14 18.
she gleaned and gathered after the Reapers among the sheaues, and what she
left when she was sufficed, she reserved it, and brought all home to relieve
and refresh her old Mother. These examples are agreeable to the rule, and
these practices are aunswerable to the prccept of the Apostle, requiring of
Children and Nephews to recompense the kindness of their Parents. When Christ
our Savior was upon the Cross, he showed his godliness toward his Mother,
and committed her to the Disciple whom he loved, himself being ready to leave
the World. For when John 19, 26, 27.
he saw his Mother and John standing by her, he said unto his Mother; Woman,
behold thy Son: then said he to the Disciple, Behold thy Mother, and from
that hour the Disciple took her home unto him. It is the duty of Children to
honor their Parents, not only by obedience, but by maintenance; not only by
reverence, but by recompense; not only by subjection, but by thankfulness for
the benefits that they have received. If they be hungry, they must feed them;
if poor, they must relieve them; if in necessity, they must help them; if
weak, they must Minister unto them. For if this must be performed to
Strangers, much more to Parents? There is nothing more just then this kind of
duty, because the light of Nature teaches, to requite one good turn for
another, and to do unto another, as thou would have him do to thee.
Wherefore, to deny the performance of these duties, is unnatural and
inhumaine: but to break out into the contrary practices, is monstrous and
beastly. Absalom 2. Sam. 15, 10, and 20, 1.
conspired against David, Sheba the Son of Bichri, a man of Iemini conspired
against David, both of them raised Israel against him, and blew the Trumpet of
rebellion. Both the persons were wicked, both their practices were deuillish,
both their punishments were just and righteous. But if we consider the manner
of the offense, by the condition of the offender, and weigh the persons in a
balance by the several bands, whereby one was tied above the other, we shall
easily find that the sin of Absalom did exceed, and his fact was more
odious and hateful in the sight of God and man. For Sheba indeed rose up
against his Liedge-Lord, and lawful Prince. But Absalom ought to have showed
himself as a Son, as a Servant, as a Subject, and to have acknowledged David
his Father, his Master, his Magistrate. He was the Lords anointed to them
both, and therefore they should have been afraid to lay their hands upon him,
or to set themselves against him, or to take away the Crown and Kingdom from
him: Nevertheless, Absaloms attempt was accompanied with a multitude of
offenses, Cicer. paradox. 3.
he wronged him that had begotten him, that had nourished him, that had
nurtered him, that had honored and advanced him, that had given him life, and
all things appertaining unto life. All these bands, that ought to have been
as a strong Cord or Cable, never to be untwisted, and as a Chain of Iron,
never to be broken, he rent in sunder as a thread of Tow is broken when it
feels the fire, and therefore as the fault was most foul, so his fall was
most fearful, according to the saying of the Wiseman; Pro. 17, 13.
Whosoever recompenceth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
Thus then we see, that such as contemn their Parents, and refuse to help and
succor those that GOD has made nearest unto them, and so bound them in a
greater band, do commit the greater sin, and plainly declare that their
hearts are void of natural affection.

The third reproof.
Thirdly, this Doctrine reprooueth those, that where most causes and reasons
concur and meet together to urge them to their duty, do not make use of
them, nor bind themselves more closely and straightly with them, nor show more
kindness being moved by them, so that the greater and more the means are to
tie them in affection one to another, the less many times their love is. This
may be made plainly to appear unto us, if we consider the particular practice
of the people toward their Minister, and the general behavior of one of the
faithful toward another. God has bound the people to their own Pastor, by a
straighter and nearer conjunction, then to the Shepherds of other Foldes,
because they have a greater charge of their Souls, and must give an account
for them to the chief Shepherd of the Sheep: and yet we see they are most
bitter and violent against them, because they reprove their sins, and
discover their corruptions, that they themselves may see them and forsake them,
and God may forgive them. Shall the sick person hate the Physician because he
shows him his disease, and offers his help and best endeavor to cure it? In
like manner, shall we be spightfully entreated and cruelly handled, and
mortally maligned, that wish them the greatest good, show our selves their best
friends, deal faithful with their Souls, and labor to bring them to
eternal happiness? This is it which the Apostle speaks to the Galathians;
Gal. 4, 16.
Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tellyou the truth? Thus also the
Prophet Jeremy complains, Ier. 18, 20.
Shall evil be recompensed for good? For they have dug a pit for my Soul:
remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away
thy wrath from them. We pray for them, we stand in the gap, we exhort and
admonish them, we desire to cure them of those sins, that fight against their
Souls to destroy them.

Secondly, we are to draw from hence a general consideration, that as God has
called us with an holy calling, into the bosom of the Church, so he has
linked the faithful in love one to another, and yoaked them together with the
sweet yoke of his Gospel: and yet how many are there that profess the name
of Christ, and will needs be accounted true Christians, that cannot abide the
Children of God, but hate them with an unfeigned hatred, and account them as
their Mortal enemies? If we should see a man rage against the members of his
own body, Mark 5, 5.
and strike himself with stones to the wounding of the flesh like the man
possessed, would we not seek to bind him with Chains, and say he were mad and
out of his wits? So likewise, if we be in Christ, we have him as our head, and
are members one of another; and therefore such as nourish the passions of
hatred as Coals of fire kindled in their breasts, are out of their right
mind, as men distracted and beside themselves. No man ever yet hated his own
flesh, but nourishes Ephe. 5, 29.
and cherishes it, even as the Lord does the Church. We have many effectual
means and strong reasons to join our affections one to another, Ephe. 4, 4, 5.
There is one Body, and one Spirit; there is one hope, and one inheritance;
there is one Faith, and one Baptism; there is one God and Father of all, which
is above all, and thorough all, and in us all: These are so many bands to hold
us together; if we pluck these Chains asunder, and break the Fetters in
pieces, that no man can tame us nor bind us, we are not living but dead
members, and offer violence to our own flesh. The single knot of nature ought
to be sufficient to knit us one to another, and the least thread of natural
conjunction of our humane Nature, ought to sew us together as a Garment fitted
for our body: how much more when many occasions meet together, which should
establish brotherly love to continue among us?

Use 3
Thirdly, seeing coupling of many reasons together, and the meeting of many
good respects in one, gives the more cause of joy and gladness, of loving and
caring one for another, it gives a profitable instruction to all Children and
Servants, and other inferiors to perform the duties of honor and reverence to
their Fathers and Masters. If there were no other means, this were a
sufficient means to make them tractable and attentive to the words and
directions of their Fathers and Masters, even because they are their Fathers
and Masters. For this includes many reasons, and joins them in nearer
bands, then they were tied together before, and detecteth them of a greater
sin, and makes them guilty of a greater judgment. When it pleased God to open
the mouth of Baalams Number. 22, 28.
Ass, to reprove the foolishness and wickedness of that false Prophet, it
was his fault not to hearken, nor give heed to that which is spoken unto him.
When God instructs us by the Creatures which are the common Masters of all
mankind, we must learn the invisible things of God by them. When the Wiseman
passed by the field of the slothful, Prou. 24, 30, 31, 32.
and by the Vineyard of the Man destitute of understanding, which was grown
all over with Thorns and Nettles: he beheld and considered it well, he looked
upon it and received instruction. But when the Lord chooses one to speak unto
us, and to inform us in his ways which has been the Instrument of our life
and being, of our peace and welfare, of our good and salvation; we ought to
have more respect to his person, and to his persuasion, as he is a more
honorable Messenger, and as his words do proceed from greater love and
kindness toward us. This serves greatly to reprove all rebellious Children
and contemptuous Servants, which dislike and distaste the holy instructions and
informations of their Fathers and Masters. If they receive any temporal
commodity from them, this does relish well in their mouths, but they regard
not their counsels, they will none of their instructions. These are wicked
Children; these are ungodly Servants. An evil Child, is but half a Child; an
evil Wife, is but half a Wife; an evil Servant, is but half a Servant; an
evil Subject, is but half a Subject. The godly and gracious Child, is a
Child indeed; a godly and gracious Wife, is a true Wife indeed; a godly and
gracious Servant, is a right Servant indeed; a godly and gracious Subject, is
to be accounted and acknowledged a true Subject indeed. For as there are
degrees of conjunction of mankind one to another, which are are as certain
steps, whereby we climb up to the society and mutual love of others; so the
more steps and degrees there are, the greater ought our love to be. To be a man
created after the Image of God is one degree, and challenges love from us to
be performed toward him.

To be joined in a Political or Domestical knot; to wit, in the Common
wealth, or in the private Family (as the Prince and Subject, the Father and
Son, the Master and Servant) is another, and a nearer degree, and ought to
be the cause of farther love. But if to these natural and civil respects,
there be added a spiritual Communion in Christ, which is the best band, that
binds faster then all the rest, whereby the Subject is made his Princes
brother; the Child, his Fathers Brother; and the Servant, his Masters Brother:
this requires a more faithful and fervent love, and a farther degree of our
affection toward them. On the other side, if the conjunction between them be
only in the two former considerations, there can be no true and sincere love
between them, albeit they be so closely tied together: no, although they be
Fathers and Children, Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, Princes and
Subjects. For where Christ Jesus is not, there can be no singleness and
soundness of the Soul; whosoever loves not in the Lord, he cannot love from
the heart: and where there is no true piety, there can be nothing else but
hypocrisy, which is the bane and poison of true love. Hence it is, that he
which has an evil Servant, does not in truth possess him, he has an
interest and propriety in the least part of him: he may have his hands, but he
cannot have his heart. So the Apostle shows, that while Onesimus was a wicked
man, and an unbeliever, his Master Philemon could not commodiously use him: he
wandered therefore a while from his House, that by changing of the place he
might be turned into another, and return a new man; before an unworthy
Servant, but now a profitable Servant; nay, a beloved Brother, made near, and
after a sort equal with his Master thorough Faith in Christ.

Whenever therefore Kings and Princes, Fathers and Masters, being
believers, have under them, and belonging unto them, such as are unfaithful
and unbelievers, they cannot promise to themselves that they have the whole
rule and command over them. This appears evidently in the Popish sort, that
believe the Doctrine of the Council, or rather Conuenticle of Trent, if one
that professes the Gospel have a Wife, or Child, or Servant, embracing that
falsely named Catholike-Religion, that rest upon the deceivable errors of the
Priests and Jesuits, and all of them upon the decree and determination of the
Pope; he cannot make his accounts (except he account amiss) that he has full
power over them, or the rule of their lives, or the love of their hearts. We
see it oftentimes come to pass in Subjects adhering to the Dregs of Popish
superstition, that notwithstanding the bands of fidelity and allegiance,
whereby they are obliged to their Princes, they break out into actions of open
Rebellion, and seek the subversion of King, and Country, and Religion. If
then a man would have an absolute and Sovereign command over his Inferiors,
and be assured to have a whole and entire Wife, that his heart may trust in
her, and her heart rest in him: if a man would have a dutiful Child, and a
faithful Servant to do his will, and perform service unto him for conscience
sake, he must make choice of such as have in them the fear of God, the Faith
of Christ, the gifts of the Spirit, the love of Religion, the desire of
instruction, and the care of salvation. If these be wanting, never think their
affection can be firmly settled toward thee: but upon every occasion it will
be easily removed from thee. It is the surest and fastest knot that Christ
knitteth, all other bands will quickly be broken and loosed.

Use 4
Lastly, seeing the increase of many bands meeting together, doubleth and
trebleth the care and love one toward another, so that where the smallest
number of means is found, there also is found the smallest love: and where the
greatest number of occasions concurreth (as it were) on an heap, there ought to
be the surest knot of friendship and amity: it should put all superiors in
mind of a necessary duty, to be careful to instruct those that belong to
their several charges and jurisdictions, that so they may tie them with a
surer knot to themselves, and have the better service at their hands. For
seeing they are nearer coupled unto them that are under the reach of their
authority, or the roof of their houses, then unto the rest of mankind: they
ought to have a greater respect unto them, and bear a dearer love unto them,
even unto their bodies, how much more unto their Souls? But we cannot better
testify our love unto them, and show our care over them, then by making known
unto them the works of the Lord, and the ways of salvation. If we be
commanded to Heb. 3, 13.
Exhort one another while it is called to day, and to stir up one another to
good things, 1 These. 5, 14
if we must admonish them that are out of order, and comfort the feeble minded;
how much more are we bound in conscience to perfect it to those that depend
upon us, and are nearer unto us? It was the first and principal care of all
the godly Kings that had true Religion in their own hearts, to provide for the
instruction of their subjects. The Apostle writing to the Ephesians, and
prescribing the distinct duties of sundry persons, forgets not the Father
and the Son, and as he charge Children Ephe. 6, 2, 4
To obey their Parents in the Lord: so he commands Parents, to bring them up
in the instruction and information of the Lord. Thus godly Masters have used
all diligence to bring their Servants to have a desire of Religion, and a love
to the exercises of piety; whereby oftentimes such a good work has been
wrought in them, that they have accounted their Masters as second Fathers, and
as spiritual Fathers, and confessed themselves more bound in all duty to
them, then to their natural Parents, having learned that to the glory of God,
and the salvation of their Souls by their Masters instruction, which they
could never understand by their Fathers education. They have confessed
themselves to have gained more by such a service, then if a large portion, a
rich inheritance, and great reuennewes had been left unto them. And indeed,
this is the only way to teach Children dutifulness, and to frame our Servants
to obedience, to plant godliness in them, and to water that which is planted.
The neglect of this care in us, will make them careless: and the making of no
conscience to teach them, will bring them to be unconscionable in their places.
If we be dumb and open not our mouths to instruct them, we shall have deaf
Children, and deaf Servants; that will stop their ears against all good
admonition that is offered unto them. If we be bound in a double Band, common
and special, and do perform a single duty unto them: it will follow, that
as they owe unto us a two-folde duty, general, and particular; the general
of all mankind; the particular of Servants, they will perform^ a single, and
maimed, and imperfect service. Thus much shall suffice for this Doctrine and
division.

17 If therefore thou account our things common, Receive him as my self.


The order of the words.
HItherto we have spoken of the former reason drawn from the Apostles action
of sending him back to his Master, together with the conuincing and confuting
of the two objections that might be made against the receiving of him; one
touching the retaining of him with himself; the other, touching the Servants
departure from his Master. Now follows the second reason of the second sort,
taken from the person of Paul, and it is of his communion with Philemon, and
the participation of the same heavenly gifts and graces with him. This reason
is first handled, and then another Objection is prevented. The reason is in
this 17. Verse: the prevention is the two next following; to wit, the 18. and
19. Verses. This reason here used, is breefely propounded, and yet nothing is
omitted which may carry any force of Argument to persuade and assuage
Philemon. For he infers out of the former words wherein he has commended
Onesimus, not so much to be accounted as a Servant, as to be received as a
Brother, that he is worthy to be forgiven: and withal, he insinnuateth and
signifies that he was necessarily joined with him in these bands of mutual
love, that he could not be separated and divided from him, whereby it must
come to pass, that one of these will follow; either thou must love us both,
or else for ever refuse us both. If thou hate him, thou can not love me: or
if thou love me, thou must not hate hate him. This reason is thus framed: If we
have fellowship together in all common blessings, then receive him. But we have
fellowship together in all common blessings: Therefore receive him.
The first proposition of this reason is in the beginning of this verse, [ If
therefore thou account our things common, receive him.] The conclusion is
amplified and made manifest by a comparison of the like, [ Receive him as my
self.]

The meaning of the words.
Thus much of the Method: now let us see somewhat concerning the meaning of the
words, which are few, and not hard. When the Apostle says [ If thou account
our things common] the words in the original are; If thou have me a Fellow or
partaker; that is, One in common with thee: whereby he expresses his singular
affection to this poor fugitive Servant, and makes his cause and this request
all one, so that to reject him, was as much as if he rejected Paul; and on the
other side, to embrace and receive him, is accounted by him, as done to
himself. Again, when he craves to have him received; by receiving, we must
understand, not only the entertaining of him into his service, and the taking
of him home into his house, but therein also he requesteth of him, to forgive
him his offenses committed against him, and to think well of him, as of a
Brother in Christ. Lastly, when he adds [ As my selfe] he means, lovingly,
friendly, heartily, as thou would do me if I came unto thee. As if he should
have said; seeing no man denies to his companion and familiar friend, any
thing that is honest and just, it cannot stand with that love and familiarity
that has ever been between thee and me, to deny me this reasonable request:
but we have been and are most dear and inward friends, communicating one with
another all good things, so that I have accounted thee another my self, and
thou have accounted me another thy self, and therefore I do not doubt, but
thou will receive him again into thy favor, as if he were another Paul, or
as a member of his body.

Sundry observations arising out of this Verse.
This is to be marked and considered concerning the meaning. The words in this
verse are not many, but the observations are not few that might be concluded
and collected out of the same. First of all, many may marvel that the Apostle
is so earnest, vehement, and importunate for a Servant, and especially for such
a Servant. Surely, fear of hard and severe dealing might have moved Onesimus
to distrust and despair, and therefore he uses all means to hold him up, to
cherrish his faith, and to further the good work begun in him, being as yet a
young plant, a new convert, as a joint newly restored, and having yet a tender
conscience: whereby he provoke us and all others, to seek tenderly the
upholding, maintaining, confirming, and comforting such as have given witness
of their true repentance, not to quench the smoking Flax, nor to break the
bruised Reed. For seeing we are with all mildness to receive unto us such as
are weak in the faith; woe unto them that stay them that are coming forward,
and lay stumbling blocks in their way to bring them back, and to cause them
to return to their vomit with the Dog, and to the wallowing in the mire like
the Sow that was washed. And seeing the sinner is thus to be helped, which has
approved his conversion unto us, that we are to make intercession unto others,
to obtain pardon for the penitent; we are admonished, that they are much more
favorably handled, and carefully to be received, and gently to be remitted by
our selves.

Secondly, we see, that to the old request he adds a new reason: for we shall
never find in this Epistle, his petition barely and nakedly propounded. He
has used diverse Arguments before to persuade Philemon, yet here we have
another annexed, to move him to grant it without denial or resistance. This
gives instruction to the Ministers of the Gospel, to teach the truth soundly
and substantially, as that the consciences of the people may be well grounded,
and thoroughly settled therein. When matters of weight and importance are in
question, they must not deal rawly, they must not use weak proofs and
insufficient reasons, whereby men may be rather hardened in their errors, then
helped out of their errors.

Thirdly, the Apostle does not simply say; If our things be common (as he
might have done) but if thou account them common, and us to have a communion
between our selves: declaring thereby, that it is not enough to know a truth,
unless we also yield unto it as unto a truth. It is one thing to know what is
good, and another thing to embrace it in our practices. It is one thing to know
what is evil, and another to refuse it in our actions. We must labor not only
to have our minds cleared, our understandings and our judgments rectified to
see the truth, but to have our hearts and affections sanctified to follow it. It
behooves therefore not to rest our selves satisfied with general notions, but
so to ensue after them, as that we make special application of the^: David in
general knew that Adultery was evil; Noah knew that drunkenness was beastly,
Peter knew the denying of his Master was fearful; yet in the brunt of
tentation, though the mind had knowledge of it, the affections would not
refuse it, but yielded as a City besiedged by an enemy.

Fourthly, the Apostle puts Philemon in mind, that seeing there was so
near a conjunction between them twain, that they were become as it were one
man, and had one mind in two bodies; it follows, that whatsoever was joined
to one of them, ought of necessity to be joined to the other. Whereby we see,
that such as are our friends, ought to be also the friends of our friends, that
is; of those that are joined unto us. Philemon was the friend of Paul, and
therefore if Onesimus were the friend of one, he must needs be the friend of
the other. Paul and Philemon were as two Brethren, if then Onesimus were the
Brother of Paul, he ought also to be accounted the Brother of Philemon, and
therefore he would have him received as himself. It is no true friendship
when one takes profession to love another man, and yet hates him which is his
cheifest and dearest friend: for if indeed we loved him, we would for his sake
love the other that loves him. This we see in the covenant made with Abraham,
Iam. 2, 23.
who is called The friend of God, whereby it appears, Genesis 12, 3.
that the Lord promised to be a friend to his friends, and an enemy to his
enemies.

Fifthly, in the amplification of the conclusion, he adds [ As my selfe]
thereby showing, that he would have him regarded no otherwise then himself.
Whereby we learn, that our love to the Brethren ought not to be in word, or in
tongue, or in show, but in deed, in truth, and in heart. This is Christian love,
this was in Christ toward us, and this should be in all of us one toward
another. 1. John 3, 18. Romans 12, 9. 1 Pet. 4, 8. These particular observations
and sundry others might be stood upon, and farther enlarged, but I have only
pointed them out, and will leave them to your farther consideration. I will
only stand upon the Doctrines that are more principally intended, and more
particularly purposed, which consist in the strength of the reason, and in the
truth of the words in themselves considered.

[ If thou account our things common, receive him as my self.] This reason is
drawn from the working cause. Where, to move Philemon to grant his petition,
he alleges the communion that was between them. If I be partaker with
thee, and thou with me of the common benefits, so that the same thing which
is mine is thine, and the same things which are thine, I may account mine;
thou being my Friend, can not deny to love and receive him that is my Friend.
Indeed, if we had only a private respect unto our selves, so that my things
were mine own, and not thine; and thy things were thine own, and not mine,
thou might deny me my request: but seeing thou art another, my self, and
dear unto me as mine own soul, it is a forcible reason to stir thee up,
both to hear and grant that which I desire and request of thee. Doctrine 1.
The consideration of the communion one with another, ought to move us to regard
one another.
From hence we learn, that the consideration of the mutual conjunction that
we have one with another, gives us an interest one in another, and ought
greatly to move us to hear and regard each other. So then, the acknowledgement
of our communion ought to stir us up to have such a care one of another, that
nothing requested upon good ground should be denied. This is it which the
Father of the faithful calls unto Lots remembrance; Gene. 13, 8. Acts 7, 26,
Let not us strive, for we are Brethren. So deals Moses toward the
Israelites, he showed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set
them at one again, saying; Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one to
another? The Apostle tells the Ephesians, that they were as one Body, and one
Spirit, they had all one Faith and Baptism, and hope of salvation, Ephe. 4, 3,
4.
and thereupon persuades with them to endeavor to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of peace. Thus he teaches the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 12, 13
By one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one
spirit, so that the gifts given unto us, are given to profit withal. The
Apostle John speaks to this purpose; Hereby have we perceived love, that he
laid down his life for us, therefore we ought also to lay down our lives for
the Brethren. This appears in the practice of Christ, John 11, 11.
he said unto his Disciples; Our friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go to wake him
up. Where we see he makes the friendship that was between them a motive to go
to Bathania, to raise him up from the dead. This is offered also unto us in the
parable propounded by Christ, Which of you shall have Luke 11, 5.
a friend, and shall go to him at midnight, and say to him; Friend, lend me
three loaves, etc. declaring thereby, that he which has a friend indeed,
rests upon him, and is bold with him in the time of his necessity. Al these
places and examples teach us to be ready to perform all duties of love and
kindness one to another, seeing there is, or ought to be a common fellowship
among us.

Reason 1.
The reasons of this truth are very plain and apparent. For first of all, we
have all of us one common Father, we are al his children; we have one common
Maker, we are the work of his hands. If then we be so nearly tied, so closely
linked and yoked one to another, we ought to have a great care and respect one
of another. This is it which Job considered to move him to mildness toward his
Inferiors, Job 31, 15.
He that has made me in the womb, has he not made him? Has not he alone
fashioned us in the womb? Where he shows, that the Master and the Servant
have one and the same Creator, so that they are so straightly joined together,
as that they are bound to be beneficial one to another. To this purpose
Solomon says, Prou. 22, 2.
The rich and the poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of them all; that
is, they live together in a common fellowship, and one stands in need of
another.

Reason 2.
Secondly, as we have one common Father, so we have one head, and are the
members one of another. This is it which our Savior teacherh in the Gospel;
John 10, 16.
There shall be one sheepfold and one Shepherd. There cannot be a nearer
conjunction and communion, then the members of the same body have one with
another: every one seeks the good of another, and all labor after the
benefit and preservation of the whole. This comparison is fitly alleged by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12, 12
As the body is one and has many Members, and all the members of the body,
which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body: even so is Christ. So
then, seeing God is the common Creator of us all, and seeing we are made the
members one of another, through our conjunction and union with Christ, we
gather from both these considerations, that our fellowship and communion one
with another, must cause and compel us to do all good one to another, and to
have a special care one of another.

Use 1
Let us breefely see what profitable Uses may be concluded from hence. And
first, if the communion that we have one with another, and the intercourse of
friendship ought to move us to Christian duties; then it follows much more,
that the communion that we have with Christ, and the honor which God
vouchsafes unto us to account us his Friends, should be available to join
us to him, to teach us to obey him, to honor him, to serve him, to worship him,
and to walk in the practice of his Commandments. Hence it is, that Abraham
performing the conditions of the Covenant that God has required of him, when
he promised to be his God, and the God of his Seed, 2 Chro. 20, 7 Esaias 41, 8.
James 2, 23.
is oftentimes renouned with this honorable Title, to be termed [ The Friend
of God.] This Christ our Savior teaches, John 15. 14, 15. and 14, 15.
Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: henceforth call I you
not Servants, for the servant knows not what the Master does: but I have
called you Friends, for all things that I heard of my Father, have I made
known to you. No friendship is more glorious and gainefull, then the friendship
of God, none is more constant or continual, seeing whom he loves, he loves
to the end. Hereby we have access unto God, as to our Friend, then which* what
can be a greater Dignity.

Now the honor is great, so we must know wherein it consists: for friendship
is not an idle name, without the truth of the thing. The love of God to us is
seen in his favor toward us, in blessing of us, in taking the care of us, in
pardoning our sins, in adopting of us to be his Sons, and in giving of us
eternal life. Our love toward God is to be measured by keeping his
Commandments, in depending upon him, in believing in him, and in looking for
all good things from him. But if we rebel against him, and forsake his laws,
we cannot make any account of Gods friendship, nor make our reckoning to have
him to be our friend. For sin is a Makebate. Commonly we hate and detest those
as the worst sort of men, that raise contention among Friends. But such is the
nature of sin, it causest the greatest enmity, where there should be the
greatest amity. The Prophet Esaias teaches this very evidently; Esa. 59, 1, 2, 3
The Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, neither is his ear
heavy, that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you
and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear:
for your hands are defiled with blood, and your Fingers with iniquities, your
lips have spoken lies, and your tongue has murmured iniquity. They wanted
many good blessings, but they considered not the cause, that their sins had
made God their Enemy, and caused him to depart from them. If then we desire
the friendship of God, we must have a desire to walk in his ways. So then
they are in a miserable case that have no care to please him, for they have not
God to be their friend, but their adversary. We say commonly, a friend in the
court, is as good as a penny in the pursse: but to have a friend in the highest
Court of heaven, and the friendship of the most high, who is the ^ing of Kings,
is more worth and better to be esteemed then all the World beside. From this
ground our Savior teaches us to regard his friendship above all, to fear his
wrath, which if it be kindled, rages as the fire, and not to stand in fear of
the displeasure of men, thereby to be hindered in our obedience; Luke 12, 4, 5
I say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after
that are not able to do any more: but I will forewarne you whom ye shall fear,
fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell: yea, I say
unto you, him fear. Thus it behooves us, from the consideration of our
communion one with another, to ascend and rise up to the contemplation of our
fellowship with God: and from the meditation of our duties to be performed to
men, to proceed to the practice of our duties to God.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing our communion is accompanied with duties of godliness, we
must be careful to associate our selves with godly men, to whom we are most
bound, and from whom we may receive the greatest benefit. For seeing our
fellowship one with another, teaches us to love and make much one of another,
we must delight in the company of the faithful, that so we may hear,
counsel, comfort, regard, and exhort one another. All mankind are combined
together in one society, but if we be brought by Gods ordinance into one
Family, we have another, and a nearer band to couple us in the same yoke. We
must beware least we give room and entertainment to those that are ungodly,
whereby the rest of the House may be insected. Thus the Apostle Peter
exhorts the believing Jews; Acts 20, 40.
Save your selves from this froward Generation. It is certain, that such as
are good, by using evil company, are made evil; and such as are evil, are
made worse. Such as make no conscience of their company, will make no
conscience in time of any iniquity.

Use 3.
Thirdly, we must learn by this communion, to show the duties of compassion
one to another, to help and relieve them that want, and every way to sustain
and succor such as are in necessity. When Job considered that we have one
Creator, and sprung all out of the Earth, which as a common Mother bare us in
her Womb, Job 31, 19, 20.
He could not see any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering. And in another place he complains of them that offered great
kindness unto him in his prosperity, when he had no need of them or their
courtesy, but forsook him in his greatest necessity. Job 6, 15.
These he compares to Winter brooks, which flow and ouer-flow when there is
an over plus of water, but are dry and dammed up in time of Summer, when the
earth gapeth, and the Grass withers, and the Flower fades for want thereof.
Such men forget themselves, and the condition wherein God has set them. They
know how to require and look for duties from others, but they are unmindful
of their own, and so become unmerciful to their Brethren. They do not
remember, that the time shall come, when they will preferred one drop of Mercy
before a thousand Kingdoms; yea, before ten thousand worlds.

[ If thou account our things common, etc.] Hitherto we have considered the
strength of the reason, and gathered the Doctrine that arises from hence. Now
we are to weigh the words alone by themselves. The Apostle takes his Argument
from the communion and fellowship that is between him and Philemon, so that he
could not deny him his suit. Doctrine 2. Among Christian friends all things are
common.
From hence we raise this Doctrine, that among Christian Friends all things
are common. Such as are true friends, not in tongue, but in truth; not in
hypocrisy, but from the heart; should have great interest one in another, to
use themselves, their gifts, their blessings without grudging, to the natural
comfort one of another. When Jonathan entered into a covenant of love and league
of friendship with David, 1 Sem. 18, 4.
By and by he put off his Robe that was upon him, and gave it David, and his
Garments, even to his Sword, and to his Bow, and to his Girdle: Yea, he
discovered the secret counsels and consultations of his Father, that he might
deliver his friend from danger of death. This is it which the Apostle speaks
to the Romans; Romans 12, 4, 5
As we have many Members in one body, and all Members have not one office, so
we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one another Members. The
Evangelist Luke describing the state and condition of the Church, after the
Resurrection and ascension of Christ, says; Act, 2, 44, 45
All that believed were in one place, and had all things common, and they sold
their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every one had
need. And afterward, in the fifth Chapter he adds at large the same point,
Act. 4, 33, 34
Great Grace was upon them all, neither was there any among them lacked, for as
many as were possessors of Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the price of
the things that were sold, and laid it down at the Apostles feet^, and it was
distributed unto every man, according as he had need.

Hence it is, that we are taught in the Articles of Faith, to believe the
communion of Saints; yea, this is so plain and manifest a truth, Plato. de
leg. lib. 5. Cicer. offi. lib. 1. and de Amicit. Aul. Gell. noct. Atti. lib. 1.
cap. 9. Terent. in Adelph.
that the Heathen had this sentence as a common Proverb commonly in their
mouths, that among friends all things should be common. Whatsoever is bestowed
upon us, we should have it not only for our selves, but for others. If we have
riches, it is our friends; if we have any gifts bestowed upon us, they must
be at the commandment of our friends. Whatsoever we have to profit them
withal, it must be theirs, as well as ours. All these Testimonies of the holy
Scripture, and common experience teach us, that wheresoever Christian
friendship is, there must be also a Christian community; that there be no
lack, but the want of every one must be supplied by a common hand of those that
do abound.

Reason 1.
Let us see how this is confirmed unto us by reasons. First, it is the
ordinance of God, that one man should be an hand and helper unto another in all
necessities, and has united us as Brethren. so that they should seek to
comfort one another. This is it which Solomon propounds, Prou. 27, 9.
As Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's
friend by hearty counsel. If then, we be bound to help our brethren by our
hands, by our mouths, by our feet, by our hearts, and by all that we have in
our power, it follows, that there ought to be a communion in the use of all
blessings that we enjoy.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the Lord Jesus, which is the great peacemaker of the world, and
sole Mediator between God and man, who has joined Heaven and Earth together
by his Cross, Ephesians. 2, 18
so that through him we have an entrance unto the Father by one spirit: he, I
say, has brought peace unto us; he has made perpetual friendship between
his Father and us, and consequently settled sure friendship among our selves.
This is it which the Apostle speaks Ephe. 2. Ephesians. 2, 14, 16, 1^. Col. 1,
20, 21
He is our peace, which has made of both one, and has broken the stop of the
partition wall, to make of twain one new man in himself: that he might
reconcile both unto God in one body, by his Cross, and stay hatred thereby. It
is the Office of Christ's Priesthood to make peace, not only be^ween God and man
(which notwithstanding is the cheifest work) but between man and man, whereby
we become one body in him.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the faithful have the same privileges, and live as it were in
common together. They have the same Father, they expect the same inheritance,
they hear the same word, they receive the same Sacraments, Gal. 4, 26. 1 Pet.
2, 2. and 1, 23. Romans 8, 9, 15.
they are born of one Mother, they are begotten of one immortal seed, they are
fed by the same sincere Milk, they live as by one soul the spirit of Christ,
they are as near as Father and Children, and as members of one body, we are al
one in respect of the promises of salvation. Albeit there be a distinction
amongst them in Country, Nation, Age, Sex, and such like; and live in diverse
ages and places, yet there is such a spiritual Kindred, and near society
between them, that these common privileges bind them mutually and manifestly
one so another. Wherefore, seeing it is the ordinance of God, that we should put
our helping hand to do all good to our brethren; seeing Christ Jesus has
reconciled us to God his Father, and made peace amongst our selves; and
lastly, seeing the faithful have a common interrest and privilege in the same
holy things, whereby they are fitted to the Kingdom of Heaven, in all these
respects we learn, that among true Christian friends, there should be a
Communion and fellowship of all the blessings of God bestowed upon them.

Use 1.
Now, order requires, that we handle the Uses of this Doctrine. And first of
all, we learn that there is no friend like to the Christian friend, who is
another of the same. Such as are coupled together in this society and
fellowship, Deuteronomy. 13, 6.
are made one soul. Hence it is, that Moses teaching that no natural
affection toward those that are nearest unto us, ought to withdraw our hearts
from God, describes such as are most dear, and so have greatest interest in
us, where he calls Brethren the sons of the same Mother; he calls the
wife, her that lies in the bosom; he says of a Friend, that he is as a man's
own soul, whom he loves as himself. The Heathen glory in certain Golden
Cicero lib de amicitia.
paires of steadfast friends, that have bin ready to lay down their lives one
for another. Howbeit, in all ages and times of the world, they are able to
reckon up very few, and those for the most part forged and counterfeit, rather
to teach what should be done, then what ever was truly done. And yet if such
friendship had ever bin practiced, and such friends ever really extant, it had
been begun and ended in the flesh, and therefore had been but a corrupt and
carnal friendship. For, where God does not couple together, and make the knot,
and where the glory of his name is not the mark we shoot at, there the very
life of true friendship is wanting. All the former examples of supposed
friends, that were fastened without the glue of Religion, and the fear of God
to hold them together, might make a goodly show of rare love, to the eyes of
natural men, howbeit they did al things to be praised of men, to be magnified
of the world, to be spoken of after their death, and to be highly esteemed of
others. But they are not to be matched and compared with true Religious
friends, which have the bond of the spirit, and of a good conscience to couple
them together. Such were Ruth and Naomi; for when Ruth was willed to return
after her Sister, she answered, Ruth 1, 15, 16
Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to depart from thee, for whether thou go,
I will go: and where thou dwell, I will dwell: thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God: where thou dyest, I will dye, and there I will be
buried; the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death depart thee
and me. Such were Jonathan and David, of whom we spoke before, who did cleave
and adhere one to another, as if they had been no longer two, but one man; and
as if one had been of the bone and flesh of another. Such were Genesis 29, 18.
Jacob and Rachell, he thought no time too long, he judged no service too
bitter, he esteemed no wages too little, because he loved her. Such were Reuben
and Joseph, he would Ge. 37, 21, 22
not content to shed Joseph's blood, nor to lay violent hands upon him, but
counseled his Brethren to cast him into a pit, to the end he might deliver
him out of their hand, and restore him to his Father again. Such were Moses and
Aaron. Such were Solomon and Hiram, 1 King. 5, 1^
between whom was peace, and they made a Covenant one with another, so that
they did communicate either to other such commodities as they were stored
withal. Among these was mutual love and friendship did bind them together.
There is a difference between love and friendship. For, he may love, that is
not beloved; but he cannot be a Friend, unless he love, and be loved; which
the Apostle notes when he says, Romans 13, 8.
Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another. This is the sum of the whole
Law, for he that loves another, has fulfilled the law. Hence it follows,
that the nearest band, and surest conjunction, is between the faithful, they
only can be true and trusty friends, because they love, and are loved; that
which one does, the other is ready to require and return the like, to perform
mutual kindness one to the other.

This is the right and religious friendship, and this is only to be found
among the Saints that are members of the same body, and joined in one
brotherhood and Communion. But it is not so between the godly and ungodly,
between the holy and profane, between the elect and the reprobate; There is
2 Cor. 6, 14.
no fellowship between righteousness and unrighteousness, there is no
communion between light and darkness, there is no concord between Christ and
Beliall. These being mixed and joined together, Dan. 2, 42, 43
are like the feet of Nebucadnezzars Image which he saw in a dream, which
were part of Iron, and part of Clay, which was easily dissolved, and quickly
broken in pieces; so is it in the agreement and love that is between the
faithful and unfaithful, it is partly strong, and partly weak, but it cannot
be joined fast one with the other, as Iron cannot be mixed with Clay. For
albeit the godly do love the ungodly, even the Infidels, according to the
commandment of God, yet there can be no sound and sincere friendship between
them, because that is not mutual love, it is not in both parties, inasmuch as
the wicked do hate extremely the Children of God, and contemn them in their
hearts, as Caine did Abell. Let us therefore sort and associate our selves with
those that are godly men, who will in time of trial prove our safest friends.
All other society, how strongly soever it seems to be planted and builded,
will fall to the ground. We see Neighbors oftentimes forsake us, we see our
alliance and Kindred renounce us, we see Brethren oftentimes show themselves
as strangers one to another; but where grace and Religion is, there the
friendship will never fail, but is as a running stream, that never waxes dry.

Mark this in those sweet paires of friends which before we coupled together in
an equal yoke, whom grace and godliness joined, and therefore no unkindness
could separate. Ruth loved Naomi as greatly when she returned empty, as when
she came out full and well stored. Jonathan was found as faithful to David
when Saul sought to slay him, as when he began to honor him; when he lowred
at him, as when he showed the best countenance toward him. And howsoever the
ungodly may hide the intents of their hearts, and promise to perform all
duties of love toward us, yet their love has no certain foundation, but will
deceive them that trust unto it. When Job was in prosperity and authority,
every one respected him, and was ready to pleasure him, he was honored in ^he
gate, he was reverenced in the street, he was feared in the house. But when
his goods were gone, and al his dignity failed, no man regarded him, his
friends, his servants, his Wife despised him. Let us hear in his own words
the complaint that he makes, and attend to that he speaks, where he
declares what befell him, Job. 19, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
My Neighbors have forsaken me, and my familiars have forgotten me: They that
dwell in mine house, and my Maids took me for a stranger in their sight: I
called my Servant, but he would not answer me, though I prayed him with my
mouth: My breath was strange unto my wife, though I prayed her for the
Childrens sake of my body: The wicked despised me, and when I arose, they spoke
against me: All my secret friends also abhorred me, and they whom I loved, are
turned against me. Whereby we see, we can make no account of the friendship of
an ungodly man, where profit is the band, and not piety; he loves for carnal
respects, and temporal commodities, and not for the truths sake. Our delight
must be to be amongst the faithful servants of God, who love always, not by
hrunts and pangs, who love wholely and entirely, not to halues; who live in
trouble and adversity, as well as in the days of prosperity, so that one may
say to another, as Iehu did to Iehonadab the son of Rechab, coming to meet
him, 1 Kin. 10, 15
Is thine heart upright, as mine heart is toward thine? He would be accounted
an unwise man, that would take more delight in the shadow, then in the body; in
the show, then in the substance: the friendship that is among the ungodly, is
only the shadow of true friendship, so that they are destitute of true
wisdom, that advance it above the friendship that is among the faithful, or
make any account and reckoning of it, in comparison of the other. Let us
therefore join in a firm League of amity and friendship with the
faithful, which no time shall dissolve, nor no occasion shall break.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing Christian Friends have a community among themselves of al
good things, it serves to condemn the Niggardliness and Covetousness of
those that overthrow this Communion, and even pinch and pine away themselves,
depriving themselves of the lawful use of that which they have in their own
keeping. Of these there are two sorts; first, such as say in word and
practice, That which is mine, is mine, and that which is thine, is thine; I
will keep mine own, and keep thou that which is thine own: I will crave
nothing of thee, and thou shall receive nothing of me. Secondly, such as say,
whatsoever is mine, is mine: and whatsoever is thine, is mine: mine own is no
way sufficient for me, but I hope and gape for a part of thine. The first sort
do not conueigh other men's goods to themselves, but refrain from wrong and
oppression: yet they cannot abide to do good to any, nor to give away any thing
that is their own. The second sort are yet farther removed from true Charity,
who regard not what means they use to get other men's goods. Let such men
Innocen. de vtilit. condicio. humanae.
consider, that they offend against God, they offend against their Neighbor,
they offend against themselves. Against God, because they detain from him his
due; against their Neighbor, because they deny to him things necessary;
against themselves, because they withold things fit and reasonable. They are
unthankful to God, they are unjust to their Neighbor, they are cruel to
themselves. The Apostle charge them to commit Idolatry, and to make a God, or
rather an Idol of their money, because as the Idolater serves his Idol, so
does the covetous man his riches, and as the one makes his Image his hope and
trust, so does the other his treasure; and as the one is afraid to break his
Image, so is the other afraid to lessen his substance. These are they that are
content to cut large thonges of other men's goods, but are sparing in spending
of their own; who empty their bellies, that they may fill their Coffers, who
pinch their body, that they may enlarge their gain, and draw back their hand
when they should give, but stretch it forth when they would receive. Hence it
is, that the Apostle says, Col. 3, 5, 6.
Mortify your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry,
for the which things sake the wrath of God comes on the Children of
disobedience. And in another place he teaches, that 1 Timothy 6. 10.
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted after,
they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
In which words, howsoever the Apostle uses an excessive kind of speaking (for
properly original sin is the root of all evils, because as a fruitful
offspring they arise from thence) yet it is a Mother that brings forth many
Children; Cruelty, Injustice, Oppression, Fraud, Deceit, Ignorance of God,
contempt of his word, and security in all heavenly things. These things being
duly considered, serve to the condemnation of those that shut up the bowels of
compassion from Gods Children in their afflictions and necessities. For the
Apostle John in his first Epistle says, 1 John. 3, 17
Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Woe
therefore unto them that make all things private, and withold their love
from such as are to be loved, and their relief from such as are to be
relieved. How can these men think to find mercy at the hands of God that show
no mercy to their brethren, seeing there shall be judgment merciless, to
such as show no mercy? Let us have our conversation without covetousness. Let
1 Cor. 10, 24
no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. The wise man teaches,
Pro. 11, 24, 25. Esaias. 58, 10, 11. Ier. 31, 12.
that the liberal person shall have plenty, and he that waters shall also
have rain: There is that scatters, and is more increased, but he that
spares more then is right, surely comes to poverty. The treasures Prou 10, 2.
of wickedness shall not prosper or profit us any thing at all, but
righteousness delivers from death.

Secondly, this reproves such as have no familiarity with the faithful, but
show themselves strangers unto them. For, whereas al our love should be toward
the Saints, all our delight should be in the Saints, all our care should be of
the Saints; there are many that boast themselves to be of the communion of
Saints, yet make no difference of any company; the most wicked are most welcome
unto them, and the most profane, are most pleasant. No company is so sweet
and so much desired, as the Communion and communication of Ruffians and
scoffers; and on the other side, nothing is more sower and sharp unto them,
then the presence and conference of such as fear God. But we must all know,
that much help or hurt comes to men, by the company which they haunt and
frequent. Hence it is, that the Prophet says, Psalm. 119, 116
Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the Commandments of my God. So the
Apostle Peter admonishes al those that would be delivered from destruction,
Acts 2, 40.
To save themselves from a froward generation. Likewise Moses and Aaron
exhorting the people to beware of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and the Rebellious
rowt of their adherents, says, Numb. 16, 21, 24, 26.
Separate your selves from among this Congregation, depart from the Tents of
these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, least ye perish in all their
sins. The ungodly have their profane meetings, their drunken feasts, their
unlawful pastimes; let us not partake with them in their evil, which is the
right way, and the ready means to quench all holy desires, and good purposes in
us, as fast as the friendship of the faithful is able to kindle them in our
hearts. When shall we see wicked men strive and contend to come into the
Company of the godly? They account nothing so unsavory unto them, nothing so
irksome, nothing so troublesome, albeit they might be helped and benefited by
their blessed meetings. How is it then, that we should desire or affect the
conversation of the ungodly, by whom we can no way be furthered in any good
thing, but be corrupted and defiled in our ways, to the dishonor of God, to
the danger of our souls, and to the perverting and poisoning of others.

Use 3
Lastly, seeing there is a Communion and fellowship of all the blessings of
God bestowed upon us, it is our duty to love one another, and to perform al
duties of love, to the benefit of others, as if we were one man. This the
Prophet teaches, Ier. 32, 38, 39
They shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the wealth of them,
and of their Children after the^. So the Apostle 1 Pet. 2, 17 and 3. 8, and 4,
8. and 5, 5.
Peter charge us, to love brotherly fellowship, saying; Be of one mind, one
suffer with another; love as Brethren. be pitiful, be courteous, submit your
selves one to another, render not evil for evil, neither rebuke for rebuke,
but contrariwise, bless; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should
be heirs of blessing. Whereby it appears, that there are many duties, as it
were branches of this love, as we see, Romans 12, 9, 10, 13. where many
particulars of this unfeigned and fervent love are expressed, and we are
admonished as members of one body, to provide one for another. We are bound to
employ our gifts, not only to our own benefit, but to the benefit of the whole
body: as the eye sees not for it self alone. the hand works for all the
parts, the foot walks for every member. So if we be true and faithful
Christians, we ought to carry this mind, to be ready to do service one to
another. If we have knoledge, it is our duty to teach others; if we have
wisdom, it is our duty to counsel and direct others; if we have the gift of
exhortation, we are to dissuade from Vice, to persuade to Virtue, and to stir
up others to good things. If we have riches and outward blessings, we must give
chearefully, not only of our superfluity, but of our penury and necessity, if
need so require. We have al received some gifts, none is an empty vessel
without liquor, or a dead tree without fruit; God, to make men without excuse,
has bestowed somewhat upon all, Math. 25. 1 Pet. 4, 10.
Some have received five Talents, some two Talents, and some one Talent. Let
every man as he has received the gift, minister the same one to another, as
good disposers of the manifold grace of God. We are joined together in a
spiritual society, and have great need one of another; as the hand cannot say
to the foot, I have no need of thee; so no man can say to any of his
Brethren, I have no need of you. The rich cannot live without the poor, and
contrariwise, the poor cannot continue without the rich. As it is the duty of
such as are poor to labor in their callings, it is the duty of the rich to
relieve them, not to despise them; to comfort them, not to contemn them; to
help them, not to disgrace them. These practices of love are a Christian man's
badge, declaring evidently what Master he serves, and to whom he belongs.
We must show our selves ready to ride and run, to use our Friends and pursse
for the good of others. Hence it is, that the Apostle commends in the Church
of the Thessalonians, not only their love, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 3.
but their labor of love performed with all carfulness and cheerfulness.
Our love therefore must not be idle, but diligent; not standing in word, but in
work; not in profession, but in action.

Moreover, we must by all good means procure the good one of another, and
bear the reproof of a friend that seeks to set our sins before us, and to
bring us into the right way. This is it which the Apostle signifies to the
Galathians, Gal. 4, 12.
Be you as I, for I am even as you, I beseech you Brethren, ye have not hurt me
at all. Whereby he means, that albeit he was compelled to use sharp
reproves (as it were) eating Corasiues and strong Purgations, that thereby he
might stir them up to repentance, and show them from whence they were
fallen, yet his mind was not changed toward them, nor his love turned into
hatred, as if he should say; Think not that my conuincing of your errors, and
reproving of your backsliding from the sincerity of the Gospel, proceeds
from any malice toward you, for I am the same man I was, and therefore look
that your minds be not estrange from me, for I do tender you, even as mine
own self. Seeing therefore a man's friend is all one with himself, one is
bound to seek the good of another, and to bear the reproves of things amiss
with all patience.

Lastly, let our communion work in us a lively feeling, as well of the
prosperous estate, as of the hard condition of our Brethren; either to rejoice
with them, or to lament with them, as occasion is offered. This is the
exhortation of the Apostle to the Romans, Chapt. 12. when he has stirred them
up to love without dissimulation; to service, without slothfulness; to
humility, without disdain; to patience, without revenge; to bless, without
curssing; to distribute, without grudging; to pray, without fainting; he says,
To. 12, 15, 16
Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep: be of like
affection one toward another. This teaches us, that all the godly ought to
have (as it were) the same will and wish: Phil. 3, 16.
they ought to think the same things, to speak the same things, to further
the same things one in another. The profits and disprofits of our Brethren,
we must have in common with them, and it is our duty to account them our own.
We are to mourn for the one, and rejoice for the other, as if it were our own
estate. When any good is befallen unto them, we are to be glad, and to be merry
at the heart, as it had befallen us; and so much the rather, seeing we have our
portion in it. If we see them weakened in their estate, and go backward and not
forward in matters of the World, it ought to be our grief and sorrow:
especially if we see them decline in the best things, and turn aside out of
the way from him that called them in the grace of Christ, wavering and
wandering wide from the truth of the Gospel which once they embraced, we ought
so to take it to heart, and to be swallowed up with heaviness, as if we our
selves had gone backward. This affection is worthy great praise, where it is to
be found. It assures us that we are living and feeling members in the body of
Christ, and have a near conjunction with the other parts. It greatly pleases
God, and has an assured promise of a rich reward, according to the saying of
our Savior, Math. 5, 7.
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. This serves to
reprehend the common practice of common Christians, that live as those that
know not, or regard not this Communion and enterchange of the same blessings
that they have received at the hands of God. These are they that say, God for
us all and every man for himself. These are they that make what benefit they
can of others, but will depart from nothing themselves: who prize men as sheep
and Oxen, and bethink with themselves how much they may make of them, as if
they brought them openly into the Market and set them to sale for what will you
give me? These are they that never esteem, nor make any account of their
brethren, but when they have occasion to use the^, and stand in great need and
necessity of them. These are they, that seek themselves only and their own
good; as for others, they regard them, so long, and so far, as they may get
and gain anything by them, according to the common practice of the world
deciphered and described by the Apostle, Phil. 2, 21.
All seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's. Is it thus in the
parts and members of the natural body? Does the eye see only for it self?
Does it not give direction to hand and foot, and serve to the good of the whole
body? Does the hand labor only for it self and to sustain it self, or does
it not rather work both for it self, and for every member of the body
besides? The foot, does it not likewise walk up and down, and take pains for
the general good and common benefit even of the least part that belongs to
the body? If it be thus in the several members of our body, ought it not much
rather to be so in the mystical body of Christ Jesus? Shall we then make a
Mart or Monopoly of our brethren, and fell them for our own filthy gain and
private advantage? But whereas we ought to rejoice at their good, how many are
there that repine at it, and pine away at the sight of it? And whereas we ought
to be greatly grieved to see them go back in goods, or in goodness; in the
world, or in the word; they are glad to behold their wantes, and are ready to
push them down that begin to fall. These men are not only without piety,
but without humanity: not only void of conscience, but of common Ciuillity,
and are no better then rotten members. Every one would be taken and holden for
a true member of Christ Jesus, but few regard to do the duties of members. The
parts of our bodies delight and rejoice one in another, but many of us that
dwell near together, regard not to see one another in the face, or to converse
and communicate either with other, and yet they would be accounted Christians.
The parts of our body are ready to help and defend one another, Job. 2, 4.
the hand is at hand to be lifted up to save the head; to endanger one member
to shield another, otherwise it were no hand: we will not hazard the least
trifle, for the greatest good of others, and yet we would be accounted
Christians. The parts of our body, 1. Cor. 12, 26
when one is in pain, will not leave it destitute and distressed, but seek by
all means to free it out of trouble; but we are hand-fast in helping the poor
and needy members of the same body with us; nay, such paymentes as are imposed
by Law upon us, are hardly wrung from us; otherwise we could be content to
suffer the poor Servants of God to perish, and yet we would be accounted
Christians.

If God love 2. Cor. 9, 7.
the cheerful giver, how should he then accept of such Guiftes? If we have
this worlds good, 1. John. 3, 17 and 4, 20.
and see our brother have need, and shut our compassion from him, how dwells
the love of God in us? If we say we love God, and hate our brother, are we not
liars against the truth? For how can he that loves not his brother whom he
has seen, love God whom he has not seen? Assuredly we may conclude, that
there is no love of God at all in them that have no eyes of compassion to see
their miseries, no ears of pity to hear their necessities, no hearts of mercy
to mercy to melt and relent at their sorrows, no hands of liberality to supply
their wants. For judgment Iam. 2, 13. and 1 John 1, 6, 7.
without mercy shall fall upon them that will show no mercy: and we shall
never have fellowship with the Father, if we have not fellowship and communion
with his Children. Wherefore (as the Apostle says) Heb. 10, 24, 25.
Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works, not
forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, as the manner of some
is: but let us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because ye see
that the day draws near. Let us be ready to practice these fruits of love
toward others, that we may taste of the Fruits of Gods love toward our selves.
Would we then breefely know what community ought to be among us? Would we
understand how, and in what manner we ought to have all things common? Would
we live as true Friends, and practice true friendship one toward another? The
holy Man Job gives us a good and full direction in these duties, and such a
direction as was sealed up by his own example: Job 31, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 24,
25. and 29, 15, 16.
He restrained not the Poor of their desire, nor caused ehe eyes of the
Widows to fail: he did not eat his Morsels alone, but the fatherless did
partake thereof: he saw not any perrish for want of clothing, or any poor
without covering: he made not Gold his hope, nor said to the Wedge of Gold;
Thou art my confidence: he was the eyes to the Blind, and the Feet to the
Lame: he was a Father unto the Poor, and when he knew not the cause, he sought
it out diligently. Here is a worthy president set before us, and a pure
Glass to look upon, wherein we may see cleerelie into the Communion of
Saints, what it is, and how it is to be practiced. Let us evermore have this as
a Table painted before our eyes, and join with our knowledge obedience,
remembering that God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and
God in him.

18 If he has hurt thee, or owes thee ought, that impute thou unto me.

19 I Paul have written this with mine own hand: I will recompense it, albeit
I do not say to thee, that thou owe moreover unto me, even thine own
self.


The order of the words.
HItherto we have spoken of the reason in the former Verse. Now we come to the
remoouing of another Objection, which the Apostle preuenteth in these two
Verses, which seemed to stand in his way, and hinder the obtaining of his
request. Objection
For Philemon might have said; Thou intreatest me for a Servant that has been
injurious and hurtful unto me, wasting and misspending my goods, and
hindering much mine outward estate, therefore I must entreat thee to give me
leave to punnish him according to his deseruings, and to recover as I can my
damage inferred by him. How then can I receive him that has hurt me, and
robbed me, and is in my debt? Answer:
To this Objection of Philemon, let us consider the answer of Paul, which he
does make two ways; first, by a concession; then by a correction: as we saw
before in remoouing the former Objections. By concessions, or by way of
granting, impute it to me, require it at my hands, and lay it upon my
accounts. This first answer, is confirmed and strengthened by an humain
testimony, [ I Paul have written it with mine own hand] I have not set to my
mark, and used the hand of another. Objection.
This Argument also has the force of another secret Objection, for Philemon
might have said; Thou promisest fair, and undertake much, thou offerest thy
self to undergo the debt in word only, but I require some better assurance,
and some stronger evidence. Answer.
To this Paul answers; If thou refuse to take my bare word and naked
promise, thou shall have more. For behold, I do not request it without script
or scrole, I have written it with mine own hand: take this as a Bill or
Obligation of my handwriting, that I will well and truly satisfy, content,
and pay, or cause thee to be well and truly satisfied, contented, and paid
whatsoever he owes thee. Lo, I bind my self firmly unto thee by these
presents, which shall be thy warrant, that the debt shall be fully and wholly
discharged, without any fraud or delay. The reason may be thus concluded: If
thou have a Bill or Band of my hand to show for his debt, then doubt not of the
payment of it: But thou have a Bill or Band of my hand, Therefore doubt not of
the payment of it.


The correction of his former offer to satisfy the debt, follows, which is
the second part of the answer; [ Albeit, thou owe to me thy self.] As if he
should say; that which I have promised to discharge, I am ready to perform, I
will pay thee every penny. And yet why do I say, I will pay thee? Forasmuch
as thou art in my debt, and owe more to me, then he does to thee: he owes
thee a little Silver, but thou owe me thine own Soul. Seeing thou art so
much indebted unto me, and that I may justly claim from thee and challenge at
thy hands thine own Flesh, which art in a special regard bound unto me in
all that thou have, it is no great matter for thee to remit a little Money, or
Money-worth, that thou may otherwise require from him. This is amplified by
an Ironicall passing over of the matter, and yet by a certain Rhetorical
Elegancy he utters it, and calls Philemon to acknowledge it. He seems to
be willing to forget it, and yet he would have him to remember it. A like
speech unto this the Apostle uses. 2 Corinthians. 9. 4. I have sent the Brethren
that ye may be ready: least if they of Macedonia come unto me and find you
unprepared, we (that we may not say, you) should be ashamed in this my constant
boasting. Where he shows, that having boasted among the Brethren of the
forwardness of the Corinthians, if they should be found unprepared, he will
not say that themselves should be ashamed, but he means that they should
consider of it, and confess it. This reuocation or denying, Which the
Rhetoricians call Apophasis.
to express in word, that which he was willing another should understand, may
be thus concluded in form of an Argument; If the case stand thus between thee
and me, that thou owe unto me thy very self: Then much more thou may
forgive thy Servant this debt for my sake. But the case stands thus between
thee and me, Therefore thou may forgive him for my sake.


The meaning of the words.
Thus much concerning the order of these two Verses in this division: wherein
we see, how in answering he argues, and in conuincing he replyeth and
proceeds to defend his cause. Now let us see the meaning of the words, so far
as they require opening and Interpretation. First, when he says, [ If he has
hurt thee, or owe thee ought.] These general words may be applied to any
wrong, or damage, or In-iustice; signifying thereby, the Theft that Onesimus
had committed, but mitigating it by a more gentle term. For hereby we may
gather, that he had robbed his Master, as the common fashion and usual manner
of those is that run away. Such as are determined to go from their Masters,
and to betake themselves to their heels, will not go away empty, but purloyne
what they can: and yet the Apostle diminishes the envy of the crime, choosing
to use such words as either betoken a small fault, or contain no fault at all.

Hence it is that he says, [ If he owe thee any thing.] For there was not any
civil contract or bargain between them, in as much as there could be no such
buying, or selling, or changing between the Master and his Servant, as the
condition of Servants was in those times, whereof we have spoken before.
Objection.
Wherefore we see that they are deceived that think it cannot be gathered out
of this place, or from this Epistle, that the Servant had robbed his Master,
both because he is not directly charged with theft, and because the Apostle
only speaks by supposition, [ If he have hurt thee.] Answer.
I answer, that he does not indeed name and express any robbing or rifling
of his Masters House; yet we must consider, how he makes the least of every
thing, in regard of his repentance which had wiped away the stain thereof. For
whereas he had been hurtful to his Master, Paul calls it [ Unprofitable:]
whereas he had played the Runna-gate, Paul calls it a departing away: so in
this place, whereas he had pilferred and purloyned his Masters goods, Paul
calls it an hurting, which is a less fault, or a debt, which is no fault.
Seeing then, throughout this Epistle the Apostles drift is, by expressing a
little to understand more; and by naming a small offense, to understand a
greater; we are not to doubt, but his meaning in these words, is to tax him
of that theft which he had committed. Neither is it any thing to the present
purpose, that it is objected, that the Apostle does not plainly and directly
avouch, that he had any way hurt his Master, because he utters nothing
simply, but by way of supposition; [ If he have hurt thee] as if he spoke by
hearsay, and knew not the certainetie of that which he had heard: For no
doubt he knew the whole truth of the matter by Onesimus, who having truly
repented, had particularly acknowledged and confessed the wickedness of his
heart, and the unrighteousness of his hands in defrauding of his Master. He
Prou. 28, 13.
that hides his sins cannot prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes
them, shall find mercy. Whosoever will obtain pardon, must make confession.
So long as sin is vnacknowledged, so long it is unpardoned. Seeing therefore
he had received remission, we cannot immagine, but that before there went
confession, and an unfolding of the whole matter from the beginning to the
ending; so that the Apostle would not, nor could not speak waueringly and
doubtfully of that, whereof he was fully instructed, and perfectly informed
from point to point. Besides, the conjunction [ If] is not condicionall in this
place, but Illatiue, and is not spoken by supposition, but rather by way of
confession or concession. True it is, sometimes it is condicionallie; directly
affirming, and plainly denying nothing. As Job 31. Job 31, 9, 13 19. Gene. 18,
24, 26, 28, 30, 31, 32.
If my heart has been deceived by a Woman, or if I have laid wait at the
door of my Neighbor: if I did contemn the judgment of my Servant: if I have
seen any perrish for want of clothing. Thus it is taken Genesis 18. 24. If there
be fifty righteous within the City, I will spare all the place for their
sakes. And thus it is taken most commonly throughout the Scriptures, in more
then an hundred places, which are all to be understood condicionallie, not
affirmatively.

Again, sometimes the word is to be taken as a particle, not only conuecting
and concluding, but affirming, and knitting together that which is affirmed, as
in many places of the 8. chapt. to the Romans, Romans 8, 17, 31.
If we be Children, then are we also heirs: if God be on our side, who can be
against us: as if he should say; seeing we are Children, seeing God is on our
side. So the Apostle exhorts the Colossians, Col. 3, 1.
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above. Where he
does not speak uncertainly, but conclude peremptorily, that they ought
seriously to enter into the Meditation of the heavenly life, considering they
had been instructed in the resurrection of Christ. Thus Peter speaks in his
second Epistle, 2 Pet. 2, 4 and 1 Pet. 4, 17, 18
If God spared not the Angels that had sinned, that is; seeing he spared them
not. And thus is the word taken (to go no farther) in the words immediately
going before, in this Epistle to Philemon, [ If thou account our things common,
receive him as my self.] Where the meaning is, seeing all things between us
are common as among friends, do not thou stand or stick at the entertaining of
him. So likewise when he says, [ If he has hurt thee] it is a granting of
the crime, and as it were a confessing of the action whereof he might be
charged, as if he had said; seeing the case is so indeed, discharge him, and
account me as thy debtor. Thus much for the clearing of the Interpretation of
the first words, and the answering of the objections against it. It follows [
That impute to me] where he takes the debt or wrong offered by Onesimus upon
himself, and offers himself to be bound in a band for him, and to become
his pledge or surety. When he says [ I have written it with mine own hand] it
is the confirmation of his promise by a civil Instrument, and by subscribing
his name unto it. Lastly, when he adds, [ Albeit, I do not say to thee that
thou owe to me even thine own self,] we must understand, that the debt
which the apostle urges as due unto him from Philemon, is in respect of his
conversion and winning unto Christ. Wherein he alludeth to such as being
conquered in battle, are reserved alive to them that have overcome them, and
made them their Servants, in saving them from death, in keeping them from the
sword, and in preserving them from destruction. Thus then the Apostle argues;
I being a Captain under Jesus Christ, to win him a people from the bondage of
sin and Satan, have among many other, won thee and thine whole Family, and
have taken you away as it were Captive, delivering you in Christ Jesus from
eternal misery; and therefore thou owe me much more then thy Servant can owe
thee, even thine own self, and whatsoever is dearest unto thee: for thou have
been by my means rescued and recovered from the bondage of Satan, and the
dominion of death, and have been brought to the freedom and liberty of the
Sons of God. Thus we see, how the Spirit leaves no starting hole for Philemon
to shake and shift off this duty, to the end it might be a perpetual rule to
the Church in the like case, without all exception. As if the Apostle should
have said; The sum and substance of the words in this division.
If thou object, that thy loss and detriment received by Onesimus, is more
then thou may bear and can forgive: I answer thee, that thou shall not
thereby be hindered, for I thy friend Paul will answer thee whatsoever he is
indebted and endangered unto thee, even to the uttermost mite thou cast demand.
And that thou should not doubt of mine offer; behold, this my handwriting
shall be thy warrant and assurance, which I have subscribed with mine own
hand: albeit, I may by my right that I have in thee (pulling thee and thy
Family out of the Captivity of Satan, the slavery of sin, and the bondage of
hell) claim from thee more then thou can from Onesimus: for thou owe to me
indeed and in truth, not a part of thy goods and possessions, but thine own
self, even thy Soul and Body, which are by my Ministry preserved to
everlasting life: and thou can not sufficiently esteem of thy Redemption and
Salvation effected and merited by Christ, but manifested, applied, and
warranted unto thee by my preaching, and the graces of God bestowed upon me for
the effectual conversion of the elect.

Observations offered unto us in these words.
Thus we have seen the order of the words, and have learned the meaning of
them. It remains according to the manner and Method before propounded, to
gather from hence such observations as are intimated unto us, and might be
largely handled of us. First of all, observe with me, that the Apostle
returns here to a consideration of that which might be objected: so that we
see it is the duty of the Ministers, not only barely to teach the truth, but
to remove doubts, to answer Objections, to put away Impedimentes, and to
clear al difficulties that may stick in the minds of the hearers, and hinder
the believing and embracing of the truth delivered unto them. For howsoever our
care be to teach plainly and evidently, yet the carnal reason of a natural
man ministers many cauilles and questions, whereby diverse scruples remain in
the hearts of the people, as dangerous stumbling blocks to turn them out of
the right way, and to stay their course from running with a right foot in the
paths of righteousness. Wherefore it stands us upon, to consider diligently,
what may be alleged against the truth that is taught by us, and to make a
plain answer unto the same. This we see in every Epistle practiced by the
Apostle. When he had taught free justification Romans 3, 20. 21, 22, 27, 28, 31.
by faith apprehending Christ without the works of the Law, the Jews might
have objected; If the law do not justify, then it was given in vain, it is
abolished, it serves to no purpose. He knew this would be concluded, and
therefore he preuenteth it; saying, Do we then make the Law of none effect
through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law. And afterward, Romans 5.
20. with Chap. 6. 1, 2.
having taught that where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more, if he
had rawly and barely left the matter thus propounded, a man might have
objected; If this be true, that there grace abounds where sin has
abounded, then sin seems to be the cause of Gods glory, and then why do we
not sin fully and freely, that thereby the glory of God may be magnified?
Wherefore he vnloseth this knot in the words and chapter immediately following,
What shall we say then? Shall we continue still in sin that grace may abound?
God forbid: How shall we that are dead to sin, live yet therein? Likewise to
the same purpose he speaks again, for having proved that sin shall not
have dominion over us, Romans 6, 14, 15.
because we are not under the law, but under grace, considering with himself,
that profane men might abuse the grace and liberty of the Gospel to commit
sin with greediness, he replieth, What then? shall we sin, because we are
not under the law, but under grace? God forbid, etc. The like we see practiced
in other places: When he has taught the Ephesians to love their Wives as
their own bodies, yea even as Christ loved the Church, and adds, that this
Ephe. 5, 32.
is a great secret or mystery: a man might ask, do you speak this of the love
that ought to be between the Husband and the Wife, or of the love that is
between Christ and his Church? he answeareth, I speak concerning Christ, and
concerning the Church. In like manner delivering a rule to the Church, that
Widows should be chosen to attend upon the sick and those that were
diseased, he would have none under threescore years of age set a part to this
Office, he adds, 1. Tim. 5, 9, 11.
But refuse the younger Widows, for when they have begun to wax wanton
against Christ, they will marry, having damnation: The Apostle knowing that
these words might have been wrested wrongfully and applied contrary to his
meaning, (for one might have said, what, have they damnation for marrying? Is
marriage the cause of damnation?) He rests not so, but answeareth the point,
they have damnation for denying and breaking their first faith. This wisdom
is to be put in practice of all the Ministers of Gods word, we must be able
not only to teach, but to convince, and to foresee what may be objected
against that which we have delivered. So then the Ministers must be men of
knowledge, thoroughly furnished to convince the adversaries, and replenished
with store, both new and old, to overthrow all spirits of contradiction that
seek to subvert and destroy the faith of many. And it belongs to the people
to resort and repair to their Ministers thus quallified, for resolution of
doubts wherewith they are troubled, Mal. 2, 7. Math. 2, 4.
considering with themselves that the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and
that the people are to seek the law at their mouths, because they are the
Messengers of the Lord of Hoastes.

Secondly, we see again in the first words of hurting and owing, that there
is used a certain mitigation. For whereas he might have called him a Thief
and Runnagate, he expresses them under much milder names, calling his robbing
and flying away, an hurting, and debt; declaring thereby, how gentle and easy
an hand, how loving and charitable an heart, we ought to bear, toward the
penitent. We are not to aggrauate the slippes and falls, nor augment the sins
and offenses of our brethren, nor to urge them and set them out in their
colors to the uttermost, nor to follow them with extremity, but it is our duty
to deal mercifully with such sinners as are unfeignedly and truly turned unto
God, Three rules to be observed to move us to deal mercifully toward the
penitent.
remembering always these three things. First, that we are subject to the like
sins, and may be overtaken with the same offenses, through the tentations of
Satan, and the corruptions of our own nature. Hence it is, that the Apostle
admonishes us, Gal. 6, 1.
to restore such as have fallen, even with the spirit of meekness, considering
also our selves least we also be tempted. Secondly, that as we are subject to
fall, so we have offended as greatly against God as they, if not in the same
kind and after the same manner; so that if he should enter into judgment with
us, who could stand in his presence, or answer him one of a thousand? This is
it which Christ Jesus laid to the charge of the proud Pharisees, when they
brought before him the woman taken in adultery, he said unto them, John. 8, 7,
^.
Let him that is among you without sin, cast the first stone at her: who,
when they heard it, being accused of their own consciences, went out one by
one, beginning at the eldest even to the last. Thirdly, that we do desire and
obtain fogiuenesse of our sins upon this condition, that we forgive others,
when we are taught to say; Mcth. 6, 12, 14.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
Wherefore, let us be of a gentle mind and placable nature, easy to be
entreated, ready to be persuaded, willing to be reconciled, and forward to
forgive all injuries and wrongs offered unto us: without which affection al
our prayers to God, and all the parts of his worship, are made void and nothing
worth unto us. Hence it is, that we are moved, when we have brought our gift
to the Altar, then and there remembering Math. 5, 23, 24.
that our brother has ought against us, to depart and leave our offering
until we be reconciled unto him. Of this point we have spoken before: yet the
great necessity of it, and the present use of the Lords supper, which is a
Sacrament of love and unity, requires the renewing of it; and therefore,
unless it be to those that are dead-hearted and heavy eared, that will neither
hear, nor mark, nor understand, nor obey, it cannot but work some grace and
conscience in them that have their ears opened, boared and prepared.

Thirdly, note the singular love and exceeding compassion in the Apostle,
offering himself to become surety; yea, to enter into bands for so base a
servant as had stolen away his Masters goods, and ran away for fear of
punishment. Herein is great love; and herein Christ Jesus testifies his love
to his Church, 2. Cor. 5, 21
in that he became sin for us, and undertook to bear the burden of man's
wickedness and Gods wrath: even wickedness most heinous, and wrath most
horrible. Herein is unspeakable love, he offered himself as a pawn and
pledge for us miserable sinners and bankrout persons, not able to pay one penny
of that great debt that we owe unto him.

Fourthly, we may learn that the imputation of another man's debt, may stand
with the law of God and man, so that by all law divine and human he is
reputed and holden a debtor, that offers and makes himself surety for
another, so that he is justly charged to be the debtor and the other man for
whom he becomes surety is discharged and freed from the debt: yea, the
satisfaction of another is imputed to the debtor, even as his debt is imputed
to the surety. This being cleerc and evident in all Law, and by all reason,
why should it seem a maruailous, or rather a monstrous thing in the eyes and
ears of our adversaries, either that our sins should be imputed to Christ
our mediator, or that his sanctification and justice should be imputed to us,
and that we are not justified by inherent righteousness, but by the imputed
righteousness of Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 30. Phil. 3, 9.
Who is made unto us of God to be our righteousness, to the end that we might
be found in him, not having our own righteousness which is of the law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ. This ought not to seem strange or
impossible to us, seeing he is no less just and righteous, to whom the justice
and righteousness of another is imputed, then that person is who has an
inherent righteousness of his own within him: as it skilleth not who paieth
the debt, so it be discharged, in as much as the debtor is as well freed when
another has satisfied the creditor, as if himself had done it. Nay he is more
just and righteous that has Christ's righteousness made his, then if he had
an inherent righteousness of his own, albeit it were perfect and complete,
full and absolute, without all stain and imperfection. For Christ's imputed
righteousness is more worth and worthy then all the inherent righteousness
that is in men and Angels: yea that imputed righteousness of Christ is more
accepted and respected of God, then all the righteousness that is found in the
Angels themselves: and when we shall live with Christ our head in the Heavens,
albeit we shall have perfect righteousness inherenr in us, and be like the
Angels which always enjoy the presence of God, and behold the beauty of his
face, yet even then we shall appear more glorious, gracious, and accepted of
God, through that righteousness of Christ imputed unto us (which we shall
never loose nor put off, no not when we shall be in immortallity) then for this
inherent sanctification when it is at the highest top and in the greatest
perfection, without any want or weakness.

Fifthly, note also the Ironicall preterition or passing by that which he would
have carefully considered, and wisely imprinted in the mind of Philemon, [ I
say not that thou owe to me thy self.] This he does to avoid all suspicion
of arrogance and ambition, or least he should seem proud and haughty, and
challenge overmuch to himself; he lesseneth and diminishes the mattter
greatly, whereas he might have uttered and signified more then he speaks, so
that he leaves the rest to Philemons secret and serious consideration. This
teaches us to avoid all arrogant boasting, and to beware of vain vaunting of
our selves above that which is meet and ought to be in us. Heereunto the
Apostle oftentimes exhorts us, Gal. 5, 26.
Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another. And in another place, Phil. 2, 2, 3.
Be of one accord and of one judgment, that nothing be done through contention
or vaineglory, but that in meekness of mind every man esteem other better
then himself. We are naturally given to think well of our selves, and to
desire to be magnified of others above that which is in us; whereas we ought to
humble and abase our selves, that God may with his gracious hand lift us up.

Lastly, observe with me in the last words the Metaphor used by the Apostle,
witnessing and warning him that he owed to him his own self; as if he had
been taken by him in wars, by the law whereof he was as his own. This
serves to teach us, that all men are by nature captives to sin and prisoners
to Satan, being delivered and freed from the subjection and slavery of them.
This our Savior teaches, John. 8, 34, 36.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that whosoever commits sin is the servant
of sin: if the son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. To this
purpose the Apostle Paul speaks, Romans 6, 17. 18.
Know ye not that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his
servants, ye are to whom ye obey: whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness: but God be thanked, that ye have been the
servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart unto the form of the
Doctrine whereunto ye were delivered: being then made free from sin ye are made
the servants of Righteousness. Where the Apostle shows, that there are two
sorts of Servants; some are Servants to sin; other, are Servants to
righteousness: and whosoever is Servant to one, cannot be Servant to the
other; they are so opposite and contrary the one to the other, that no man can
serve these two Masters. This is it which the Apostle John handles; He that 1
John 3, 8.
commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning:
for this purpose was made manifest that Son of God, that he might loose the
works of the Devil. Let us all suffer the Ministers of the Gospel to take us
out of the hands of Satan, and to subdue us to the Kingdom of Christ, by the
two-edged Sword that goes out of his mouth. Thus much may suffice for the
general observations which arise out of the words, and might be stood upon at
large; but I have only breefelie pointed them out. Now let us particularly lay
open such doctrins as are more especially aimed at in these words.

[ If he has hurt thee, or owes thee ought, etc.] In the former verse, we
have heard how the Apostle has reasoned on this manner with Philemon, [ If our
things be common, thou ought to receive him to favor, whom I have so great
cause to fauour] urging a community and fellowship in all Gods blessings. But
in this verse he acknowledges a debt to Philemon from Onesimus, and does take
it upon himself to answer it. Doctrine 1. The communion of the Saints does
not take away the possession and interest that is in the things of this life.
We learn from hence, that the communion which is among the faithful Saints,
does not take away the private possession, dominion, distinction, and interest
in the things of this life. Albeit the things belonging to this temporal life,
be in some respect common, yet in another respect they are private. They are
common touching use, they are private touching possession. This appears in
the practice of the Fathers that lived after the flood; as Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Job, David, and diverse others; who albeit they willingly imparted to
their Brethren the blessings of God bestowed upon them, yet they had their
special houses of abode, inheritances of lands, possessions of goods, Flocks
of Sheep, herds of Cattle, and distinction of Servants. Mark this in the
order, that God took with his own people, when he had subdued their Enemies,
and brought them into the Land, Number. 32. and 34.
every Tribe had his several inheritance, and every Family in the Tribe, had
his peculiar possession divided unto him by lot, to avoid all Controversy and
contention among them. When Naboth was urged by Ahab to pass his Vineyard to
him, either by sale or by exchange, he answered; 1 King. 21, 3.
The Lord keep me from giving the Inheritance of my Fathers unto thee. This is
it which Solomon speaks in the Proverbs, Pr^ 5, 15, 16 17.
Drink the Water of thy Cesterne, and of the Rivers of Waters in the streets,
but let them be thine, even thine only, and not the Strangers with thee. He
teaches the faithful to live of their own labors, and to be helpefull to
the godly that want. Great were the wants and miseries of the poor Saints of
God, (as we see in the Acts of the Apostles) so that many sold their
possessions to relieve the distressed Members of the Church: yet the Apostle
Peter says to Annanias, who had kept back a part of the price of that he had
sold; Acts 5, 4.
Whilst it remained, appertained it not unto thee? And after it was sold, was
it not in thine own power? How is it that thou have conceived this thing in
thine heart? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. By which words it is
manifest, that albeit the Saints accounted nothing their own, but had all
things common among themselves, yet they always retained a several right and
propriety in those things that they possessed.

Reason 1.
This truth will yet further and better appear unto us, if we enter into the
consideration of the Reasons that serve to strengthen it. First, it is
confirmed by the Commandments of God, and by the fourth petition of the Lords
Prayer. The Exodus 20, 15
eight Commandment forbids us to steal away our Neighbors goods, and to
do him the least hurt therein. The tenth commandment Exodus 20, 17.
restrains the inward lusts and motions that arise in our minds, and
condemns the coveting of his house, of his wife, of his servant, of his ox,
of his ass, or of any thing that belongs unto him. If then, God commands
the preservation of every man's goods, and forbids all injuries to be offered
unto them; it stands us upon to acknowledge a right and interest that every
one has in earthly things given unto him. Likewise, our Savior Christ
teaches us Mat. 6, 11.
daily to ask our daily bread, so that no man ought to desire that which is
another bread, but every one to know his own, what God has given him, and
what he has given to others. If then there be bread that is ours, then also
there is bread that is not ours. And if somewhat be ours, and somewhat not
ours; it follows that every one has an interest in his own goods, and
cannot lay hold on another man's.

Reason 2.
Secondly, the inuading of other men's inheritances, and the incroaching upon
their private possessions, is the fruit either of a confused Anarchy, or of a
loose government, and both of them are contrary to that ordinance which God
establishes, and the order that he requires. This we see in the latter end of
the book of Judges, where it is recorded, and oftentimes repeated, that Judge.
17, 6, and 18. 1. and 19 1. and 21, 25.
In those days, there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was
good in his own eyes. And what I pray you was that? Even that which was stark
naught: they brake out into open outrages; riots, usurpations, oppressions, and
community of women. All things were out of course, no man ordered his life
aright, every man followed his own lusts. But God is a God of order, and not
of confusion, 1. Cor, 14, 33, 40.
as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 14 God is not the author of confusion, but of
peace, as we see in all the Churches of the Saints: let all things be done
honestly and in order. But if every man may enter upon the labors of other
men, and take to himself what he pleases, it would bring as great a confusion
of families and common wealths, Genesis 11, 8.
as once there was of tongues when one did not understand another, so that they
were constrained to break off the work they had begun.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, every one has a proper and peculiar possession, his own servants to
order, his own ground to till, his own fields to husband, his own family to
govern, and his own domestical affairs to manage, that he may provide
things honest in the sight of God, that he may rejoice in the labor of his
own hands, and be thankful to the father and giver of all good things. It
is a rule taught by nature, approved by experience, strengthened by custom,
Aristot. polit. lib. 2. Cap. 2.
and established by the founders of Cities and Kingdoms, that whatsoever is
cared for of all, is cared for of none as it ought to be, but is neglected of
all. This appears in every Town and incorporation, in every house and
congregation. If a matter be committed to many servants to be dispatched, it is
commonly either altogether left undone, or done negligently, and worse then if
it had been assigned to one. I have heard it delivered as a proverb, that he
which has one man, is sure of a man, he that has two men, has but half a
man; and he that keeps three, has none at all. One looks upon another, and
leaves the work for his fellows, thinking with himself that albeit he
neglect the doing of it, yet there are two others to finish it: and so among
them all, the business of the Master lies undone. We see this in mending of
high ways, which because it is to be done by a common hand, and by a general
agreement of many together, is generally posted over from one to another, and
commonly left off from year to year. Mark this moreover in the provision for
the poor, who ought to be charitably rel^ued by the laws of God and man: yet
because the burden lies upon the shoulders of all, all men are ready to shake
it off from them, and pinch courtesy who shall begin. But when every one
knows his own, it increases care, and doubleth diligence in him, he
rejoices with his family in the blessings of God, and learneth to be a good
Steward in the use of them, disposing of them to the glory of the giver, and to
the comfort of the receiver. This it which Solomon teaches, Chap. 5. of the
Proverbs, Prou. 5, 15, 18. 19.
Let thy fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the wife of thy youth, let her
be as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe: let her breasts satisfy thee at all
times, and delight in her continually. So then, the distinction of dominion and
possession, when every one knows his own and what is not his own, makes
men careful to look unto them. Wherefore seeing God is the author of
propriety, the hater of confusion, and the commander and appointer of every man
his several task and labor; it follows, that the community of the Saints
does not destroy the propriety of substance, but every man keeps the title
and tenor of his own goods, which no other can challenge to himself.

Use 1.
As we have seen the reasons that confirm this Doctrine, so let us see the
uses that instruct us in many profitable points tending to edification. First
of all, this confuteth and conuinceth the detestable and damnable sect of the
Anabaptists, who deny to men any property in any thing, but would have all
things common. True it is, among faithful friends all things are common (as
we have already proved and confessed) so that as we have one father, so we
have one fraternity, and are of one family. Hence it is, that Tertullian in his
Apology teaches, Tertul. in Apologet.
that among Christians all things were common, except men's wives. What then?
Were these first Christians, Anabaptists? Or are these Anabaptists like these
first Christians? No, in no wise. They allege indeed the example and practice
of the primitive church, but it does not no way favor their opinion, nor
countenance any such Communion, as these Heretics would bring in amongs us.
Objection 1.
But they object that all that believed were in one place, and had all things
common; yea, they accounted nothing to be their own. Answer.
I answer, that these words are not to be understood, as though they had
forsaken their own houses, and lived together, in public, and in common, in
the same house, as it were in the celles and Cloisters of Monks; but as it
follows in the next words, Acts. 2, 46.
They continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from
house to house; did eat their meat together with gladness and singleness of
heart. If this be true, let the Anabaptists (a new sect of Monks) answer, at
whose houses this was done? Was this meeting and eating of their meat in the
houses of the Infidels, or of the believers? I think no man is so sottish, to
say it was in the houses of the unbelievers, who would not receive them to
house, nor give them any entertainment among them, seeing they hated them and
their profession to the death. Wherefore it must of necessity follow, that
these assemblies were in the houses of such as were faithful. If then the
faithful Christians had their houses, in which they met together, then they
did not at all sell nor forsake their houses and dwellings, nor coop up
themselves as is it were in Monasteries or Hermitages from the society of men.
Objection 2.
Secondly, whereas they object, Chap. 4. Acts. 4, 34, 35.
As many as were possessors of Lands sold them, and brought the price of the
things that were sold, and laid it down at the Apostles feet: Answer.
It is not so to be understood, as if they had cast away all care of their
household affairs, and possessed nothing in private afterward. For this was
done by some of the richer and wealthier sort, who were not compelled to sell,
neither can it be gathered that they sold all. Nay it appears throughout this
book of the Acts, that many after this fact possessed houses of their own.
The Evangelist Luke notes, that when Peter the Apostle was brought out of
prison by the Ministry of the Angel that was sent to deliver him, Acts. 12, 12.
As he considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary, the mother of John,
where many were gathered together and prayed. From whence I pray you, had this
woman this house? If all Christians sold their inheritances and proper houses?
So then, the communion of goods that was among the first Christians, was
nothing but a sale of part of their possessions to succor the poor Saints,
least being constrained through Famine, and left destitute of the help of the
Brethren, they should turn back again to the Jewish Religion; and therefore
it is said, that distribution was made of those things that were sold; not
equally, or confusedly, Acts 4, 35.
But according as every one had need: so that he that had the greater charge,
had the greater allowance, and he that had the less Family, had the less
maintenance. Tiue it is, it is said; Acts 4, 32. and 2, 44.
The multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one Soul,
neither any of them atcounted any thing of that which he possessed was his
own, but they had all things common. But from hence we may rightly gather,
that every man had special interest in his own goods. For if they had
possessed nothing as their own, and that the community among them had
destroyed the property that rested and remained with the^, what is this that he
says; any thing of that which he possessed was his own? Whereby we see, that
as yet they continued owners and possessours of their goods, as they did
before: but they so possessed them, that they were content to employ them no
less to the use of others, then to the benefit of themselves; according to the
precept of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7, 30, 31.
That they which buy, be as though they possessed not: and they that use this
World, be as though they used it not, because the fashion of this world goes
away. Objection 3.
But be it, that the Apostles had instituted such a communion as these imagine,
in this Church at Jerusalem: and let us grant, that among them there was no
distinction or property retained: Answer.
yet it cannot be proved, that the same was required of all Christians, or that
it was unlawful for them to keep that portion of earthly blessing befallen
unto them. We heard before what Peter said to Annanias; Acts 5, 3, 4.
Why has Satan filled thy heart that thou should lie unto the Holy Ghost,
and keep away part of the price of the possession? Whilst it remained,
appertained it not unto thee? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? How is it that thou have conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou have
not lied unto men, but unto God. How could Peter speak this, or with what
warrant could he deliver it, if all Christians had been enjoined to sell their
possessions, and to renounce their Title and interest in them, to live in
common one with another? Does he not say, that the possession might have been
kept and unsold? And when State was delivered, does he not affirm, that the
Money that he had received was in his own power? Objection.
If any ask, wherefore then is he so sharply reproved, and severely
punished? Answer.
I answer, because he supposed he could deceive the Holy Ghost, and so kept
back a part of the price, and yet pretended to bring the whole sum unto the
Apostles. His sin therefore was lying, fraud, and deceit. So then the
Anabaptists are plainly convinced, and a lawful propriety of goods is
established. This we read farther in other places of this Book, that the
Christians held the possession of their houses and goods as their own. There
was a certain Woman, a Disciple, Acts 9, 36.
named Tabitha; she was full of good works and Alms which she did, and made
many Coats and Garments which she gave to the poor.

In the next Chapter, among many Christian virtues, Cornelius the Captain is
commended, to Acts 10, 2.
Be a devout man, and one that feared God withal his Household, which gave much
Alms to the people, and praised God continually. In the eleauenth Chapter we
see, that after Agabus had signified by the Spirit, that there should be a
great Famine throughout all the World; Acts 11, 29.
The Disciples, every Man according to his ability, purposed to send succor
unto the Brethren which dwelt in Judea. Mark here that he says; Every man
according to his ability; for what ability could any have, if no man did hold
any thing as his own? Or what difference could there be between one another?
In like manner, we heard before, Acts 11, 12.
of the house of Mary the Mother of John, where many were assembled: and we
read of the house of Acts 9, 43. and 10, 6.
Simon the Tanner where Peter lodged, and continued for the space of many
days: he was a true Christian, and yet he kept his house after his conversion
to the Faith of the Gospel. In the 16. Chapter, Lydia a seller of Purple,
having her heart opened, and being baptized, said; Acts 16, 15.
If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into mine House, and
abide there: and she constrained them. She does not say; Sell my House, but
enter into my House, which she so possessed, as that she communicated it also
to the Apostles. In the twentieth Chapter the Apostle Paul does glory before
the Elders of Ephesus, saying; Acts 20, 33
I have coueted no Man's Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel. What reason can be
rendered of this saying; if no Christian might lawfully retain the possession
and propriety of Gold or Silver? In the 21. Chapter it is said; that Acts 21,
8.
Paul and they that were with him, entered into the House of Phillip the
Evangelist, whtch was one of the seven Deacons, and abode with him. If nothing
ought in private to be possessed, why had he not sold his house? How dares he
retain and reserve any thing to himself? Wherefore is he not reproved of the
Apostle, and the rest of the Brethren, for breaking the supposed ordinance that
they had planted and appointed in all Churches. But of this, Upon Number. 21, 21.
I have spoken elsewhere; Muscul. upon Math. Chap. 6.
and others discuss and dispute this point at large, showing that God has
settled this order to be observed in the Church, that every one govern aright
his own house, and distribute to the necessities of the Saints. The Apostle
speaks to this purpose; 1 Timothy 5, 4.
If any Widow have Children or Nephews, let them learn first to show
godliness toward their own house, and to recompense their Kindred, for that
is an honest thing, and acceptable before GOD. And afterward, 1 Timothy 5, 8.
If there be any that provides not for his own; and namely for them of his
Household, he denies the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel. Likewise writing
to the Thessalonians, he says in the first Epistle, chapt. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4, to
11.
We beseech you brethren, that ye en^rease more and more, and that ye study to
be quiet, and to meddle with your own business, and to work with your own
hands, as we commanded you. And in his second Epistle, Chapter 3. 2 Thessalonians. 3,
10, 11, 12.
When we were with you, this we warned you off, that if there were any which
would not work, that he should not eat: for we heard that there are some
which walk among you inordinatelie, and work not at all, but are
Busybodies: therefore them that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own Bread, etc.
Thus then it evidently appears, that the Annabaptists are deceived, which go
about to bring in such a communion, or rather confusion among men, as neither
Christ has commanded, nor the Apostles have instituted, nor experience has
approved, nor any Christians have practiced, nor the example of the Church at
Jerusalem has warranted. To this Pestilent and poisoned Sect of detestable
Heretics, we may join as Cozin-Germans, those mischievous and miserable
Malcontents, that hold in word the lawfulness of private possession, but
follow in practice the unlawfulness of more then an Anabaptisticall communion.

These are they that bring discontent to see others enjoy more then themselves,
endeavor by unlawful and ungodly actions to bring in an equality of all
things; pulling down Hedges, filling up of Ditches, burning of Houses,
remoouing of Marks, breaking down Fences, digging down Enclosures, dispaling
and disparking the bounds of Lands, and laying all things common, (as they
did in the Insurrection of In the reign of Richard the second.
Wat Tyler, Jack Straw, and many others) which we have seen or heard done in
our days; yea, many idle and disordered people, hoped and looked for a
commotion in the latter days of our late Sovereign. For as Esau hating his
Brother, and thirsting after the murder of him, thought in his mind; Genesis 27,
41.
The days of mourning for my Father will come shortly, then will I slay my
Brother Jacob: so these ryotus routs of Rebels, intending to fish in troubled
waters, and minding to make a prey of the richer sort, said among themselves;
The days of mourning for Queen Elizabeth will come shortly; then we shall have
enough, then we shall make the Chur^es pay for all, then we will want nothing
that is to be had. Let us take heed of such ungracious person as begin a
conspiracy, and lay the foundation of an Insurrection. Though they call us to
come with them, and would have us to join in league with them; let us beware
we cast not in our lot among them, nor walk in the way with them, for their
feet run to evil, and their broad paths, are the beaten paths of death.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing every man has a state in his own goods, it teaches us this
duty, that we ought to be content with that portion which we have; be it more
or less, be it small or great, be it a simple or a worthy portion, and to be
by all means thankful for it: considering with our selves, that the
difference of places, Lands, Possessions, with the properties thereof, be of
God, and are to be acknowledged as his gift. True it is, men do sometimes
increase their wealth by unlawful means, by robbing and wronging of others,
to their own condemnation: but then they want comfort and peace in the
possessing of them; they cannot say they eat their own Bread; they cannot
esteem God to be their helper. Let us hate such wicked shifts, and renounce
from our hearts all deceitful dealing. Let us seek for a blessing upon our
labor at his hands, that is the disposer of all things in Heaven and Earth.
Let us learn, 1 Timothy 6, 6, 7, 8.
That godliness is great gain, if a Man be content with that he has: for we
brought nothing into the World, and it is certain that we can carry nothing
out, therefore when we have food and raiment, let us therewith be content.
This is it which the Apostle teaches, Heb. 13. Heb. 13, 5, 6.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with those
things that ye have, for he has said; I will not fail thee, neither
forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, The Lord is mine helper, neither will
I fear what man can do unto me. We shall never deal faithfully with the
goods of other men, nor for Conscience sake abstain from wrong and Injustice,
until we rest contented in our hearts with things present, and depend by Faith
upon Gods providence, knowing that he has by his gracious promise bound and
charged himself with us, and for us, in all things necessary, as well for
our bodies, as for our souls. He is a mighty God, and a merciful Father, that
never fails nor forsakes his Children that trust in him, that call unto him,
that depend upon him. If this Faith be in us, it will swallow up many cares,
and consume many fears, which distract and distemper unbelievers in this life.

Let not our heart thercfore be addicted to Covetousness, nor let us suffer
our selves to be carried away from God, by the greedy and gaping desire of
Riches, nor seek to augment them, and abound in them by unlawful means, nor
possess them with vexation of mind, or with affiance in them. But let us rest
in our several Callings and conditions of life with contentation, and a quiet
Conscience, not swelling in heart, or disquieting our selves in vain, with
longing after an higher state and standing, then the Lord has allotted and
allowed unto us. If once our affections ouer-flowe the banks of our present
conditions, so that we cannot use with thankfulness that which we have
received, we can never be persuaded to be contented, but we will not stick
now and then to borrow of the Law of equity, shifting and providing for our
selves what ways we can without difference, and breaking out into dishonest
and unorderly courses, without conscience. Let us therefore Rules to be
remembered to work in us contentation.
for our better instruction in this point, lay up in our hearts, these few
Rules follows, to work in us contentation.

First, that all of us enjoy more then we deserve, and can justly challenge at
the hands of God. If we would have a crum of bread, we must crave it of him,
and say, Math. 6, 11.
Give us this day our daily bread.

Secondly, that we oftentimes do want outward things, because we esteem no
more of inward graces and spiritual blessings. We have no promise of God to
bestow upon us earthly gifts, any farther then we ask by prayer, and seek by
faith heavenly things, according to the saying of Christ; Math. 6, 33.
First seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be ministered unto you. It is therefore Gods great judgment upon such
graceless and thanklesse men, as contemn these things that belong to a
better life, that oftentimes they are brought to feel the want of the
transitory things of this life.

Thirdly, that it is a great subtlety and policy of Satan, to inueigle and
entangle our minds with the desire of such benefits as we want, thereby to
cause us to murmr, and to move us to distrust for them, and to disgrace the
present benefits which we enjoy, and so to provoke us to be unthankful. The
people of Israel abounded plentifully in many great blessings in the
Wilderness, and tasted liberally of Gods goodness; yet Exodus 14, 11, and 15,
23. and 16, 2. and 17, 2.
when they suffered the least want of Water, or Bread, and had not their lusts
satisfied at their own desire, they did break out into impatiency of spirit,
and forgate the mighty works that he had done for them. Their present want made
them to distaste and dislike all the rest of Gods mercies; Genesis 41, 4, 7
Even as the euill-fauoured and leane-fleshed Kine, did eat up the
well-fauoured and fat Kine, or as the thin and blasted ears of Corn, devoured
the rank and full ears, in the dreams of Pharaoh. Let us not therefore
burn with a desire of an higher estate, but labor to find our hearts and
minds thoroughly settled in that large and liberal portion which we have in
present possession by the good hand of God toward us.

Fourthly, that the Lord does not always actually bestow upon his Children the
riches and wealth of this World, but nurtereth them up to depend wholly upon
his faithful promise, who has given them his word, that he will not leave
them nor forsake them. And in the mean season, he works in their hearts a
patient bearing of the wants and necessities of this life, but in the end, he
will bestow upon them eternal blessings that never shall have end, and
heavenly graces that never shall decay.

Fifthly, that one drop of Gods favor toward us, is better worth, and more of
value, then this whole World, that is but vain and transitory. If we cannot
rest in this favor of God, in the want of outward things, it is most certain
we have not yet learned truly to prize, and rightly esteem the favor of
God. Such as cannot be content to forgo and forsake earthly things, never
truly felt the forgiveness of sins. Let us learn to rest in the least
taste and touch of the grace and favor of God, whatsoever it brings with it;
whether wealth or want; whether plenty or poverty; whether prosperity or
adversity.

Lastly, we must remember that Nature is content with a little; so that if we
have food and raiment, we ought to be content, as we noted before. This was the
vow of Jacob when he went from his Fathers house, while he was in the way to
Haran; Genesis 28, 20, 21.
If GOD will be with me, and will keep me in this journey which I go, and
will give me Bread to eat, and Clothes to put on, so that I come again unto
my Fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my GOD. There are two
points of man's life; his entering into the World, and his going out of the
world: the space coming between both these, receives many changes and
alterations, many differences and diversities. Some are poor, and some are
rich; some noble, and some vn-noble; some high, and some low. The beginning of
all is equal; the end of all also is equal touching this life: for as we
brought nothing into this world, so we can carry nothing away with us, We came
Job 1, 21.
naked out of our mothers womb, and naked we shall return thither. The time
between our rising and falling, our birth and death, is of short continuance,
and therefore we ought not to be careful to heap up Riches, Psalm. 49, 17.
For as much as we shall take nothing away when we dye, neither shall our pomp
descend after us. If a Man have need of one only Pot or Pitcher of Water, it
is small wisdom and great vanity to try to draw up a whole stream. If a
little provision will serve for the journey and voyage that we undertake, it is
a needelesse and bootlesse thing to hoard and heap up great store of furniture
for a small occasion. Let us therefore take heed of all excess, and content
our selves with the moderate use of outward blessings, enjoying such things
as we have with cheerfulness and thankfulness, bearing the want of such
things as we have not, with patience and meekness, depending upon GOD for
his blessing, in all things that any way concern and belong unto us. To love
Riches, is a token of a base and abject mind; to covet and desire them when we
want them, is a sign of a wretched and miserable mind; to use them well to
our private commodity, and the public utility when we have them, is a
Testimony of a commendable and contented mind.

Use 3
Lastly, we learn from this Doctrine, to take good heed that we do not abuse
our property and dominion of those guiftes that God has given us, bestowing
them only to our private use, and withholding the comfort of them from
others, to whom they ought of right to be imparted and employed. For albeit the
possession of them be ours, yet there is an use of them belonging to the
Saints; the property of goods, and the communion of Saints standing together.
Whenever we have these outward things, we must not withold them, when they
may profit the Church, and refresh the Saints. We must not be couetously and
corruptly minded, like Naball; who, when David and his Men were in necessity
in the Wilderness, said; 1 Samuel 25, 11
Shall I take my Bread, and my Water, and my Flesh that I have killed for my
Shearers, and give it unto Men that I know not whence they are? He challenges
all as proper to himself; his Bread is his, his Water is his, his Flesh is
his, all is his; he has nothing for David, nothing for his Servants, nothing
for others. This we see in the dealing of Laban toward Jacob, he says unto
him; These Daughters, are my Daughters; these Sons, are my Sons; these
Sheep, are my Sheep; and all that thou have is mine. He challenges all to
himself, he leaves nothing to Jacob. Gene. 31. 43. The Apostle James teaching
us to prove our Faith by our works, says; Iam. 2, 15, 16
If a Brother or a Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you
say unto them; Depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill your Bellies,
notwithstanding ye give them not those things that are needful, what helps
it? Whereby we see, that mercifulness to our poor and needy Brethren is
commanded: so that as we believe a communion to be among all true professors,
so we are charged to be as the Clouds that drop down the sweet shewers upon
the Herbs, as lively Fountains of Water that flow out plentifully to the use
of others, as fruitful Trees bringing forth store to feed others. We must
consider, that we are but Stewards of our goods that are lent us for a time,
for which we are to give an account, and of which we are to give a yearly
rent to the chief Lord, which his poor Children are appointed to receive at
our own hands, whom we are bound to relieve with our goods. He has said;
Math. 26, 11.
The poor ye shall always have with you, but me ye shall not always have.
This duty is oftentimes required and beaten upon in the word of God. This
appears in the practice of Job, who being accused falsely of his three
friends, to be an Hypocrite, is compelled to boast after a sort of his works
as the fruits of his Faith, and the assured Seals of his unfeigned profession;
Job 29, 12, 13.
I delivered the Poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him: the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the Widows heart to rejoice.

Where we see, how he rendereth an account of his life past, being of his
Adversaries charged with great wickedness and much dissimulation. So the
Prophet describing the blessedness of that Man that fears the Lord, and
delights greatly in his Commandments, says; Psalm. 112, 9.
He has distributed and given to the Poor, his righteousness remains for
ever, his Horn shall be exalted with glory. He shows hereby, that the
godly do not spare niggardlie, but distribute liberally; according as the
necessity of the poor Saints requires, and as his own power and ability
suffers him. Heereunto comes the precept of Christ: Luke 12, 33
Sell that ye have, and give Alms: make you Bags which wax not old, a
Treasure that can never fail in Heaven, where no Thief comes, neither Moath
corrupts.

Let us consider, that God has made the poor as well as the Rich; and that
the poor man is our own Flesh. Especially, let us always remember that the
godly poor are our Brethren in Christ, Math. 25, 34.
and that in the last judgment the Lord Jesus will account it, and reward it
as done unto himself, whatsoever has been bestowed upon his needy and
distressed Brethren. If we be careful to practice these duties of Christian
Charity and Community, it shall avail to seal up Gods favor toward us in the
remission of our sins, and much advantage us to obtain many blessings, seeing
many supplications shall be made and offered up for us, and so we shall taste
the fruit that we have planted, and harvest the Corn that we have sowed.
For Gal. 6, 7.
Whatsoever a Man sows, that he shall reap, (as the Apostle testifies to
the Galathians) and therefore if we be diligent to help the poor and needy,
we shall receive a full recompense, with much increase into our own bosoms.

[ That impute to me, I will recompense thee, etc.] See here the most earnest
affection of Paul, for this poor Servant. He offers himself to become
Surety and Pay-maister for Onesimus, to answer for his debt, and to stand as
a debtor himself in his place, in respect of his Creditor, and to pay
whatsoever would be, or could be required at his hands. Objection.
But before we come to the point of instruction here offered to our
consideration, it shall not be amiss to answer a question that may here be
demanded, how he promises the payment of money to another, who unless he were
himself helped and sustained of the Churches, had not whereupon to live. We
know how it went oftentimes with the Apostles, by the confession of Peter, and
of John, who said to the Cripple that lay at the gate of the temple, Acts 3. 6.
Silver and gold have we none. And the Apostle Paul was also constrained to
labor with his own hands. How then is he on a sudden become so wealthy, as
to offer his service to another, and to undertake to discharge the debt of
another? Answer.
I answer, the meaning of the Apostle is, that he would have him forgive his
Servant, and to require the debt neither of him, nor of his Servant; as
appears evidently by the whole course of the preventing of this Objection.
He would not therefore have him to contend with his poor penitent Servant,
nor seek any trouble against him, unless he would account him a debtor in his
stead. And furthermore, he adds forthwith, that Philemon was indeed wholly
his, to whom he owed all that he had: so that if he would require the debt, he
should consider that the payment was already made. From this offer that Paul
makes, which is, to satisfy another man's debt. We Doctrine 2. It is lawful
for one man to become surety for another.
learn, that it is a lawful thing for one man to become Surety for another,
and to engage himself for his sure and faithful Friend, of whom he is well
persuaded. Howsoever suretiship be to some very hurtful, and to all dangerous,
yet it is to none in it self, and of it own nature, unlawful or sinful.

This truth is confirmed unto us by diverse examples, of such as have gone
before us in the practice of this duty. When Jacob refused to send his
youngest and beloved Son Benjamin (whom he begat in his old age) into Egypt
with his other Sons to fetch Corn, saying; Ye have robbed me of my Children:
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin: all these things
are against me. Gene. 42, 36 37.
Then Ruben answered his Father, saying; Slay my two Sons if I bring him not to
thee again: deliver him to mine hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
Where we see, he offers his Sons in hostage, and was ready to deliver them
as pledges, and to bind to his Father, Man for Man, Son for Son, body for
body, and life for life: which is a greater matter then to be bound money for
money, and goods for goods. The like we see more evidently in the Chapter
following, when Jacob did hang back, and seemed resolved not to let Benjamin
depart with them; Judah is earnest with his Father, saying; Gene. 43, 8, 9, 10.
Send the Boy with me, that we may rise and go, and that we may live and not
dye; both we, and thou, and our Children: I will be surety for him, of mine
hand shall thou require him: If I bring him not to thee, and set him before
thee, then let me bear the blame for ever.

In which words we see, that when Judah considered the cause of their long
delay, and the extreamitie of the great dearth, and the danger of their
present estate, that except they had made this tarrying, doubtless they might
have departed from their Father, and returned to their Father again the second
time, he undertakes the matter, and becomes surety for the Child. This is it
which he freely and frankly confesses before Joseph, when they had been
brought back to him, the Cup being found in Beniamins sack, Genesis 44, 32.
Doubtless thy Servant became surety for the Child to my Father, and said;
If I bring him not unto thee again, then will I bear the blame unto my Father
for ever: now therefore (I pray thee) let me thy Servant abide for the Child,
as a Servant to my Lord, and let the Child go up with his Brethren. Whereby
also it appears, that he considering with himself, that he could not
without impeachment of his credit, without breach of his promise, and without
heaviness to his Father, return to him, except the Child were with him: he
offers himself as a pawn, and pledge, and prisoner to Joseph, as before he
had done to his Father.

This also we see evidently in the Acts of the Apostles, when Paul was
troubled fot preaching Christ crucified, and risen again from the dead, Acts
17, 5, 8 9.
Insomuch, that the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them
certain vicious and Vagabond Fellows, and having assembled the multitude,
they made a tumult in the City: It is said, that Jason received him and other
of the Brethren into his house, and offered to bail them, and to be bound for
them, putting in good assurance that they should appear and be forth-comming.
And if we require an example in the same kind and condition, with this that is
mentioned in this Epistle: Our Savior expresses the like, in the Parable of
him that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, who
wounded him with their weapon, and robbed him of his Raiment, and left him in
his trouble, even half dead: Luke 10, 34, 35.
A certain Samaritan (as he iournied) came near unto him, and when he saw
him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, and
poured in Oil and Wine, and put him on his own Beast, and brought him to an
Inn, and made provision for him: and on the morrow when he departed, he took
out two pence, and gave them to the Host, and said unto him; Take care of him,
and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will recompense thee.
This Samaritan did show himself a right Neighbor, both in showing his present
charity toward him, and in offering himself to become a surety for him. All
these approved and allowed examples of the faithful, do sufficiently and
evidently teach us, that it is in it self lawful to undertake payment for
another, and to become Surety for him.

Reason 1.
And if we require better grounds to satisfy us in this truth, let us enter
into the strength of reason to assure us, without any wavering herein. First,
weigh with me the example of Christ, an excellent pattern and president of the
practice of this, an example far beyond all exception, an example that
ouershadoweth, and dazeleth Heb. 12, 1, 2.
and darkneth, all that cloud of witnesses produced by the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrews; he became surety for his Church unto his father, to
pay the debt of our sins, and to satisfy his justice. If then any doubt, or
make a question of the former examples, wherein we saw how Ruben offered
himself to become as a pledge to his father, Judah to Joseph, Jason to the
Governor, and the Samaritan to his Host: behold a most absolute and perfect
example of Christ Jesus, who bound himself for us; his body for our bodies,
and his soul for our souls, that our sinful bodies might be made clean by
his body, and our souls, washed through his most precious blood. For the
Prophet prophesies, Isay. 53, 10.
that he should make his soul an offering for sin. And Christ himself
says, Mat. 26, 38. John. 12, 27.
My soul is very heavy even unto the death, etc. Thus did his love exceed and
abound toward us, that our love might exceed and abound one toward another. To
this purpose, the Apostle shows, Heb. 7, 22.
that Jesus is made a surety of a better Testament. He stood in our places, he
took upon him our sins, he bare in his body the punishments due to us, he
felt the wrath of God kindled against us.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is a fruit of love even this way to relieve and help such as are
like to suffer damage and detriment by want of outward things. Now, humane
society and Christian piety requires, that one should sustain and succor
another in their necessity, as we see in the former examples of Reuben, Judah,
Jason, and the Samaritan before mentioned and remembered. The life of man can
hardly stand without lending and borrowing, without letting and hiring, without
buying and selling, without bargaining and trusting one of another. It is a
work of mercy Leuit. 19, 18
to become surety, and therefore as lawful (no doubt) as to give or lend. The
law of God commands us to help our Neighbors, as we are able, and as they
have need: and they are to be relieved by such means as are in our power; by
giving, by forgiving, by communicating to them such things as we have, and they
have not. For if we love them, and have true Charity in us, we must not be
wanting to them, but be ready to profit them and do them good, so far as we
do not hurt our selves. It is no unwise sentence of a wise man, Eccle. 29, 18
The wicked will not become surety, and he that is of an unthankful mind,
forsakes him that delivered him: declaring thereby, that as he is a fool that
is surety for every man, so is he ungodly that in no wise will be surety for
any man. We are commanded to Exodus 23, 5.
help up our enemies Ox that is fallen, or his Ass that is sunk down under
his burden; how much more ought we to show pity and compassion to our brother
himself, vexed with the creditor, terrified with the prison, oppressed with
his debt, and dismayed and discouraged with the payment at hand, that is to be
made? So then, whether we do consider that Christ Jesus is made our surety, or
that suretiship is a fruit of Christian love one toward another, in both
respects we see, that in it self it is not to be disalowed or condemned.

Use 1.
The uses of this Doctrine are diligently to be considered of us. And first of
all, if it be lawful and warranted to become surety one for another (as we
have before plainly proved) it conuinceth and confuteth those that hold it to
be evil and unlawful, to give their word, or offer their band, or tender
their promise or engage themselves any way for their brethren. Love is a debt
that we owe to all men, Romans 13, 8.
as the Apostle testifies, Romans 13. 8. and therefore we ought not to fail in
the perfourmance thereof. It is imagined and supposed by some, that all or the
greatest part of the controversies between man and man, and suites of Law,
between party and party arise from hence, that things are taken up upon trust,
that there is borrowing and lending among us, and that there is crediting one
of another; and so would have these quite taken away, and the Names of them
utterly abolished out of all Incorporations and Commonwealths.

It is reported, that among the Turks are few suites and actions commenced one
against another, because there is with them no bargain or sale, no buying or
selling, but for ready Money, and for present pay. But this is a plain
fallation, to put that for a cause which indeed is not the cause. For the
corrupt conscience of men, the covetous desire of Money, the greedy gaping
after gain, the malicious humor of revenge, the bitter root of strife, and
the extreme want of love are the true causes of all wranglings and suites one
against another, not the lending and borrowing of Money or money-worth. Hence
it is, that God never forbids in his Law the use of hiring, or of borrowing,
but rather rectifieth the judgment, directs the practice, and prescribes
the rules of the right and lawful use thereof. Hence it is that the Lord says
in the Law; Ex. 22, 25, 26
If thou lend Money to my people; that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall
not be as an Usurer unto him, ye shall not oppress him with Usury: If thou
take thy Neighbors Raiment to pledge, thou shall restore it unto him before
the Sun go down: for that is his covering only, and this is his Garment,
for his skin, wherein shall he sleep? Therefore when he cries unto me, I
will hear him, for I am merciful. In these words, he forbids lending upon
interest to the poor, and forbids cruelty in retaining pawnes and pledges
taken from them that are in necessity, whereas they ought to be restored.

To this end and purpose Moses speaks in another place, Deuteronomy. 15, 7, 8.
If one of thy Brethren with thee be poor, within any of thy Gates in thy Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut
thine hand from thy poor Brother, but thou shall open thine hand unto him and
shall lend him sufficient for his need which he has. So the Prophet says;
Psalm. 37, 21, 26.
The wicked borrows and pays not again: but the righteous is ever
merciful, he gives and lends, and his seed enjoys the blessing. To these
sayings of Moses and the Prophets, accords the Commandment of Christ; Math.
5, 42.
Give to him that asks: and from him that would borrow of thee turn not
away. All these rules of direction serve to instruct us in the practice of the
duties of love, and teach us how to behave our selves in buying and borrowing,
in letting and lending unto our Brethren that call upon us for our help in
the time of need. Secondly, hereby they are reprehended, that bind
themselves by vow or oath, from binding themselves in any respect, or in any
cause, or upon any occasion for any person. This is an ungodly and unlawful
shift that some men use, to disable and to bar themselves from doing this
work of charity, and showing this fruit of love to their Brethren. For many, to
the end they might not be enwrapped and entangled in the deceitful snares of
suretiship, do enter into covenant one with another, and do firmly bind
themselves upon a great penalty and forfeiture, never to enterpose their
credit for any man whatsoever. But it is sometimes a necessary duty of piety,
and a testimony of the soundness of our Religion, and a great comfort to our
conscices, to stand between our Brethren, and the harms that are coming
toward them,

It is a general rule taught in the word of GOD, delivered by the law of
nature, and observed by the Gentiles; that we should so deal with others, as
we would be dealt with all our own selves. It is taught by the mouth of
Christ; Luke. 6, 30, 31.
Give to every man that asks of thee, and of him that takes away the things
that be thine, ask them not again: and as ye would that men should do to
you, so do ye to them likewise. There is no man if he were in want, and stood
in need of the bare word, or honest promise, or firm band and Obligation of
another, but he would be ready to request it, and willing to use it, and
content to accept of it. Wherefore, we are to remember that we ought not to
hang back when as we ought to perform the like service, and to show like
compassion to our brethren. It is therefore a great sin, and a great sign of
the want of love, when we are called unto this duty, not to be forward
faithfully to discharge it. We ought at all times to be lovingly affected and
charitably disposed one toward another; so that when God calls us, and
withal enableth us with no damage, or trouble, or loss to our selves, to
deliver our neighbor out of his misery, then to shut up our compassion, and to
refuse to pass our promise for him, is an evident token, that little love and
small kindness abides in us. If then, the not doing of this duty, be an
offense against God and our Brethren, how much more to covenant and condition
with our selves or others, or to enter into great bands, that we will never
enter into any bands (great or little) for them that call upon us, and mean
honestly to discharge whatsoever we mercifully undertake for them? No Vow can
be good, no Oath can be lawful, no Band can be allowed, no Covenant can be
equal, no promise can be warranted, that is not well grounded, and advisedly
uttered. For, seeing suretyship is not of it self, and in it self unlawful,
to bind our selves wholly from it, cannot be esteemed to be lawful.

Let us therefore in the acknowledgement of this truth, show brotherly Love as
occasion serves, as the need of our Neighbor requires, and as our own
ability permits. Some are willing to help their brethren by word and
deed, and are not able: In these 2 Cor. 8, 12.
a willing heart, and a ready mind, are to be accepted. Others, are able to do
much good by their wealth, and by their word; yet they cannot be brought to
show any relief either by the one, or by the other. Wherefore, it stands you
upon, that have this worlds good, to be ready to employ it as faithful
Stewards this way, Luke 16, 9.
And to make you friends with the Riches of iniquity, that when ye shall want,
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. And in the mean season,
Luke 12, 33
Make you Bags which wax not old, a treasure that can never fail in Heaven,
where no thief comes, neither Moth corrupts. But how many are there, that
are even dead in good works? They are dumb and tongue-tyed when they should
speak for the poor, or give their word for them; their hands have a shaking
palsy, that they cannot write their names to do them good; so that if one
poor man were not more ready to plight his promise for another, then the rich,
they might many times starve and be undone. These are they that care not what
become of those that are in necessity, which shall one day give an account of
their Stewardshippe, and leave behind them, the Goods wherein they delighted,
and made them the Gods wherein they trusted.

Use 2
Secondly, seeing we have showed it to be lawful to enter into suretyship,
(for if it had bin simply and altogether forbidden, Paul would never have
proffered himself to be surety unto Philemon for Onesimus.) This serves
diverse ways for our instruction. For hereby we are directed to be careful to
use it lawfully. A thing that is of it self, and in it own nature lawdable
and lawful, may be used wickedly, vnwarrantably, and unlawfully. The Apostle
Paul speaking of the Law says, 1 Timothy 1, 8.
We know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully. The thing that is
good, may be used in a manner that is not good. But it is a true and common
Proverb, That the faults of the Artificers are not to be ascribed to the Arts
themselves. The Law is not to be blamed, but the Teachers of the Law, who did
falsely apply it, and wrongfully wrest it, and ignorantly corrupt it. Now, that
which the Apostle speaks of the Law, may rightly be spoken of suretyship: It
is good and lawful, if a man use it well and lawfully. But if we use it, and
enter into it rashly, not rightly; ordinarily, not warily; foolishly, not
wisely; desperately, not discreetly; if we entangle our selves with it, without
much deliberation, without good circumspection, and without due consideration,
it becomes unlawful unto us.

True it is, it is not evil in it self, but to him it turns to be evil,
that uses it euilly, according to that which the Lord says by the Prophet,
Ezekiel. 20, 25.
I gave them Statutes which were not good, and Judgments wherein they should
not live: because they brake them and abused them, and were made more
inexcuseable without them, in that they framed not their lives according to the
obedience of them. It falls out oftentimes, that such as have incombred
themselves with rash promises, and unadvised suretyshippe, seldom live in
peace and quietness, without distraction of mind, or fear of trouble, or
danger of loss, or feeling of misery. Hence it is, that Solomon teaches us
to behave our selves wisely and warily in this point, and beats upon no
Doctrine more often, more earnestly, more effectually, then he does upon this
matter that wc have in hand. In the sixth Chapter of the Proverbs, he says,
Prou. 6, 1.
My Son, if thou be surety for thy Neighbor, and have stricken hand with the
Stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy Mouth, and art taken with the
words of thine own mouth. Where he compares him that is free from bills and
bands, and books of the Creditors, free from suretyship and fuch like bondage,
to a Bird that has the liberty of the whole air, to fly therein at her own
pleasure: but he that is bound by Promise, or Covenant, or Statute, is like a
bird in the net of the Fowler, the which (albeit she flutter with her wing and
cry with her voice, and hop with her foot, yet) is fast caught, and may be
killed, or put in the Cage. So is it with him that is entered into bands, or
has given his word for another; he has after a sort lost his freedom, he
stands in danger of falling into mischief. Wherefore, that this giving of
assurance to others, and for others, either by our word or hand, may be
performed lawfully to the good of others, and not to the hurt of our selves,
Two things to be observed in suretyship.
we must mark, remember, and practice, two points: First, consider the
persons of others for whom it is done; Secondly, our own persons that do it.

Touching those persons for whom we become sureties, we must know, that we are
not to engage our selves and our credit, for every one that will crave it at
our hands, or will desire us to pawn our Word, and enter into bands for
them, and promise us fair to see us discharged: but in such men who oftentimes
have a greater feeling of their own wantes and necessities, then of freeing
them out of woe, that have pledged themselves for them, In the persons for who^
we are bound, we must consider three things.
we are to observe three things. First, that they be well known. Secondly,
that they be honest and godly. Thirdly, that they be suffient to pay that
which they would have us bound unto another, to assure him that they will pay.
These are the persons that we are bound to help, either for Piety, or
Charity, or Honesty, or Amity, or Consanguinity, or Affinity, all which
bands do bind us one to another, and require some duty to be performed
toward them. This is set down as a singular point of true Wisdom by the
Wiseman, Prou. 11, 15. He shall be sore vexed that is surety for a Stranger,
and he that hates suretyship, is sure. And afterward in the same Book, to the
same effect, Prou. 20, 16. and 27, 13.
Take his Garment that is surety for a Stranger, and a pledge of him for the
stranger. As if he should say, pity him not, let him feel the smart of his
folly and rashness, and let him bear the punishment of his headiness and
heedlesnesse: according to that which is set down in another place, Prou. 17,
18.
A Man destitute of understanding, touches the hand, and becomes surety for
his Neighbor. Whereby we see, that we must not be so ouer-seene to undertake
for all men hand over head without difference, but for such as are well and
thoroughly known unto us within and without, with whom we have lived and been
long conversant, and eaten (as it is Cicer. lib. de amicitia.
in the Proverb) a Bushel of Salt, of whose care and Conscience in his
dealings with others, either in the same, or in the like cases we have had some
good trial and experience. He that does engage himself far for a stranger
whom he does not know, shall repent afterward when it is too late. And if we
have seen or heard of his unfaithfulness in former times to others, we are
deceived if we expect any better dealing.

2.
Again, we are to observe that Solomon by the word [ Stranger] does not only
understand such an one as is unknown unto us, but would have us beware of
those that are lewd and ungodly. For so throughout the whole book of the
Proverbs for the most part, he takes and uses that word, By the Prou. 2, 16.
Strange Woman; he means, a wicked Woman. So in the former places his purpose
is to teach us to look to our selves, that they be not of profane life and
loose behavior, for whom we promise to become sureties; they ought to be
known unto us for their honesty and piety, that so our hearts may trust and
rest in them. But such as are ungodly, and given over to all licentiousness,
and spend their days and wealth in beastly drunkenness, will never make
conscience of their word or band to save us harmless. They may well flatter us
till we be bound, but they regard not to discharge us after we are bound. They
are unfaithful to God, and therefore we cannot look to find them faithful
to our selves. Whereby we see, how grossly they are deceived, and how greatly
they are deluded, and how sencelessely they are besotted, that will sooner be
bound for Shifters, Gamsters, Bankerouts, Tosse-pots, and other base
Companions, most unwilling, and most unable to keep touch with their
Creditors, then such as are sober-minded, and honest livers, painful in their
callings, and careful to bring up their families as they ought to do. These
are they, that as they are loose in life, so they are lavish of their word, and
prodigal of their tongue for their consorts. If there be any Malefactors guilty
of any heinous and horrible crime, they are ready to offer their word or band
to bail them, and deliver them from prison, and account it a trick and token
of good fellowship to stand for them, and to keep them from their deserved
punishment. And therefore they are oftentimes rewarded according to their
works, and left in the danger which they have brought upon themselves. These
are they that will complain against the unfaithfulness of others, whereas
rather they might and should accuse their own rashness and foolishness, that
joined with them in their impiety, and brought upon themselves great misery.

3.
Moreover, as we must know them in the face, and in the faith, so we must
hearken after their sufficiency. We must not undertake much for them, that are
not able to discharge a little. It is notably said of Solomon, Prou. 13, 7.
There is that makes himself rich, having nothing; and that makes himself
poor, having great riches; that is, a man cannot rightly judge of the estate
of every one by their course of life, and outward carriage: many being poor,
and in debt, being Bankrouts and broken fellows, make show of great wealth, by
putting on brave apparel, by delighting in costly fare, by setting up
sumptuous buildinges, by frequenting chargeable company, and by keeping a great
port: this is exceeding vanity, and ends in beggary. Others, on the other
side, faigne themselves needy, and complain of poverty; they go barely, and
fare hardly, as if they were nothing worth, who notwithstanding are of great
wealth and substance: This is extreme parsimony, and ends in misery.

Seeing therefore, it is so ordinary and common for men to dissemble their
estates, by making it seem better then it is, we must be wise-hearted, not to
think all Gold that glistereth. The world is full of those that lift up
themselves in pride above that they are indeed, and make show of that which is
not in them in truth, and thereby endanger those that look no nearer, and try
no further then the outward pomp and appearance. These are like those running
streams, that promise continuance, and yet incontinently are dried up, and
deceive such as trusted in them; or like those living creatures that stouer
with their wings and feathers, or raise up their backs and bristles, whereby
they seem much greater then Nature has made them: Or like to Quagmyres, that
apeare fair without, but if you com near them, you stand in danger to be
plunged in them, and to perish by them. Thus we see what is to be considered of
us, in making our selves sureties for others; Namely, that in regard of their
persons, we must know them thoroughly, we must have experience of their
honesty, and we must learn what is their sufficiency: But if they be strangers
utterly unknown unto us, if they be Varlets void of Conscience and fidelity,
if they be boasting and bragging mates without substance and ability, let us
take heed we do not strike hand for them, nor be deceived by them, nor offer
our selves as pledges or sureties for them, which is seldom done without hurt,
never without danger.

Secondly, touching our own persons, In our own persons, before we become
sureties, we are to consider two things; the quantity, and their ability.
before we are to enter into band or suretyship for others, we must mark and
meditate upon two things. First, what is the sum for which we shall be
obliged. Secondly, the means how we may be discharged. It stands us greatly
upon, to bethink our selves both what is the quantity, and what is our ability
to answer it. It is a morrall precept, and wise saying worthy to be written in
our hearts, Eccles. 8, 13.
Be not surety above thy power: for if thou be surety, think to pay it. So
then, there is more required of us, then to look to the persons of others, who
they are, and what they are. It is a vain thing to be wise abroad, and foolish
at home; to be sharpe-sighted in prying into the estates of others, and never
to enter into the consideration of our own. For whatsoever the persons be,
and whatsoever their earnestness be, draw not a Bow above thy strength. Albeit
they be not enemies unto us, but friends; not strangers, but well known; not
hateful persons, but most dear unto thee; not loose Companions, but honest
and godly minded: yet be well advised what thou do, and look before thou
leap. If it be for thy assured friend, that is as thy soul; if it were for
thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother; if it were for thy Kinsman that is of
thine own blood; if it were for thine own son, that is thine own flesh, yet
engage not thy self so far, promise not so much, bind not thy self in so
great a sum, as may impair thy estate, hurt thy family, hinder thy trade,
diminish thy stock, and undo thy posterity, if the debt should be required of
thee, and the stone be rolled upon thee. For whosoever gives his word and
promise for another, binds himself to pay and to discharge that debt wherein
the principal party fails: and the Creditor oftentimes relyeth more upon the
sufficiency of the assurer, then upon the honesty of the borrower. We are in
kindness and courtesy so to pleasure another, as that no man is bound to undo,
or to hinder himself.

Let every man therefore well weigh his own strength. It were foolish pity
for the saving of another man's life to loose our own. It were amercilesse
kind of mercy to leap into the water, and drown our selves, while we seek
to deliver another. We are bound to have Jude verse. 23
compassion of some, pulling them out of the fire, when we see them in danger
to be burned; but it were more then childish to run into the fire, and so
burn our selves. We are Gal. 6, 2.
commanded to bear the burden one of another, but it were more then soolish
pity to break our own shoulders, by sustaining the weight and bearing the
burden of another man. Again, as we are to mark our own strength, so we
are to consider our own discharge, how we may be secured and set at liberty.
For, before we pass our word, or give our band and hand for the payment of
other men's debtes and duties, we must know how we shall be assured to be
delivered from that burden and bondage that we have undertaken. We ought
indeed to bear good will to all men, but our good will should not be a
looser. It is no Charity to receive a blow upon our own heads, to keep the
stock from another. So then, let us remember these few points fit to be
learned and practiced of us. Know what kind of man he is for whom thou
becommest a surety. If he be a stranger to thee, meddle not with him: if he
have broken his credit with any before, suspect him: if he be a shifting
Companion, discard him; if he be insufficient to pay his own debt, deny him;
if the sum be great, and thy ability little, so that it may hinder thee and
thy Calling, if thou be driven to pay it, enter not into it; and if thou can
not see which way thou may be freed from the perrill and danger that
hangs over thy head, fly away from it, as from a Serpent that will sting
thee, as from a Canker that will consume thee, as from a Gulf that is ready
to swallow thee.

There are Two Cankers that consume the Commonwealth; Usury, and Suretyship.
two eating sores, that are in Nature as a Gangrene, which are as two Vultures,
that are continually gnawing upon the heart, and devour the flesh, even unto
the bones; to wit, Usury, and Suretyship. These are near of Kin one to
another, and are joined together as the Father and Son, as the cause, and the
effect. The unmercifulness of the Usurer constrains the poor debtor to
crave mercy of the surety. I speak of that Usury that byteth, and of such
suretyship as undoes: Of that Usury that oppresses, and of such suretyship,
as when it has taken away the coat, will take away the Cloak also, which
strippeth a man of the Jewels wherewith he was decked, of the furniture
wherewith he was stored, of the Garments wherewith he was clothed.
Notwithstanding, there is great difference to be made between them: Prou. 30,
15
This Usurer is as the Hunter; the Surety as the prey: The Usurer as the
Horse-leech does cry always bring, bring; the poo^ Surety is made as the
Porter on the Packe-horse, that bears till his shoulders break. It is
necessary for every man to have these notes before his eyes, that he be not
suddenly taken, or rather ouer-taken by the instigation and importunity of
others. This reproves such as make an ordinary and common matter of it, and a
notable point of good fellowship, the part of a good nature and loving
disposition, to be of a flexible nature (as the soft wax) to yield to every
man's request in this business. We see generally, that they which have the
least purpose to pay, and the smallest care to perform that which they have
promised, are for the most part most forward to undertake and offer themselves,
their words, their wealth, their bands, their bodies for other men. But such
as are most careful and Conscionable in payeng their Debtes, answearing the
Arrerages that accrue by the false-hoode of feigned friends, are most backward
to yield their necks to this yoke, assuring themselves, that it is far
better to walk at liberty, then to have his feet put in the Stocks for
Correction. Wherefore, let no man blame those men that hang back, and are not
ready to serve every man's turn, nor to grant every man's request with their
Band and Obligation. How many are there in this present, and have been in
former times, that have been quite undone, and fallen into decay, and with
that fall, have thrown down their Wives and Children for ever, by yielding to
gratify others, and damnifie themselves thorough this means of rash
Suretyship? Such as are cruel Creditors, and live upon the prey, as the Math.
24, 28
Eagle does upon the Carcass, will show no more mercy to the debtor, that is
come in his danger, then the miserable rich man Luke 16, 21
did to the Beggar that lay at his Gate.

This we see in the Creditor mentioned, 2 Kings 4, 1. where one of the Wives of
the Children of the Prophets, comes, cries, and complains unto Elisha,
That her Husband that feared the Lord being dead, the Creditor came to take
her two Sons to be his Bondmen. This also appears in the practice of the
unmerciful Rich-men, mentioned in Nehemiah 5, 1. 4, 5. so that there was a
great outcry of the people, and of their Wives against them, who said; We
have borrowed Money for the Kings Tribute upon our Lands and our Vineyardes,
and now our flesh is as the flesh of our Brethren, and our Sons as their
Sons: And lo, we bring into subjection our Sons and our Daughters, as
Servants; and there be of our Daughters now in subjection, and there is no
power in our hands, for other Men have our Lands, and our Vineyards.

If then, we would not willingly draw upon our selves the burdens of other
men, nor see with our eyes the taking away of our goods, for which we have
labored, nor hear with our ears the cry of our wives and Children spoiled
of their hope and expectation, nor feel our selves bitten with hunger, pinched
with cold, thrown into prison, and vexed with all kind of miseries, let us
look to it betimes, least we repent when it is too late. It is profitable and
Heavenly Counsel given by Solomon, Prou. 22, 26, 27. Be not thou of them that
touch the hand, nor among them that are surety for debts; If thou have nothing
to pay, why causest thou that he should take thy bed from under thee? It is a
true saying, [ He is happy; that can by other Men's harms can learn to
beware.] Let us not be cruel and unmerciful to our own Families, nor rush our
selves into these Quicke-sandes of troubles and turmoyles that after follow at
the heels of this rashness. Let us use all carfulness and diligence to
know the party for whom we promise to become Pay-Maisters. Let us weigh his
Truth and Honesty, his Estate and Ability, his Profession and Piety: And
withal, let us examine our selves thoroughly, and ponder our own
sufficiency, that we be not at unawares surprised and hastily overtaken. Let
us prove our selves, and enter seriously into this Cogitation and
consideration, whether we be able, without shaking of our Wealth or
Substance, or diminishing of our credit and estimation, or weakening of our
estate, to discharge that which we have undertaken, if our friend for whom
we are bound, should fail and fall down. Neither let any Foolish and
Indiscreet persons Object, that this pretending of danger, and entering with
wariness, is to be accounted no better then a wanting of Love that ought to
be in us: For, it is rather a point of good Wisdom and Discretion, to look
unto our own estate, and to beware, and to be warned in time, by the falls
and ruins of other Men. How many are fallen from great Riches, to extreme
poverty; from much, to little; from an high condition, to great Beggerie and
misery; and been as it were consumed with the scorching heat that this fire of
Suretyshippe has cast out? Wherefore, let us learn to be Wise betimes, and
take heed by the chaunges and chances of other men, least by engaging our
selves too deeply for other men's debtes, our minds be distracted with
pensive thoughts, our hearts be pierced with bitter Sorrows, and our bodies
be ^st into loathsome prisons, as it has fallen out to very many before our
eye^. If Riotous livers, and prodigal persons, that wast their wealth in
vanit^, and spend their goods unthriftily, do request and require us to give
ou^ words, or to be bound in bands for them, we are not bound to do it by ^he
Law of God; nay, we are bound not to do it by the Law of God: w^ 1 Timothy 5, 8.
are bound to provide for our own families, or else we have denied the Faith,
and are worse then Infidelles that are in the world, and out of the church. The
Apostle, in giving of Alms, and extending of our liberality ^owardes the
poor Saints, Would not 2 Cor. 8, 13.
have one ouer-burdened, and another ^ased: One oppressed, and another
released: One pressed down, another to high ^ifted up. The same proportion
is to be holden and observed in this case. Indeed, 1 Cor. 13.
Love seeks not her own, but is bountiful; Nevertheless, it is no fruit
of Love required to be in us, that one should be grieved, and another eased;
that one should be hindered, and another helped.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing it is not unlawful or forbidden, to bind a man's self by band
or otherwise to another, it ought to teach all Creditors and Lenders, not to be
rough and rigorous over a surety. No cruelty toward any is lawful. If it be a
Malefactor that has committed an heinous crime, and deserves the punishment
of death, he is not to be proceeded against with a desire of private revenge,
and a satisfying of our cruel mind, and a thirsting after blood. If it be a
Debtor that is fallen into decay, he is to be dealt withal in Mercy and
Commisseration, not with Rigor and Severity. If then, we are to deal so
with a Debtor, much more with a surety. When we see a man that has been well
advised in it, and circumspect to prevent dangers, and foresee damages so
far as the eye of man's understanding and judgment can reach, we ought not to
take advantage of his error, but to show him what favor possibly we can. If
thou see him fallen into thy hands, deal with all mercifulness toward him,
and consider not so much what thou may do by Law, as what thou ought to do
in love: neither think what rigor of Justice will permit, but what the right
of equity will allow thee to do. It is a true saying, Terent. in Heautont. act.
4. scen. 5.
that the Heathen saw into, Extremity of Law, is oftentimes the greatest
injury and want of Charity that can be. Hence it is, that Solomon exhorts
sureties to deal wisely, to rid themselves out of danger, and to use all
lawful means to free themselves from trouble, and not delay to promote and
procure their own good, Prou. 6, 3. My Son, if thou be surety for thy
Neighbor, do this now, and deliver thy self, seeing thou art come into the
hand of thy neighbor, go and humble thy self, and solicit thy friends. He
would never give this devise and direction what he should do that as ensnared
and entrapped by suretyship, unless the Creditor were to be drawn to show
pity.

Now, in these words, Three rules to be observed of them that have bin
entangled by rash suretiship.
he gives a threefold counsel what to do, and how to behave our selves when
we are entangled with rash suretiship. First, we must not sit still, or
neglect the opportunity to deliver our selves from danger, we must submit our
selves to him, to whom we are bound, and into whose power thou art fallen, and
at whose mercy thou stand; crave pardon and patience at his hands, request
him earnestly to be friendly and favorable toward thee in releeuing or
releasing thee, and letting of thee alone. Say unto him, and say it in truth
of thy heart, and with full purpose of performing, Doubt not of your debt, be
content for a while, and (God willing) I will discharge all at the last.
Secondly, we are willed and warned to go to our friend, or to him whom we
took for our friend, when we became surety for him, and to urge him instantly
to pay his own Debt, and discharge thee of the danger without delay; tell him,
it is for his cause, that thou endurest this trouble, and bear this burden,
and that for doing good to him, thou suffer and sustainest this loss: will
him to consid^ of thy kindness that had not the power to deny the engaging
of thy self to help him in his necessity.

Thirdly, we are admonished and advised to go to our friends that lou^ us and
desire our good, and are greatly grieved for our affliction, entreat^g them to
pity our case, pardon our negligence, and help us out of these b^iars in
which we are entangled, hoping never to come into the like inco^berances
again. These are the ways that we are to take, and the pathe^ that we are to
walk in. In the practice of them being sanctified to our use* we may look for
a blessing from God, and hope to find comfort in our own hearts. But if thou
think to escape the hands of thy Creditors, by hyding or absenting of thy
self from him, or standing out against him, or holding suit with him, and
answearing him at the Law, thou art deceived. Thou shall better provide for
thine own peace and security, by submitting thy self to the party to whom
thou art bound, by entreating the person for whom thou art bound, and by
soliciting thy friends, to consider thy case and their own in thee. All this
does Solomon not only counsel us to do, but to do it speedily, and to take
little rest, until we be delivered from this danger, saying, Prou. 6, 4, 5
Give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye lids: deliver thy self
as a Roe from the hand of the Hunter, as a Bird from the hand of the Fowler.

Heereunto accords and agrees the saying of Christ our Savior, Luke 12, 58
While thou go with thine adversary to the Ruler, as thou art in the way,
give diligence in the way, that thou may be delivered from him, least he
draw thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Iaylour, and the
Iaylour cast thee into prison: I tell thee, thou shall not depart thence, till
thou have paid the utmost Mite. There is nothing to be gotten, by opposing of
our selves against such as may hurt us, and by keeping out of their sight, with
a purpose to defraude them, and to defend our selves. It is most true, which
Solomon speaks in another place, Prou. 22, 7.
The Rich rules the poor, and the borrower is Servant to the Man that
lends. Whereby he means, that commonly it falls out among men, that the
rich overrule the poor, and that the Debtors are Servants unto their
Creditors. To conclude, if we show our selves ready and willing to put in
practice the Rules given unto us, to bring us out of the Briars and bondage of
suretyshippe, we shall find rest to our souls, and God will incline the
heart of our Creditors, to show favor unto us, who has the hearts of all men
in his own hands.

Verse 19. [ I Paul, have written this with mine own hand, I will recompense
it.] Philemon might well have contented himself with the bare word and naked
Promise of Paul, forasmuch as his word and deed did not differ one from the
other. This is the defense that he makes for himself to the Corinthians, when
he was accused of lightness and inconstancy, promising to come unto them, and
yet he came not, 2 Cor. 1, 17, 18.
When I was thus minded to come unto you, did I use lightness? Or mind I
those things which I mind, according to the Flesh, that with me should be
yea and nay? Yea, GOD is faithful, that our word toward you, was not yea and
nay. Notwithstanding, albeit his word was as good as his band, and his saying
accorded with his doing, and his promise were as strong as an Obligation, so
that he dealt not as men usually do, which will rashly avouch any thing that
comes into their head, and by and by change their purpose in the turning of
an hand. We see in this place, how he, promising to satisfy Philemons
damage, and willing to leave no scruple or doubt in him, does farther
confirm it, and assures him by his handwriting and Covenants, albeit they
two were great and near friends, and had good interest one in another.

Doctrine 3. Covenants in writing for debts, bargains and sales are honest and
lawful.
We learn from hence, that civil Instruments and Covenants in writing,
together with other assurances that may be asked and granted, are good and
lawful, even amongst the best and greatest Friends. I say, when Debtes are
owing, when bargains are made, when money is lent, when Lands are sold, and
when there are mutual Contracts between man and man; between Friend and
Friend; between Kinsman and Kinsman; assurance in writing with hand and seal
may be enterchangeably given and received. This we see in the practice of all
people in former times. When Abraham had made a Covenant of peace and unity
with Abimelech K. of Gerar, he did deliver unto him seven Lambs, Genesis 21, 39
23.
That the taking of them might be a witness of the truth, and an assurance
unto him that he had dug that Well of waters. To this purpose, did the
King require Abraham to take an Oath and solemnly to swear by the name of
God, that he would not deal falsely and fraudulently with him, nor hurt him,
nor his Children, nor his Childrens Children. The like (or rather greater)
assurance is required and yielded in the 23. Chapter of the same Book, where
Abraham, buying a field of Ephron the Hittite, requires an Instrument with
witnesses, and a delivery of the possession, The Field of Ephron, Genesis 23, 17,
18, 20.
which was in Machpelah, and over against Mamre, even the Field and the Cave
that was therein, and all the Trees that were in the Field, which were in all
the Borders round about, was made sure unto Abraham for a possession, in the
sight of the Hittites, even of all that went in at the gates of his City.
Where we see, all the circumstances and manner of the contract which Abraham
makes are set down and expressed.

First, we see a large description of the place that was bought, together with
the bounding and confronting of the place, as also the appurtenances; Namely,
the Trees that grew therein. Secondly, we see the name of the seller set
down, who did openly avouch the sale thereof, as being his own. Thirdly, the
name of the buyer, that no doubt might be left. Lastly, the witnesses are
recorded of this bargain and sale, that none might heereaftet lay claim unto
it, or deny unto Abraham the lawful possession of it, and the holding of it to
him and his. And if we would yet see this more clearly, we have more evident
confirmation of it in the prophesies of Jeremy, where to show the certainety
of the return of the Israelites into their Land and Country again, he
makes a solemn purchase, Ier. 32, 9, 10.
I bought the Field of Hanameel mine Uncles son, and waighed him Silver,
even seven Shekels, and ten pieces of Silver; and I writ in the Book, and
signed it, and took witnesses, and I gave the Book of the possession unto
Baruch, in the sight of Hanameel mine Uncles Son, and in the presence of the
Witnesses, which were written in the Book of the possession, before all the
Jews that sat in the Court of the Prison.

In these words (which are more at large related in the Prophet) we see what
assurance and security was taken and given, with VVriting, Sealing,
VVitnesses, delivery and keeping the Rolls and Records thereof. This is set
down likewise, in the latter end of the same Chapter, Jeremy 32. 43, 44. where
he says, The Fields shall be possessed in this Land, whereof ye say, It is
desolate, without Man or Beast, and shall be given into the hand of the
Caldeans: Men shall buy Fields for Silver, and make Writings, and seal them,
and take witnesses in the Land of Benjamin, and round about Jerusalem, etc.
for I will cause their Captivity to return, says the Lord. This discovers
the practice of those times, and delivers the forms and fashions observed
among that people. When Jacob and Laban made a Covenant either with other, Ge,
31, 51, 52
which might be a witness between them both, they confirmed it by Oath, and
set up an heap of stones, to testify the amity and friendship renewed between
both parties. In the Parable of the unjust Steward it is remembered, that all
Debtors and Debts were recorded in writing, with the sum that every one owed:
Lu. 16, 5, 6, 7
For he called unto every one of his Masters Debtors, and said unto the
first: How much owe thou unto my Master? And he said, An hundred measures
of Oil. And he said to him, Take thy writing, and sit down quickly, and write
fifty. Then said he to another, How much owe thou? And he said, An hundred
measures of Wheat: Then he said to him, take thy writing, and write
fourscore. In this Parable, we see the manner that was used in the days of
old; namely, that Books of recknings and accounts were commonly kept, and
usually brought forth, when men did level their debts, and make even one with
another. All which Testimonies, ratifying the practice of former times and
persons, serve to teach us, that it is lawful for the faithful, to use all
circumspection to assure their debts, bargains, and contracts one with another.

Reason 1
And if we would enter into a further consideration of this truth, we shall see
a plain confirmation of it by sundry reasons. For first, it is a common
Proverb among us, Fast bind, fast find. That which is loosely bound, is
lightly lost; but a threefold Cord well tied and twisted by word, by writing,
by seal, is not easily broken. A word affirms, a writing confirms, a seal
assures, and every one of them binds to perform our promise. We see by
daily experience, that men are both mortal and mutable, and words prove
oftentimes but wind, albeit ratified with the greatest solemnity. True it is,
our word ought to be as good as a thousand Obligations, but deceit is bred
naturally in our hearts, so that we cannot ground upon the bare word of men to
find good dealing. Otherwise, the Lord would never have given Leuit. 19, 11 13.
so many Laws to restrain wrong and Injustice, fraud and oppression. All
these, or at least a great part of them are prevented, by setting down our
Covenants and Agreements in Writing, under our hands and seals.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is needful to have this manner of dealing among us, to the end
that equity and upright dealing might be observed among us, and that all
occasions of wrangling and wresting of words and bargains, may be cut off,
as with the sword of Justice. This is it which the Prophet Jeremy expresses in
the 32. Chapter of his prophesies, mentioned before, where the Doctrine has
his confirmation, Ier. 32, 14.
Thus says the Lord of Hoastes, the God of Israel, Take the writings, even
this Book of the possession; both that is sealed, and this Book that is open,
and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue a long time. Where
he makes mention of a double writing or instrument, which is here called
aftet the manner of the Hebrews [ A Book,] One of them was unsealed; the
other, was sealed, and so concealed; and both of them were evidences to assure
unto him the Land that he bought and purchased. That which was sealed, seems
to be the Original, and as it were the Court Rolls authentically recorded and
laid up for the perpetual rememberance of the matter. That which was open and
unsealed, seems to be a Coppie, delivered and taken word for word out of the
former, to be carried about with them into Captivity. The end of both was for
continuance, that the bargain and sale that passed between them, might never
be forgotten.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, that all occasion of Controversy and couzenage might be taken away.
For if there were no writings to show (the memories of men being frail, and
their practices being unfaithful) the world would be full of all loose
dealings, and concord would be banished from among men. The end why Abraham
set seven Lambs by themselves, Genesis 21, 30.
was; because Abimelech should receive them at his hands, to be a witness of
their agreement, and that all controversies were finished and ended between
them. It appears many times, when proofs in writing fail, that false
witnesses are suborned, and so the seats of Justice are subverted: all which
are easily remedied, when good assurances are at the first taken.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, good assurance is to be allowed and received, to the end we may
safely dispose of such things as are in our power and possession, either to
our posterity or otherwise. Hence has been in all ages, the lawdable and
commendale use of making Wills and Testaments, which the word of God
approoueth, by delivering diverse rules belonging to that profession. The Law of
God and of Nature, has taught; that the Will and Testament of the dead, ought
Gal. 3, 15.
not to be abrogated or altered: and that no Heb. 9, 13.
Will is of force until the Testator be dead. Now, we know not whether the
gifts that we give, and the Legacies that we bequeath, be of our own proper
goods, or the goods of other men, except we have before hand a sufficient
assurance of them made unto us. Seeing therefore, where there is a fast knot,
there is a sure keeping; seeing upright dealing is to be observed; seeing
occasions of quarrels and contentions are to be stopped; and seeing the goods
that God has given unto us, are rightly to be bestowed: it follows, that
every one is to provide for the security and quietness of his estate by all
lawful means, not only by word of mouth, but by assurance in writing, that
thereby he may foresee the danger that may come upon him, and be wary and
circumspect in all his doings; according to the saying of Christ, the Teacher
and Author of true wisdom, Math. 10, 16
Be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. For if wisdom do season all
our affairs, then also our contracts, that are common in this life.

Use 1.
We have heard this Doctrine confirmed: Now let us see how it may be applied,
and what uses may be concluded out of it. First of all, it setueth for reproof
of the Anabaptists, who are hereby directly overthrown, that condemn the
property of goods and possessions, together with all contracts and conditions
that pass from one to another. For we have showed, that bargains and sales
are lawful, not only among the Gentiles, but even among the Christians; not
only under the rudiments of the Law, but in the times of the Gospel. The end
of such writings Obligatory is nothing else, but to assure every one of his
own, and to make it appear what belongs to another man. If then it be
lawful to possess House and Lands; Money and moounables, as our own
substance; it is as lawful to crave and take assurance of the possession of
them, that they may not by fraudulent means be alienated from us. But of this
we have spoken before. Secondly, they are reprehended, who are offended that
men in these cases will not trust them, and rely upon their words without
farther assurance in writing, and refuse to give men good security. For all is
little enough, and many times too little.

I have heard it credibly affirmed and avouched by some Master of that
profession, that albeit a conueyance of Land, a deed of estate, an Indenture
of Covenants be drawn, as sure and certain as learned counsel can devise and
contriue; yet it is an easy matter to pick holes in them, and to take
advantage of them. We see daily, what quirkes and tricks of Law are broached
and invented, whereby such as are simply and honestly minded, are defrauded and
defeated, of Houses, Lands, and other Chattels. Never was there so Psalm. 62, 9.
little truth, and so great craft and cozenage in the World, as in these days.
Satan himself seems now to have opened all his pack of devises, and his
Instruments as good Scholars of so bad a Master, have learned sundry
deuillish practices, whereby true meaning men are oftentimes notoriously gulled.

Some there are that are thought to study little else, then to find wantes and
imperfections; in Statutes, in Leafes, in Lands, and in assurances given
between man and man. This is the cause, that the Makers of our Laws are
compelled to use so many words, and to heap up so many Terms, that thereby
they might heal this sore, and remedy this mischief. Let us not therefore
grieve or grudge to make sure that whereof we have made sale. No man ought to
be so simple as not to ask it; and no man ought to be so peevish as to deny
it. We may easily behold such as are friends to day, to be enemies to morrow:
one while they affirm, another while they deny; at one time they promise to
pay or repay; at another they hang back at it, and make it strange that they
should be challenged of their promise. Every one Phil. 2, 21.
Seeks his own, and not the things of other men: and how many have been
foulely deceived, and guilefully beguiled by trusting too far? But there is no
reason or equity, that when we have received Money, we should deny or delay to
give good security, and that other men should stand to our courtesy. Wherefore,
it is a great injury and In-iustice, to require men to depend upon us and our
word, without further assurance in black and white. For albeit, we mean not
falsely, but faithfully; not fraudulently, but honestly; and our Word be as
firm as our Oath; and our Oath as sure as our Band; and our Band as good as
ready payment, and present possession, in regard of our honest meaning and true
intent: yet we cannot live for ever, and we know not what may fall out after
our decease. Objection.
But some man may say; what need so much a do among Friends? And what stir
do you make, as if we were Infidels, and not Christians? Or what need so many
Covenants and conueyances, where there is a shorter course? And where the
profession of Christ is a stronger band, then all the writings that the wit of
man can imagine and set down? Answer.
I answer, that all they that profess Christ in word, do not believe in him
in heart. And albeit, the saving knowledge of Christ be a band of all bands, to
link us together; yet this does not hinder or abolish civil contracts, to be
assured to us and our posterities. Be it, that we are the greatest friends,
there is so much more need, of so much the more ado among them that are
Friends, thereby to keep them Friends, and to hold the knot of friendship
between the^. For oftentimes it falls out, that through want of words, and
writings, and witnesses; such as have bin most faithful friends, have become
most bitter enemies one to another. Were not Paul and Philemon Friends, near
Friends; yea, the nearest and dearest Friends that could be? Were they not as
the Father and the Son? Did they not so live together and love together,
Verse 17.
That they had all things common? Yet we see Paul offers assurance of his
word and promise in writing, subscribed with his own hand; I Paul have
written it with mine own hand. Yea, notwithstanding all assurances that can be
desired and demanded, we may well perceive by daily and lamentable experience,
what suits and strifes arise about Titles and conueyances of Lands and Livings:
how much more would we contend one with another, if there were no Instruments
drawn, no Evidences made, no writings engrossed, to testify the truth among
us? All Kingdoms and Cities, all Towns and Villages, would be full of
stirs and strifes, of troubles and tumults, that would never end: and the
Judges and Justices might stand from Morning to Evening to hear cases, and
decide controversies between man and man, to the wearying of themselves and
others. He that has an heavy pursse and a strong heart, would never rest
satisfied, if no writing or records could be produced against him. Wherefore,
it stands all men upon; on the one side, willingly to yield good assurance;
and on the other side, to ask good security, where they buy and sell, or
borrow, or bargain, and do give or take upon trust; through want whereof
sometimes, not only the Rents and Reuennewes, but the Lands themselves are
spent in suits and actions of Law.

Lastly, it reproves such, as notwithstanding assurance given, do make no
conscience to pay debts and demands due, upon agreement to their brethren.
These are forward to give assurance, but backward to make performance. Many
there are, that are content to yield to what promises, and enter into what
bands you will crave: but when they have done, they use no care, and make no
account to pay their debts, and to perform the Covenants whereunto they have
consented and condescended, contrary to the counsel of the Prophet, who asking
the question; Psalm. 15, 1, 4
Who shall dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and who shall rest in his holy
Mountain? He answers, He that swears to his own hindrance, and changes
not. It is requisite for every one, to be as wary and well advised in his
promises as he can, and to deliberate with himself and his Friends, that he
do nothing rashly: but when he has stricken hands, and made a promise to his
Neighbor, he ought to perform it, albeit it be to his hinderance, unless
peradventure he be released.

Be it therefore known unto all men, that as it is lawful to converse and
commerse one with another; so it is meet and convenient that they should
deal, not upon vncertaineties, but upon assurances, as they that build not
upon a sandy ground, but upon a sound foundation. As it is right and lawful,
that there should be buying and bargaining, purchasing and possessing among us,
so is it right and lawful, that there should be Deeds and Indentures to
testify the same, and as it were to live when we are dead. And as it is
needful and expedient so long as the world endures and continues, there
should be borrowing and lending; so it is as necessary, there should be Bills
and Bands, to show the truth, and to bind men to the payment of all dues,
debts, and demands whatsoever: and after payment well and truly made, to give
discharge and acquittance accordingly, that controversies (so much as may be)
may be avoided, and concord (as far as is possible) may be maintained and
established. They therefore are unworthy to live in any wel-ordered and governed
Commonwealth, that refuse (being able) to perform their promises, and
satisfy their Creditors, and cancel the Obligations, that themselves have
sealed and delivered before many Witnesses, who albeit they stand not by the
highway side with Swords, or Staves, or Rapiers, or other Weapons, yet are
indeed no better then Thieves and Robbers; nay, many times are worse, inasmuch
they bring greater damage, and are the means of undoing many men. Such are
they that are angry, and much offended with Notaries and Scriueners, which by
their writings bind them (as they imagine) too strongly: and when they see
themselves troubled and arrested upon the Obligation, they hate them, and
curse them, and cannot behold them with a friendly look and a loving
countenance: as if the fault were in the Clearkes, Bayliffes, and other
public Officers, not in themselves and their own unfaithfulness, which is
all one, as if a Male-factor should charge the Executioner (who is the Minister
of Justice) to be the cause of his death, forgetting that his own misdeedes
and misdemeanors, brought him up unto that place and punishment.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing it is needful, that to confirm our lawful contractes,
there be Evidences to show, it is a good point of wisdom required of us, to
use the advice of such as are learned in the law, and are both men of knowledge
and of conscience. For here (if in any thing else) we shall find the common
Proverb true; That the best, is best cheap. Many there are that regard the Fee
more then the Cause; and speak for themselves, rather then for the party that
has chosen them. Again, many suites arise through ignorance and
unskillfulness of the Law; wherefore, it is meet we should resort to a learned
Counsel: so that partly through the want of honesty and piety in some; partly,
the want of skill and practice in others, many poor Clients go to wrack. We
must all deal in the matter of our goods, as wise Patients do for the curing
of their bodies, and the recovery of their health. They will not go to every
Slubberer or Sorcerer; to every Leach or Mountebanke, to take charge of their
bodies; to whom a man would be loath to commit his Beasts. If any doubts arise,
avoid all forgery, and perjury, suborning of false Witnesses, counterfeiting of
Evidences, and such like deceitful practices; as the God of this world has
taught the Children of darkness and confusion. Take that course which God
allows, and Justice warranteth; repair to men of that profession, give him
good instruction, and follow thou his direction. For this purpose, I will crave
leave to set down Three rules belonging to Lawyers.
three rules, that are required and are to be performed of men of Law; the
observation whereof, shall give peace and comfort of conscience with God, and
gain them Crowns and credit among men.

First of all, if they disdain not to be advised and taught by us, let the end
of all their pleas and proceedings, be the finding out of the ttuth. Let this
be the mark that they shoot at, and the star whereby they direct all their
course, which seasoneth all their pleadings (as it were) with Salt. If they
regard not the trial of the truth, nor which way the cause go, so they may
receive their Fee; they abuse the balances of Justice, and turn equity into
Iniquity. God is truth, and every one that belongs unto him, should labor to
bring the truth to light. It is a general rule taught by the Apostle, 2 Cor.
13, 8.
We cannot do any thing against the truth, but for the truth. Woe therefore
unto them that dig deep to hide the truth, and invent shifts to bury it out of
sight, that it may not take place; and do all things against the truth, and
nothing for it.

The second rule is, that they do not delay the causes of their Clients, and
protract the time in hope of farther gain; from Term to Term, and from
year to year. As there may be too great have, so there may be too great
delay, and there are Rocks on either hand; the safest course, is to sail in
the midst between them both, for fear of shipwreck. It is a duty of the
Surgeon, not to linger the curing of his Patient, and to torment him a whole
year, where he might restore him in a quarter. Suites of Law are tedious and
chargeable; they are as the fits of a Fever, that vex the body and trouble
the mind. It is an evil course, to keep sores always raw, and wounds
green, in hope to get Money: So it is an uncharitable proceeding, to retain
causes, and to keep them always on foot, except they may have for expedition.

Lastly, as the end of their pleading must be truth and verity, and the
course of it without delay; so it is required of them, when they know the cause
to be evil, and see the manifest signs of an overthrow, that they do not
conceal it, but discover and open it unto their Clients. They are to forewarne
them of the end, that they do not entangle themselves in unnecessary and
unlawful suites. It is delivered as a duty of the Physician, and of the
Minister, when they come to a sick man that lies on his deathbed, and see
manifest signs of death, that they do not hide it from him, nor flatter him
in his sickness, saying; I hope you shall do well and recover, and be as
merry among your Neighbors as ever you were; but rather with wisdom warn
him, and with discretion certify him of it, to the end he may renounce all
confidence in earthly things, and put his whole affiance in God; according to
that sentence of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1, 9.
We received the sentence of death in our selves, because we should not trust
in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. Thus ought it to be with the
careful and conscionable Lawyer, when he sees the cause of his Clyent
desperate and languishing, without hope of life, he ought not to draw him on,
and move him to proceed, but persuade him to give over, and tell him the
danger that will come upon him. It is too late to bid the Soldier beware, when
the victory is lost. The wisest way is to prevent a mischief betimes, before
it be too late. So then, to trusse up these things closely together, and to
couch them in a narrow room, if he shall use his diligence that the truth may
be discovered, and right take place, and make this the end of his pleading; if
he bend his wits to give quick dispatch to the causes he undertakes, and not
to prolong the time for his own advantage: And last of all, if he lay open the
weakness of his Clyents cause unto him, and forewarne him of the issue
thereof; he shall do the part of an honest man; of a faithful Christian; of a
learned Lawyer; and of a discreet Counselor.

Use 3
Thirdly, from these assurances in writing, to confirm our promises one to
another; we learn the cause why it pleased the Lord to use so many ways and
means with us, to give us his Word, his Oath, his promises, his Miracles, his
Covenants, and his Seals. We learn wherefore all these do serve, even to
strengthen our Faith in the good meaning of God toward us. And as he thereby
assures his own graces, so he provides for our weakness. If there were in
us that measure of Faith that ought to be, the bare word of God might be
all-sufficient to teach us to acknowledge him to be the God of our salvation,
and to depend upon him for our Redemption. But seeing we have much infidelity
in us, and are cumbred with doubting in the promises of God, it pleased him in
great mercy to provide a remedy for our infirmity: so that we may truly say;
where Sin abounded, Grace has abounded much more. Thus we see the Lord Jesus
dealt with Thomas, one of the twelve, when he believed not the Resurrection,
nor those that were chosen Witnesses thereof, but said; John 20, 25, 27.
Except I see in his hands the print of the Nails, and put my Finger into the
print of the Nails, and put mine hand into his side, I will not believe it.
Here we may behold (as in a Glass) the example of exceeding great infidelity
and unbelief; he neither believes, nor will believe; he will live by sight,
and not by Faith. This was no small obstinacy and incredulity in one of the
Apostles, who deserved to perrish in his sin. But Christ Jesus raises him
out of this sleep, and offers mercy with much compassion, as it were pulling
him out of this danger; Put thy Finger here, and see mine hands, and put
forth thine hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but
faithful. This is it which the Evangelist Matthew sets down, Chapt. 12.
Math. 12. 20.
A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench,
till he bring forth judgment unto victory. Now, such as Thomas was, such we
are all by Nature: we cannot be persuaded to believe, except we see and feel.
We will not believe the bare word of God, but are always ready to waver
through unbelief.

Hence it is, that God in great mercy did from the beginning of the world, add
to his word his Sacraments; to assure his people, that as he is the GOD of
truth, so he means truly, and performs effectually whatsoever he has
promised. The Sacraments therefore, are as signs and seals of his promises,
and dependances upon the word that is gone out of his own mouth. The Apostle
speaking of circumcision given to Abraham, says; Romans 4, 11.
He received the sign of Circumcision, as the Seal of the righteousness of
the Faith which he had, when he was uncircumcised, that he should be the Father
of al them that believe, not being circumcised, that righteousness might be
imputed unto them also. Whereby we may see, what the Nature of the Sacraments
is, to wit; what a Sacrament is, and to what end it was instituted.
that they are visible signs instituted of God, to seal up his promises in
the hearts of the faithful. The Author or efficient cause is God, who only
has power and authority to appoint and ordain them, because he it is that can
give force and efficacy unto them. The matter is the visible sign: the form
is the manner of institution, according to the Rites taught and prescribed in
the word.

The end is, that the faithful may be confirmed and strengthened in the truth
of GOD. The word was given to instruct the Church by hearing: the Sacraments
were given to instruct the Church both by it, and by the rest of the senses.
Indeed, if we were Angels, and not men; and were Spirits without bodies, and
heavenly Creatures, not earthly: we should not stand in need of visible and
bodily Sacraments; but because our faith is feeble, and wrastleth with Satan,
the World, the Flesh, and such Enemies; it wants proppes and pillars to
uphold it, that it do not fall. For albeit our Faith be mingled with doubting,
and assaulted strongly with the waves of infidelity, yet it cease not to be
a true Faith. An imperfect Faith is a sound Faith, though it be weak; so that
it stands us upon with the Apostles, Luke 17, 5.
To pray for the increase thereof. Faith goes before the Sacraments: the which
without Faith, are idle and empty signs, without profit, without comfort,
without use.

True it is, the Infidels, as the Aegiptians, Aethiopians, and other profane
people, who neither worshipped the true God, nor embraced the true Religion,
had the outward use of circumcision (as Herod. in Euterpe.
Histories testify) as also the Turks and Jews have at this day: but their
cutting off the flesh is not the Sacrament of God, but a mere civil thing;
yea, an evil thing. Thus then we see, that the Sacraments were ordained of God
to help our infirmity. The promise of God is certain, and his Covenant does
not waver: neither can these outward Seals make it stronger. But it is we that
stumble and stagger, and have need to be supported. And woe unto us if we use
not this help and remedy left unto us, nor profit thereby in confidence and
assurance of our salvation. For God has after a sort bound himself unto us,
as by an Obligation. Indeed man, notwithstanding his words, his oaths, his
promises, his bands, his seals, and his assurances; is oftentimes changeable
and unconstant: but it is not so with God, whose word is yea, and Amen. Were it
not that we are weak of Faith, and slow to believe, he needed not to swear by
himself, and by his holiness: he needed not to have set Authenticke Seals
to his Word, saving that he minded to leave no place for doubting in us.

Hence it is, that the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, Chapt. 6. says; He. 6,
17, 18.
God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
stablenesse of his counsel, bound himself by an Oath, that by two immutable
things, wherein it was impossible that God should lie, we might have strong
consolation, which have our refuge, to lay hold upon that hope that is set
before us, etc. The greater means God has left unto us, the greater faith he
requires of us, and the more conscionable use of those means, that we may not
always be Children. Woe then unto us, if in the store of so great mercies,
and variety of so many means, we remain distrustful, and do not labor to
gather strength of faith, and assurance of comfort. Let us therefore grow from
Faith to Faith, as it were from strength to strength, and not stand at one
stay: let us proceed from one degree and measure to another, until Christ
Jesus be thoroughly formed in us.

Use 4
Lastly, seeing Covenants in writing be requisite by the Laws of God and Man;
we must know, that it is our duty to deal justly and uprightly one with
another, and in our bargainings, to keep a good conscience toward God and Man.
For this is the end wherefore Instruments in writing were brought in, that all
cozenage might be cut off, and all occasion of strife might be prevented.
Whereby we may gather, that in all ages of men, and times of the World, there
have been many deceits, and much unrighteous dealing, to the disturbance of
public peace, and the dissoluing of concord among men: otherwise it had been
in vain to require, or to receive such security in our buying and selling, in
our borrowing and lending one with another. If every man's word and deed did
ever go together, and the outward words of his mouth, did agree with the
inward secrets of his heart, if he did hate fraud and falsehood, as Death and
Hell: what need were there of so many men's oaths to be taken, of so many
Witnesses to be called, of so many Writings to be engrossed, of so many
Evidences to be drawn, and of so many assurances to be made. A man cannot in
these days borrow or lend a little Money, but there must be Bills and Bands,
Writings and Obligations, Seals and Witnesses, to testify the same. If there
were those sincere hearts that ought to be among us, and that upright dealing
that God requires, there should not need so many Oaths, not so many Nouerint
vniuersi be every where found. Let us therefore deal justly and truly, and
not seek to wind away in the dark, so soon as any starting hole is offered
unto us.

Hence it is that Moses says; Leuit 25, 14 15, 16, 17.
When thou sellest ought to thy Neighbor, or buyest at thy Neighbors hand, ye
shall not oppress one another: but according to the number of years thou
shall increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of years, thou
shall abate the price thereof, for the number of Fruits does he sell unto thee:
oppress ye not therefore any Man his Neighbor, but thou shall fear thy God,
for I am the Lord your GOD. Where we see, the Lord charge his people to keep
a good conscience in their Traffic one with another, and condemns all
deceitful Sellers and cozening Bargainers, that aim only at their own
gain, but seek not the good of their Brethren. Heereunto comes the
Exhortation of the Apostle. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 4, 6.
Let no Man oppress or defraud his Brother in any matter: for the Lord is an
Auenger of all such things. This is a notable warning to all men that profess
holiness, without which no man shall see God; to beware of all injuries and
In-iustice, and to seek no commodity to our selves by the discommodity; nor
advantage, by the disadvantage of another. We are all Brethren. Shall one
Brother oppress another? Or deceive and defraud another? Thus does the same
Apostle increase the sin of the Corinthians, when he says unto them, 1 Cor.
6, 4, 5.
Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Why rather sustain ye not harm? Nay, ye your
selves do wrong, and do harm, and that to your Brethren.

There are many Bands, as it were joints, whereby we are knit and coupled one
to another, to be of one Blood, of one Kindred, of one Country, of one City,
of one assembly, and of one Family: all which kinds of conjunction, as so many
strong Arguments do cry out in our ears, and publish to our hearts, that no
injurious and unjust dealings ought to be practiced among us. And albeit the
former reasons ought to be sufficient unto us, yet none can be more effectual
to join us in mutual friendship, and to procure the good one of another, then
the consideration of the conjunction that we have with Christ our head, and the
communion that we have in Christ one with another; whereby it comes to
pass, Ephe. 2, 15.
That we are made one new Man in himself, Romans 12, 5.
And every one, one another Members. If all these things will not suffice and
serve the turn, to turn us away from doing wrongs to those that are so near
unto us; yet let the vengeance of God that hangs over the heads of all
Oppressors terrify us, who in all Ages past has showed, in the seasons
present does show, and in the times to come will show himself the great
Revenger of Fraud, Pillage, Theft, Injury, and all wrongful dealinges. If
then the knowledge of Gods will cannot work in us an hatred of In-iustice, let
us be assured, that after the breach of his Law, and the transgression of his
will, follows the execution of his wrath, and the inflicting of punishment
due thereunto.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. If that his
wrath be kindled; yea, but a little, blessed are all they that trust in him.
These men that scratch and scrape together the Treasures of this life, which
are but trash in comparison of the life to come, never consider the day of
reckoning that shall follow, when the Lord will call them to an account of
their stewardship, And judge every man according to his works. Romans 2. 6.

[ Albeit I do not say to thee, that thou owe moreover unto me, even thin
own self.] Hitherto we have seen the former part of the answer to the
objection: Now remains in these words, to be considered the reuocation of
the former grant; wherein, albeit the Apostle will not speak what he thinks,
yet he leaves it to Philemons secret cogitation, to consider what he was
indebted unto him, as if he should say; I have offered to discharge thy
Servants debt; nevertheless, if thou remember me, and if thou have not
forgotten thy self, the amends is already made, the debt is already paid.
Whereby it appears, Philemo^ won to the faith by the Ministry of Paul.
that Philemon was himself won to the embracing of the Faith by the
Ministry of Paul, as his Servant also was. First of all, the Apostle claims
at his hands, that duty he challenged at the Servants hand; as appears verse
13. where he shows, that he would have retained him, that in his stead he
might have ministered unto him in the bonds of the Gospel. Seeing therefore
both of them owed the like service; it follows, that both of them had the
same occasion: for the Apostle joins them together, as the fruits of his
Apostleship.

Secondly, it is the greatest debt (that can be) that is here expressed,
when he says to him [ Thou owe unto me even thine own self.] It was a
great debt which the Math. 18, 28
Servant owed to his Fellow-Seruant, that required of him an hundred pence, but
so much Money would have leuelled the debt, and discharged him from prison, and
have paid that he owed. They were great Debers Luke 7, 41. and 16, 7, 8.
that owed; the one five hundred pence; the other fifty: but he that owed ten
thousand Talents, was the greatest of all: and yet if they had been able to
have paid so much, the debts had been fully discharged. For where Money is
owing, Money will make even: a little sum, will be paid with a little; a
great sum, with the like quantity. The unjust Steward called together his
Masters Debtors; and one owed an hundred measures of Oil; another so many of
Wheat, but the Apostle says; he did owe unto him, not fifty pence, not an
hundred pence, not ten thousand Talents, not an hundred measures of Oil, not
an hundred measures of Wheat, but his own self; that is, even his Soul and
body. This debt he urges because of his Ministry, by which he was at the first
converted, and hitherto continued in the state of grace, which remained as a
Seal engraven and imprinted in his heart. Doctrine 4. Such as have gained us
unto God, ought above all others to be most dear unto us.
From hence we learn, that such as have gained us to God, or preserved us in
the state of Salvation by the preaching of the Gospel, ought to be most dear
unto us, we owing unto them even our selves, and whatsoever we have besides to
do them good. The benefits bestowed upon us by the Ministry of the word, can
never be sufficiently esteemed, nor worthily enough prized, nor abundantly
enough be recompensed and rewarded.

Hence it is, that when Elisha sell sick of his sickness, whereof he dyed;
Ioash the King of Israel came down unto him, and wept upon his face, and
said; 2 Kin. 13, 14
O my Father, my Father, the Charr^t of Israel, and the Horsemen of the same.
Where we may learn what to account of the Teachers of the Church, by the
testimony of a King that sits on his Throne: if he do so account of the^,
such as are inferior to him must not make less reckoning of them. Hereunto
comes the saying of the Prophet; Esaias 52, 7. Nah. 1, 15.
How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that declares and
publishes peace; that declares good tidings, and publishes salvation; saying
unto Sion, Thy God reigns. Where he shows by way of admiration, that it is
one of the greatest benefits to have Pastors sent unto us, that may direct our
steps into the way of peace, and guide our feet to eternal life. This is the
estimation that the Galathians had of Paul, and the commendation which Paul
gives of the Galathians, that they accounted nothing too dear or too good for
him; Gal. 4, 14, 15
The trial of me which was in my flesh, ye despied not, neither abhorred: but
ye received me as an Angel of God; yea, as Christ Jesus. What was then your
felicity? For I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have
pulled out your own eyes, and have given them unto me. Where he shows, that
he was entertained among them as an Angel; nay, above an Angel, even as
Christ himself. To this purpose he writes to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4, 1.
Let a man so think of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
secrets of God. By all which testimonies it is manifest, that such as converted
us to the faith, and brought us to be Citizens of the kingdom of heaven,
ought to be dearly and entirely beloved of us.

Reason 1
Neither should this seem strange unto us. First of all, they are most of all
to be loved and highly esteemed of us that do us most good: we are most deeply
indebted unto them, that labor most for our benefit. This it is which our
Savior insinuates in the parable of the lender that had two debtors; the one
ought him more, the other less; and he forgave them both: declaring, that he
judged uprightly, Luke 7, 43.
Who supposed that he would love him most, to whom he had forgiven most. The
greatest benefit requires of us the greatest love. But the Ministers do us, or
may do us the greatest good, if we lay not a bar in our own way. For the
blessings that God bestows upon men by the Ministry of his Pastors and
Teachers, are spiritual and eternal blessings: but the blessings that the
hearers do return and recompense to their Ministers, are Temporal, and (as
the Apostle speaks, and calls them) Carnal, saying; 1 Cor. 9, 11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, it is a great thing if we reap
your carnal things? They fight our Spiritual battles for us, and what do we
not owe to such?

Reason 2.
Again, they are unto us in stead of Christ: they are his officers that he has
appointed in his Church, who when he ascended into heaven, gave gifts unto men,
and ordained those that should teach his people unto the end of the World.
Hence it is that the Apostle says; 2 Cor. 5, 20.
Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ: as though God did beseech you through
us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled unto God. If we did
believe that the Ministers were left us in Christ's stead, and did supply his
room, we would otherwise respect them and esteem of them, then we do.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, they are the Ministers by whom we believe; and consequently, by whom
we are saved: They are our Fathers in Christ, by whom we are begotten to
eternal life. To this end the Apostle says; 1. Cor. 3, 5.
Who is Paul then? And who is Apollos, but the Ministers by whom ye believed,
and as the Lord gave to every Man? Can we have a greater blessing bestowed upon
us then Faith; without which, it is impossible to please to God? But Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of GOD: And the word is brought
unto us by the Ministers of God. Seeing then, that they deserve the greatest
love, that do us the greatest good: Seeing the Ministers are unto us in the
place of Christ Jesus; and lastly, seeing they are the Instruments by whom we
believe. It follows necessarily, that such as turn many unto
righteousness, are highly to be regarded, and to be greatly magnified of us
above many others.

Use 1.
The Uses arising from hence, are of diverse sorts. First of all, it directs
us to other necessary truths to be learned of us. It is noted by the Apostle,
to be one general use of the Scripture; that it serves and suffices to teach
all truth needful to salvation: so the former point being received, will help
us to find out and conclude other truths. First we learn, that wheresoever
there is a true profession; a sound feeling; and true taste of Religion, or joy
of salvation, there will be a reverent account, and joyful entertainment of
the teachers and publishers of the Gospel. On the other side, a light and
slender account of the Ministers, argues a light account of the word of
Christ, of the doctrine of salvation, and of the trueness of Religion. Let
every one of us examine our own affections, and try our own hearts by this
Touchstone. It is impossible to make any divorce between the true Ministers of
God, and the true Doctrine which is according to godliness. He that honoreth
one, magnifieth the other; and he that contemns the one, despises the
other. Whosoever it is, that being distempered and diseased, esteems of his
health, or desires it, he will honor the Physician that cures and recouereth
him. He that being wounded, is thoroughly healed, will greatly regard him that
gave unto him the salve to make a plaster. He that has been ignorant, and is
taught the knowledge that he had not before; will make much of him that has
been his Master. This will be the behavior of all such as have felt the
burden of their sins, and been humbled under the heavy stroke of Gods hand,
and felt the unsearchable depth of the sore festering and fretting within them:
They are the only men that know what necessary use there is of the Ministers,
to search their wounds, to raise up with comfort, to bind up the
brokenhearted, and strengthen them that are weak and ready to fall. As for
those that never knew what the Nature of sin is, nor felt the intolerable
burden of it, but think themselves sound, and not sick; heart-whole, and not
diseased; Living men by Nature, and not dead in sins and trespasses; they
take themselves to be in good case, according to the saying of Christ our
Savior; Math. 9, 12.
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick. Thus then we see,
how we may prove our selves whether we be in the Faith or not, even by the good
estimation that we have of such as are the bringers of it.

Secondly, we may gather from hence, that the greatest part of the world lies
deeply and dangerously in condemnation, because such has been the
unthankfulness thereof toward the Ministers and Messengers of Salvation, that
bring glad tidings of peace unto us, that it never respected them, or gave them
any reverence. We see this by the examples of the Prophets, of the Apostles,
and of Christ himself. So long as men resolve to entertain their sins, so
long they will never be willing to entertain the Preachers of the Gospel;
whose Office is, to beat down the Kingdom of sin and Satan, and to set up
the Kingdom of Christ Jesus in the hearts of Men. When Herod was determined to
keep his Brothers Wife, Math. 14, 4, 5
he could not abide to hear John preach unto him, but committed him to prison.
It is an evident sign of a corrupt conscience and of a profane heart, to
account vilely of those whom God has highly advanced. The Ministers of the
Gospel were never so much hated, scorned, and abhorred; they are made a common
reproach and byword for every base Fellow; they are set forth as upon a Stage
or Scaffold, to be derided of every Man; 1. Cor. 4, 13.
They are made as the filth of the world, and the off-scowring of all things
unto this time. If this be the estate of the Ministers, we may give a true
judgment in what estate the cause of Religion stands among us, and what
harbor it finds with the men of this age.

Such as esteem of the Ministers as the filth and off-scowring of the earth,
do also account the knowledge of the word as the Dregs and drauery of all
other things. Such as respect not those that are the means of faith, will
also reject faith it self. The Ministers of the word and true Religion, grow
up as two Plants together; so long as the one is countenanced and vpholden, so
long the other will flourish and spread abroad, and prosper. But if the
Ministers, that are as the Lords Gardiners, or the dressers of his Vine, be
euilly entreated, maliciously slandered, despightfully handled, and
scornefullie reproached; Religion it self begins to faint and to languish,
and cannot long go free. Let us know therefore by this sign, the sickness of
this age, and the dangerous declining of all good things. There cannot be a
more certain token of the ruin of the Church, then when we see the maine
posts and chief pillars thereof set at naught. It is an easy matter to give
judgment what will be the issue of this disease; it is no hard thing to feel
the pulses of this Generation, and to tell them that the very pangs of death
are upon them, so long as the spiritual Physicians of their Souls are base in
their eyes, that desire nothing more then to recover them out of that desperate
consumption into which they are fallen. There is no man has his vital Spirits
so far spent, and the natural heat so much wasted, but is willing to hear
of a Physician that is able and willing to set him on foot again, and to
restore his strength unto him that he had before. But we are become so
senseless or shameless, and so dead in our sins, that we have no desire of
health, nor seek after any spiritual Surgeons or Physicians to look unto us
in time of sickness. There is no disease without cure, if men of knowledge be
enquired after, who have the tongue of the learned to minister a word in due
season.

Use 2.
Secondly, as this Doctrine serves to teach, so it is profitable to reprove
diverse sorts of men; but I will only touch these three. The first reproof.
First, it makes against fuch as make a bad and base account of the Ministers
of God, and think they owe no duty to their Pastors, but reckon them as their
Vassals and Servants; suppose that they are bound to please them, and follow
their humors, and account their Teachers beholden unto them for vouchsafing to
hear them, as crediting their Ministry by their presence. It must not
therefore seem a strange thing unto us, when we see the Ambassadors of God
contemned, when we hear them reviled, and all manner of evil done to their
persons. We know our calling to be of GOD, acceptable in his sight, and
precious with all faithful men. We are the sweet 2 Cor. 2, 15.
savor of God, as well in them that perrish, as in them that are saved: we
know, that 1 Cor. 1, 24.
howsoever the preaching of the Word be a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Graecians, and both a stumbling block and foolishness to
the filthy Libertines, and carnal Gospellers: yet to them that are
effectually called, it is the power of God, and the wisdom of God. We know
what Christ has pronounced of our Ministry, so long as we deliver the truth
of God. Luke 10, 16. Luke 10, 16
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises me: and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

If a Man abuse an Ambassador of a Prince, and set him at naught, it is
reputed and revenged as a disgrace and dishonor done to the Prince himself:
so, if we shall abase and disgrace the Ministers of the Gospel, which are the
Messengers of God, we shall never escape without punishment, but bring upon our
selves swift damnation. Is not he a godless and ungracious Child, that
mocketh and despises his Father, after the example of curssed Cham, Genesis 9, 22.
who tasted of Gods wrath for this contempt? The Lord pronounces a fearful
threatening against this fearful sin; The eye Prou. 30, 17.
that mocketh his Father, and despises the instruction of his Mother, let the
Ravens of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it. In like
manner, he is an ungodly and unregenerate hearer, that controlleth and
contemns the Preacher of the word, who is a spiritual Father of the soul,
and gives us not this life, but a new life; not the first birth, but the
second birth; not the sight of the body, but the light of the mind; which
things are far more excellent and precious then the other. There can be
therefore no greater unthankfulness, then to contemn the Ministers of Christ.

The second reproof.
Secondly, it meets with the starting holes and silly defenses that many make
for themselves, who to excuse their contempt of the Gospel, and treading under
foot the word of God, do lay all the blame and fault upon the Ministers. Ask
the question of the most proud Spirits and profane persons, whether they be
enemies to the preaching of the Gospel, and open contemners of the Gospel, or
not: they will deny it, and show themselves ready to abjure it; and yet none do
more evidently contradict the truth then they. These are sly and secret
enemies, who lightly esteem Gods sacred and eternal word, under pretense of
men's persons. They profess in word, to magnify the word; but they regard not
the Ministers that bring it. They know well enough, that if they should openly
oppose themselves against the Scriptures, and bid battle to God; all men would
cry out against them; all men would hiss at them; all men would point them out
with the finger; and nod their heads at them as they go in the streets. But
they go more subtly and circumspectly to work, they pretend the greatest
love to the truth that can be, all their quarrel is to the Ministers that
deliver it. And thus they think to slide away in the dark, that they may not
be espied: whereas their own consciences within them do accuse them, and
their own hearts every way, and every day condemn them, to be deep
dissemblers, hollow hearted Hypocrites, and the most dangerous enemies that
the Church of God has. The same Apostle, that writing to the Thessalonians,
charge them 1 These. 5, 20, 12, 13.
Not to despise prophsying; exhorts them also, and beseeches them in the
same Chapter, That they acknowledge them which labor among them, and are over
them in the Lord, and admonish them, that they have them in singular love for
their works sake. The same Apostle that honors the Scripture with the
greatest Titles of Dignity, 2 Timothy 3, 16, 17. and 4, 2, 5.
and makes it sufficient to make The man of God absolute, being made perfect
to every good work, writing unto Timothy: does also command him, to Preach
in season and out of season; to do the work of an Evangelist, and to cause
his Ministry to be thoroughly liked off. It is a vain excuse, and worse then
the Figge-leaues that Adam sewed together to hide his shame, to seem to approve
and allow of the word, and yet to reject such as are appointed to speak in the
Church, and are set over us in the Lord.

He would be accounted a stark fool, that being hungry, would dislike and
distaste his meat, and so starve his body through a wilful famine, because he
cannot abide the Cook that dressed it: or that would refuse his drink to
quench his thirst, because he neither loves nor likes him that drawed it for
him, and brought it unto him. Would not he be condemned of extreme
foolishness and simplicity, that would not vouchsafe to receive or look upon,
or hear to be read, a Letter sent unto him from his Prince, and that for his
good, because he cares not for the Messenger that offers it unto his
hands? Or, would not all men account him worthy to dye an hundred times, who
having a pardon sealed and sent him from the King, for his offenses, whereby he
justly deserved to have the sentence of death pronounced against him, to be
immediately executed upon him, should scorn the pardon, and the Princes mercy;
because he favors not the man that is employed to bring it? Or, would not
all men say he were worthy to be drowned, who being fallen into a swift
stream, ready to bear him away with the violence of the waves, would not lay
hand and hold on that which is preferred unto him, because he accounts him
his Enemy that desires to save him? The like folly and madness is in those
that refuse the word, because they hate the person of the Minister that
breaks the bread of eternal Life, that does the message that God has put in
his mouth, that publishes in Christ's Name a pardon of sin to all people that
will repent and believe the Gospel; that would bring them to salvation of
their Souls, that they might not perish, but have everlasting life.

The Prophet commends good King Hezekiah, who albeit he were sharply
reproved, and threatened with a grievous judgment, he did not break out into
raging speeches, nor cast into prison, nor put to death the Prophet that
denounced a great plague against him: but submitted himself to God, and
reverenced the word of the Prophet, saying; Esaias 39, 8.
The word of the Lord is good which thou have spoken. All men will be ready to
confess in general, that the word of God is good, even as God is good; but
they cannot be brought to acknowledge the word in the mouth of the Minister to
be good. This is the shift of those that are wise to deceive themselves. If
they bring unto us the Doctrine of salvation revealed in the Scriptures, it is
that word whereby we shall be judged in the last day, and be found guilty of
horrible Treason against God.

Hence it is, that the Apostle says, To. 2, 12, 16.
As many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law, at the day when
God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel.
The Jews and Gentiles oftentimes cried out against him, and accounted him
unworthy to live, yet he shows that at the last day they should be judged,
not only according to the word, but according to his word; not only according
to the Gospel, but according to his Gospel. When the Lord was determined to
give his own people into the hand of their enemies, and to root them out of
that good Land which he had given unto their Fathers, he hydeth not from them
the cause of his judgments, but sets their sins in order before them,
that 2 Chr. 36, 16
they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there
was no remedy. Where we see, he joins together the mocking of his Messengers,
and the despising of his words. These two, do necessarily follow one another;
and where the one goes before, and leads the way, the other will not come
far behind. If this were well and thoroughly waighed of us, it would avail
us to great good, and further us in the word of salvation, and rid us from
many stumbling blocks that lie in our way.

The third reproof.
Lastly, it reproves such as refuse to give them sufficient maintenance, and
do bar them of that competent and convenient portion that God has allotted
unto them in his word. For, if such as have spent their strength to bring us
unto God, ought above all others to be regarded of us, and have a worthy
recompense of their labors; surely, they deserve to be checked and controlled,
that deal niggardly toward them, who have kept back nothing from them, but
revealed unto them the whole Counsel of God. We see in this place, what the
Apostle Paul challenges at the hands of Philemon, whom he had won to the
Faith; he accounts him to owe unto him all that he had, so that if he should
give unto him all the substance of his house; nay, his own life, it were but
due, it were but a debt that he owed unto him. He that has ransomed a prisoner
out of the hands of the enemies, has jurisdiction and authority over him, and
may worthily claim whatsoever he has. He that has saved the life of his
enemy in battle, and made him captive, is wholly at his disposing that has
taken him. In like manner, such as have pulled us out of the fire of hell, out
of the Jaws of death, and out of the slavery of Satan the Prince of this
world, that rules in the hearts of the Children of disobedience; may by a
Divine and human right reap, our temporal things, and require to be
sustained and maintained by us. Might not he be registered for a most
unthankful person to all posterities that shall come hereafter, that would
suffer him to want that has fed him, that has nourished him, that has
preserved his life? Who does not cry out against Pharaoh and the Egyptians,
Exodus 1, 8.
who forgot Joseph a great Benefactor to their whole Land, that provided much
Corn in the plentiful years, and saved the lives of many thousands by his
labor and industry? So likewise, what a shame is it, to suffer such worthy
Instruments of our good, to lack and suffer hunger? Undoubtedly, they deserve
to be forsaken of God and all good men, that forsake those that are their
Fathers in Christ, and instructers in Christianity. Notwithstanding, this
blemish and reproach sticks nearer unto many men now living, then the skin
upon their backs, which brandeth and blotteth them, as with a coal of
perpetual infamy; who being brought to know themselves, to see their own
sins, to understand their secret offenses, to make Conscience of their ways,
to come to true repentance, and to begin to set their footing in the kingdom
of heaven, by the blessing of God, upon the labors of his Ministers, yet have
no consideration of them, are not greiued nor ashamed to see them want, and to
live in necessity, but have forgotten all the comfort that they have received,
and shut up the eyes of their compassion from them. So often as I consider the
former times of men's zeal and forwardness, that being drawn to a love of the
truth became Instruments to draw on others, and compare the same with the
present estate of things, we may seem to live in a continual Winter, and
under a frozen Climate, wherein appears nothing all the year long, but
Frosts and Ice, and cold, and Hail, and Snowes, covering the Mountains and
Valleys, without any Spring or Summer, without any heat, or growing, or
flourishing of any thing. For I remember, how many being touched with a terror
in Conscience, and feeling the burden of their sins more heavy then Lead,
pressing them down to the nethermost Hell, could find no comfort in their
pleasant Companions, in their delightful pastimes, and in sweet Instruments of
Music, all these were tedious and bitter, and wearisom unto the flesh: one
word of comfort from the mouth of the Minister, was as Balsam unto them, to
refresh their faint and feeble spirits, by whom they were raised up. But now,
living in peace and prosperity, they are fallen asleep, they remember not the
kindness they have received, and the consolation that they have tasted, and
can both hear and see their misery, and almost beggary, that were the greatest
means of their bringing them from the greatest misery and slavery that can be
imagined. For, what greater bondage, then the bondage of sin, of Satan, and
of Hell? It is a great reproach to see a Christian Brother to beg his Bread,
or to crave relief of others: a faithful Minister is a Christian brother, and
more then a Brother; yea, a Christian Father, whose Children in the faith ought
to give him maintenance in the flesh. It is truly said by the Apostle, Gal.
6, 6, 7.
Let him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him, partaker of
all his goods: Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap. To this purpose he speaks in another place, 1 Timothy
5, 17 18. Deuteronomy. 25, 4. Math. 10, 10.
The elders that rule well, let them be had in double honor, especially they
which labor in the word and Doctrine: for the Scripture says, Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn: And, The Labourer is
worthy of his wages. It is a great shame to the people of God, that such as are
conscionable in their Callinges, and are as faithful Stewards distributing to
them in the family such store as they have provided, should complain for want
of maintenance, and a liberal pension in temporal things. The Apostle James
teaches, James 5, 4.
That the hyre of the Laborers which have reaped their fields (which was of
them kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are
entered into the ears of the Lord of Hoasts. The Ministers of God are his
Laborers, and labor for us, to gather us as good Corn into the Lords Barn:
if then, we detain from them the Bread that they should eat, and the fleece
of the woll wherewith they should be clothed, and the fruits of the earth
whereby they should be maintained; This is a crying sin, and will never cease,
until it have brought down Gods judgments upon our selves, and our substance.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing the benefits brought upon us, both upon our bodies and souls,
by the means of the Ministry, can never be worthily esteemed, and sufficiently
expressed; it serves to instruct us in the necessary duties of our obedience,
even to testify our love to the truth, by reuerencing and respecting them that
are as the Lords Messengers, to bring the truth unto our doors. This the
Apostle commends unto us in the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2, 13
For this cause also thank we God, without ceasing, that when ye perceived the
word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but
as it is indeed the word of God, which also works in you that believe. Where
we see, that after the Thessalonians had heard the Gospel of Christ published
unto them, so many of them as were ordained unto eternal life believed; and
submitted themselves to be duided and reformed by it.

This duty, has Four degrees of submitting our selves to the Gospel.
many branches. First, it is required of us to hear the word of God with
patience. This is the first step and degree that leads unto life, and it
proceeds from the mere grace and favor of God, whenever it is wrought in
our hearts. For, how many are there, that when they hear, stop their ears?
That when they see, shut their eyes? That when they understand, do harden
their hearts? When Stephen made a defense for himself, before the chief
Priests that sat in the Counsel, Acts 7, 57.
They gave a shout with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran
violently upon him all at once, and cast him out of the City, and stoned him
with stones. When one Alexander a Jew beckned with the hand, prepared himself
to speak, and would have excused the Apostles, Acts 19, 33
There arose a great shout almost for the space of two hours, of all men
crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Likewise when Paul made a particular
rehearsal of the manner of his conversion to the faith, before the Jews, they
heard him quietly and with silence, until he said; He was sent to the
Gentiles; but then thorough impatience, Acts 22, 23.
they cried out, they cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air,
and lift up their voices, saying; Away with such a fellow from the earth, for
it is not meet that he should live. We see by these examples, that it is a
token of Gods goodness, when he gives us circumcised ears to listen and
attend to the word preached unto us, with patience and perseverance unto the
end, albeit we hear our sins reproved, and our secret thoughts opened unto us.
It is our duty to show our selves swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow
to wrath. We must be slow to speak against that which has bin delivered, and
we must be slow to anger and indignation against those that have delivered the
truth unto us.

Secondly, it is required, that we receive the word that we have heard, and
assent unto it as to the word of truth, and acknowledge it to be good and
true, even that part of the word that contains his judgments, his
threatenings, his cursses, his punnishments. This is to be craved of God, as
being a special work of grace in those that belong to his kingdom. For many
there are that hear, and have their ears open to attend; these are not dull
hearers that mark nothing, but ate ready to listen and give care; and yet they
will not give their assent to that which they have heard. The Apostle teaches,
1 Cor. 2, 14.
That the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. When Paul preached at Athens, in the hearing of the
Stoikes and Epicures, touching the resurrection from the dead, they said, Acts
17, 18
What will this Babbler say? A great part of our ordinary hearers, may be placed
in this rank, who are content to hear, and then sit in judgment upon that
which they have heard, and never give credit unto it, but measure the truth of
God by their carnal conceits, and natural reasons.

Thirdly, it is farther required of us, to embrace the truth in our hearts, and
carefully to apply it to our own souls. It belongs unto us, not only to
hear it with the ear, and to assent to it with the mind but to lay it up
deeply rooted in us, and to make it our own by a special application. This is
the right use of the word, this is peculiar to the elect, and this is a work of
grace in our hearts. The Hystoricall faith gives a general consent to the
truth of God, but never goes farther to apprehend it, as we see in Simon the
Sorcerer, who is said to have believed, that is; in a general manner to have
consented to the Gospel; and yet Peter tells him, Acts 8, 21.
That his heart was upright, and that he remained in the gall of bitterness.
Let us not therefore approbriate the word of grace, that is able to build
farther unto our own selves; otherwise we shall have no more comfort then the
Reprobates have, who come so far, as to confess the word to be true, and
that God by his Son will save the Vessels of mercy.

Lastly, it is required in this special manner, to entertain the word, to
wit; as the word of God. Many receive the word and embrace it willingly,
readily, cheerfully, and joyfully; but not as the word of God. I will not stand
to speak of the Church of Rome, which holds that the word written, has not
authority in it self, unless the Church approve it, and therefore albeit it
embraces the word of God, yet it embraces it not as the word of God. For how
many are there among our selves, that receive not the word of God with that
reverence and obedience that they ought, as appears by the evil practices of
their lives? These men do not receive the word of God, as the word of God, who
if they did in truth and sincerity acknowledge this truth to be of God, and to
have him for the author thereof, they would lead their lives in another manner
then they do; they would be afraid to rush forward, and to run headlong as it
were with violence into the breach and transgression thereof. They would
consider, that God will not bear and endure the contempt of his word, but
revenge the dishonor done to his name, with great plagues and most grievous
judgments. These are the duties that are to be performed of us, and the four
degrees that testify our submitting of our selves to the truth of the Gospel,
preached and delivered unto us by the Ministers of Christ.

Use 4
Lastly, seeing they, by whose ministry we are gained to God, and preserved in
the state of salvation being gained, ought to be most dear to us, we owing
unto them our own selves. This must teach the Ministers of God a necessary
duty and lesson, to be marked of them; to wit, to endeavor by their daily
diligence, and continual preaching of the Gospel, to make the people indebted
unto them. For how do the people come so much in their debt, but that they
receive heavenly Doctrine by their Ministry, as from the mouth of God? Such as
have need of admonition, must be exhorted; such as are weak in the faith, must
be strengthened; such as need comfort, ought to be comforted; such as are
ignorant, must be instructed; such as are willing to be taught must be
beseeched and entreated; and every one must be handled according to his nature
and condition, according to the rule of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2, 15
Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Workman that needs not to be
ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright. All men are not to be handled after
one manner, but one after one manner, and another after another. He were a badde
and mad Physician, that would use all his patients to one receipt. Some have
gross humors in them, and stand in need to be purged; some, more strongly;
others more gently; according to their condition and Constitution. Others have
more need to have nature restored, then purged, such must have Cordials and
Restoratiues ministered unto them. So is it with such as need Physic for the
soul. The Minister must not be dumb and silent among his people, but speak
unto them, and instruct them as a good Father does his Child, one after one
manner, another after another manner, and every one by some means or other.
This the Apostle sets down as a duty by his own practice, 1 These. 2, 7, 8
Phillip. 2, 17. Acts 20, 24.
We were gentle amongst you, even as a Nursse cherrisheth her Children: Thus
being affectioned toward you, our good will was to have dealt unto you, not
the Gospel of GOD only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto
us. Where the Apostle testifies his great love and liberality toward them,
that he accounted not his own life precious and dear unto himself, but was
content to offer it up upon the Sacrifice and service of their faith, that he
might rejoice in the day of Christ. So then, it belongs to us the Ministers
of the word, to preach the Gospel with all patience, diligence, and
long-suffering. Let us be instant, in season, and out of season: Let us be
gentle 2 Timothy 2, 24.
toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil, and instructing them that
are contrary minded. Paul writing to the Romans, and declaring unto them that
he oftentimes purposed to come unto them, that he might have some fruit also
among them, yields this as the reason, To. 1, 14, 15
I am Debtor both to the Grecians, and to the Barbarians: both to the Wisemen,
and unto the unwise; therefore so much as in me is, I am ready to preach the
Gospel to you also that are at Rome. So in another place he testifies, that
Albeit he was free, 1 Cor. 9, 19.
yet he had made himself a servant unto all men, that he might win the more. To
the Jews, he became as a Jew, that he might win the Jews; to them that are
under the Law, as though he were under the Law, that he might win them that
are under the Law: to the weak, he became as weak, that he might win the
weak: he was made all things to all men, that he might by all means save
some. Thus we see how the Ministers ought to apply, and to employ themselves in
laboring in the Lords harvest, to gain a people unto him, and to bring them
into the sheepfold of Christ. For how or which way should the people be
indebted unto us, if we never commit the Gospel unto them? A Debtor and a
Creditor are Relatiues, and have reference one to another. If we do not seek
to make our hearers pertakers of the treasures of the Gospel, nor labor to
enrich them with the saving knowledge of the Doctrine of salvation, we cannot
be dear unto them, they cannot be indebted unto us. If we reap and receive
their temporal things, and eat and drink, feed and cloth our selves by
their labor, without labor in our places, we run continually into their debt,
and they owe us nothing but shame and contempt to be powered upon us, according
to our deserts. It is a great comfort to the people, that make much of them
that have the oversight over them, submitting themselves to them that must give
an account for their souls, considering that thereby they may gather
confidence, and get assurance to themselves, that they are true believers, and
have embraced the Gospel in sincerity. So on the other side, it is a singular
point of sound comfort to all the Ministers of the word, that have bin painful
in the work of the Lord, they may claim as their own right and proper
possession of their people, to be maintained and honored with double honor of
them, and nothing indeed can be sufficient or answerable in proportion to their
pains. But what reason can be alleged, that the people should be burdened,
and not instructed? Charged with Tiths, and not helped with teaching? Pay their
duties, and receive no Doctrine. Hence it is that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4,
1, 2
Let a man so think of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
secrets of God; and as for the rest, it is required of the disposers, that
every man be found faithful. Whereby we see, the good account and estimation
that the Minister receives of his people, ought to move him to faithfulness
and painfulness in his Office; so that we must conclude, that such as will be
reputed for the Ministers of Christ, should show themselves to be so indeed,
by their care of the flock committed unto them.

20 Yea, Brother, let me obtain this pleasure of thee in the Lord, comfort
my bowels in the Lord.

21 Trusting in thine obedience I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou will do
even more then I say.


The order of the words.
Hitherto we have seen the Reasons that Paul has propounded to urge Philemon
to receive and entertain his servant: In these words, we see the matter
concluded and repeated again, howbeit not ydely or unprofitably, but with
gain and an holy advantage: for in the closing up of the whole, he reasons
farther, and infers a new argument to persuade Philemon, drawn from the
benefit and comfort he should receive by it. This reason is taken from the
effects, and may be thus concluded: If hereby I shall obtain fruit of thee
in the Lord, and if thou do refresh my bowels in the Lord, Then thou
should receive him to thee again. But I shall hereby obtain fruit, and
have my bowels refreshed, Therefore receive him to thee again.


Or we may frame the Reason on this manner: That which may greatly rejoice me,
and both please and pleasure me, I am assured thou will willingly do: But the
forgiving of Onesimus will do so, Therefore I am assured thou will willingly do
it.


This is contained in the 20. verse. In the next verse, we have the preventing
of another Objection which might be made, not against some part, but against
the whole Epistle, and the Apostles manner of handling thereof. The Objection
is wanting, but may easily be gathered, and may be thus supplied out of the
Answer which is expressed: Why are you so earnest and vehement in this matter?
Have you so great distrust, and so little confidence in me, that you use so
many words, and deal so earnestly with me? Do you think I have so little
Charity in my self, and so small respect to you, and so hard an heart toward
him, that no persuasion can mollify me, no reason overcome me, no friends turn
me? The answer to this follows: I have written unto thee, not because I
doubt of thy favor, but because I trust in thy obedience: not because I fear
thou will deny me, but because I know thou will pleasure me. This persuasion
he amplifieth by a comparison drawn from the greater to the less, as if he
should say: Nay I am well assured, that for my sake thou will grant a greater
matter then I crave at thy hands. The Reason may be thus contrived: If thou be
ready to yield more then this, then I know assuredly thou will do this: But
thou art ready to yield more then this, Therefore I know assuredly thou will do
this.


The meaning of the words.
Thus much is to be marked of us touching the method, wherein we have the
conclusion of the chief matter, howbeit adorned with much efficacy of words,
and strengthened with great force of reasons. Now let us consider the meaning of
such things as require interptetation. [ Yea, Brother] This first word, is a
note of exclamation, or an Aduerbe of asking, or wishing, or beseeching, or
hoping well; as if he should say: Oh my Brother, I hope that this my
intercession for him shall not be in vain, but carry sufficient weight and
authority to work in thee moderation in relenting, and compassion in pardoning
of him. This word of affirmation is put to garnish the sentence, and to make
the exhortation more powerful and patheticall. When he says, Let me obtain
this favor, or fruit; benefit or pleasure; he uses the Optatiue mood, and
alludeth to the name of Onesimus in the word [ Onaimen] which fitly serves his
purpose. Touching these words [ Comfort my Bowels.] The meaning is, receive
him, and remit his offenses, and in so doing, thou shall cheer and revive my
heart: for the receiving of him, is the releeuing and refreshing of my outward
parts, and of my inward affections; so that nothing shall be more pleasing unto
me. He adds [ in the Lord,] thereby signifying, that the duty required of him
is such, that it pleases God, and sets forth his glory, and may
Religiously be performed; nay such, as could not with a safe Conscience be
omitted or denied. So then, he understands hereby, that he should do him
a great pleasure, and withal please God and obey him. That then which he does
request, is commended by two fruits; it shall benefit man, and it shall be
acceptable to God. In the 21. Verse he says, [ Trusting in thine Obedience,]
which is word for word (in thy harkening unto me) expressing wherein Obedience
consists; Namely, in harkening to that which is commanded, even to hearken
with a purpose to do it.

To this purpose Samuel joins Harkning and Obeying together, 1 Samuel 15, 22
Has the Lord as great pleasure in Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, as when the
voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to Obey is better then Sacrifice, and to
Harken is better then the fat of Rams. So then, the use of this word [ of
Obedience,] is not without great force, for thereby he insinuates, that
Philemon could never escape the note of disobedience, if he did not yield to
the Apostle of Christ, making so honest, so equal, so just a request. Lastly,
when he says, [ Thou will do no more then I say,] the words are in the
Original, [ Above that I speak,] that is; thou will grant more then I ask or
demand at thy hands; testifying hereby, the free hearts of true Christians,
that being provoked to necessary and holy duties, they will oftentimes exceed
that whereunto they are desired. This being the right order, and true
interpretation of these words, in these two verses, they are thus much in
effect; Oh my Brother, if thou regardest any good to me, or desire to
pleasure me in that which I desire or delight in, let me obtain this benefit
and good turn at thy hands, which will also be accepted of God, being a work of
mercy allowed and commended in his word; refresh I beseech thee my bowels, and
comfort me in my son Onesimus, for what thou do to him heerin, shall be as done
to me. If thou ask me, why I use so many words, and whither I do distrust of
thy dealing? I answer, that I write nothing at all doubting, but altogether
trusting thou will grant my request; yea, assuring my self, thou will show
thy self willing to grant more then I have requested, even to set him free if
I should require it.

General Observations out of these two Verses.
These words are short, but the Observations that arise from hence, might be
many: some I will only point out, and afterward handle others perticularly.
First of all, mark the forcible farewell that the Apostle takes. The
Conclusions and Perorations that Orators use, are wont to have the sharpest
edge, but they are wont for the most part to be long and tedious, and full of
words; but the Apostle in this place uses the greatest brevity, with the
greatest vehemence: Wherein he repeateth again the same manner of speech, [
Of refreshing his bowels,] which we had before in the twelfe Verse. [ Thou
therefore receive him that is mine own Bowelles.] Likewise, as he says, [
Let me obtain this pleasure in the Lord,] so he doubleth it, [ Comfort my
bowelles in the Lord.] This teaches, that repetitions of the same Doctrine,
are good and profitable to the Church, according to the practice of Paul, Phil.
3, 1.
It greeueth me not to write the same things to you, and for you it is a sure
thing. Let it not therefore grieve us, or offend us, to hear the same
Exhortations, Reprehensions, and Threatenings, but rather learn to lay better
hold of them at the last, then we have done at the first.

Secondly, by these phrases of obtaining a pleasure, and refreshing his bowels,
we may learn, what joy and comfort the godly do feel and receive in
themselves by the raising and restoring of a sinner. It is as if we wanted an
hand, an eye, a foot, or an arm, and had it given unto us: would not this
rejoice us, and revive us greatly? So is it with the faithful, when they
behold a fellow member with them in Christ's body restored and coupled with
the head, from whence it receives a gracious influence of all spiritual
blessings; it ministers occasion of the greatest joy that can be unto the^.
Thus it ought to be with us, when we see any converted to the faith, we ought
to have a fellow-feeling of the goodness of God bestowed upon them, Luke 15,
10.
inasmuch as the Angels themselves rejoice when one sinner is converted.

Thirdly, mark what words of beseeching and entreating he uses, of praying
and desiring him to grant his request, albeit by his Apostolical authority he
might command him. Whereby we learn, that the godly and faithful are more
moved with mildness and gentleness, and with loving and friendly
exhortations, then by severe threatenings denounced against them. They are
endued with Gods spirit, which is a Master to teach them, and works in them
the will and the deed. Of unwilling, they are made willing; of tough and rough
hewn, they are made pliable and apt for the building; of stubborn, they are
become obedient and ready to learn. They are as good scholars in the school of
Christ, who fear more the displeasure of their Master whom they love, and who
loves them, then the suffering of many stripes and strokes given unto them.
This is a true note to know the disciples of Christ from al others. Evil men
abstain from sin for fear of the punishment, and for feeling of judgment, so
that if there were no threatenings denounced, no curses annexed, no plagues and
torments feared, they would grow worse and worse, and quickly fill up the
measure of their iniquity.

Fourthly, we may gather hereby, that pollitick order is not ouerthrown by the
Doctrine of the Gospel, neither is the right and authority of Masters over
their servants abrogated by the faith of Christ. For Philemon was not an
Infidel or unbeliever, Verse 1.
but a fellow-helper with Paul; yet rule over his servants is not denied him,
nor taken from him, but he is only bidden to receive him courteously, and to
pardon him mercifully; yea Paul (as we see) does humbly beseech him, that he
may obtain and retain his former place, and does not straightly command him to
discharge him of his service. This jurisdiction stands by good warrant of the
Laws of God and Men: but of this we have spoken more at large before, in the
12. Verse of this Epistle.

Fifthly, we see the Title again repeated, that he gives to Philemon, when he
calls him by the name of his Brother. Thus he called him before verse 7. and
so he esteemed of Onesimus, verse 16. Whereby we see, that all men made
members of Christ, and engrafted into his body, are become as faith. Brethren
one to another. Thus does the Apostle call this Onesimus Col. 4, 9.
A faithful and a beloved Brother, who is as one of them that were chief in
the church. The consideration hereof, ought on the one side, to pull down our
proud Feathers, and make us equal with them of the lower sort: and on the
other side, to make us love one another not with dissimulation, but with
brotherly love; not in word only, but in truth; as members of one body, and as
brethren of one father.

Sixthly, he continues his humble supplication for Onesimus, which shows,
that they are far from true repentance, that do excuse, or defend, or deny
their faults and offenses; For he that Prou. 28, 13.
hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes
them, shall find Mercy. When Onesimus did see so famous an Apostle of Christ,
so carefully to entreat for his cause, he ought much more to be humbled with a
feeling and remembrance of his former offenses, thereby to move the mind of
his Master to gentleness and moderation.

Lastly, observe out of this place, that albeit we doubt not to obtain that
which we desire, but are assured to enjoy that which we ask, yet we must deal
earnestly and effectually, both in regatd of the matter it self (for in a
weighty and necessary cause, we ought not to proceed slenderly) and in respect
of the nature of men, who many times are dull to conceive, and slow to grant
that which we crave. There is no man so quick of pace, but needs to have the
spurs clapped to his sides now and then. No man runs so swift a pace, but
sometimes wants exhortations, consolations, reprehensions, admonitions,
threatenings, and such like encoragements. We have not yet attained unto
perfection, so long as we live we must be Scholars in Christ's school, and as
it were, proceed from step to step. Thus much breefly touching the general
Observations: Now, let us come to the handling of the particular Doctrines.

[ Yea, Brother, let me obtain this fruit.] By this conclusion it may appear,
that albeit Onesimus had robbed his Master, and run away with a great part of
his substance, yet he had spent all (as it often falls out with ill-gotten
goods) and then being beaten with his own rod (as the Luke 15, 17.
prodigal son) and brought to necessity, tasted of the sweet fruit of the
Ministry of the blessed Apostle. Hence it is, that he urges so earnestly, and
presses Philemon so exceedingly to remit the debt, and to forgive the hurt he
had received by his naughty servant, as being no way able to satisfy him, nor
by any means hereafter being likely to satisfy him. For if any ability had bin
in him, to make satisfaction, there had bin no place for pardon and remission,
nor for Paul's undertaking of the debt. If we by fraud and stealth, by injury
and injustice, possess the goods of other men, we are commanded to make
actual and real restitution. The word of God teaches us directly, that such
as detain the goods of other men, Leuit. 6, 1, 7. Math. 5, 23, 24 Numb. 5, 6, 7.
are unmeet for his worship, and unfit for his service. Again, such as
withold them from the right owners, Eze. 18, 15, 33.
shall die in their sins, and not have pardon before restitution, when God has
enabled them thereunto. But if we do keep back from them their own, August.
epist. ad Maced.
our repentance is not conscionable, but counterfeit. Heerby it appears, that
Onesimus was not able to pay unto his Master such things as he had taken away,
for otherwise it had bin an unreasonable request to have a debt pardoned which
might be restored. For that which any man does unjustly detain, is none of
his, but that persons from whom it is detained. So then, this being the poor
servants condition, that he had left nothing of all that which he had taken
away (as commonly goods euilly gotten, are euilly spent) the Apostle craves
pardon. Doctrine 1. No man ought to be eager and extreme, in exacting debts
and dues from the poor and needy
From hence we learn, that we ought not to be eager and extreme in urging
and exacting debtes from the poor and needy, but rather be ready to remit
and relieve, or at least to forbear what we may, and are enabled to do.
Heerunto comes the precept delivered in the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 15, 2
Every creditor shall quit the love of his hand which he has lent to his
neighbor; he shall not ask it again of his neighbor, nor of his brother, for
the year of the Lords freedom is proclaimed. Where he teaches, yt mercy
should be showed to their brethren in necessity, that they ought not to be
hasty in calling for the things that are due to the^, but rather to give
farther day and respit. So afterward, Verse 7.
If one of thy Brethren with thee be poor, within any of thy gates in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee: thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut
thine hand from thy poor Brother. To these Commandments remembered unto us
in the Law, let us join the practice of Nehemiah, in the time of a Public
want and outcry of the people, when they complained that they were constrained
to take up Corn upon trust, to morgage their Lands, their Houses, and their
Vineyards, thorough extremity of the famine, to borrowe Money for the Kings
Tribute, which must be paid, and to sell their sons and daughters for Slaves,
Nehem. 5, 9.
he said; Ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, for the reproach of
the Heathen our enemies? For even I, my Brethren, and my Servants do lend
them Money and Corn: I pray you, let us leave off this burden, Restore (I
pray you) wnto them this day their Lands, their Vineyards, their Olives, and
their Houses, and remit the hundereth part of the Silver, of the Corn, of the
Wine, and of the Oil that ye exact of them. Then they said; We will restore
it, and will not require it of them, we will do as thou have said. Where we
see, the wonderful care that this Governor of the people had, to have the
poor relieved, and to cause their case to be respected, and to move the Rich
to be beneficial and bountiful unto them. So then, it is a clear point, that
no man ought to be ouer-hasty in requiring such Debts as are due unto him from
poor men, and such as are in great need.

Reason 1.
If any will yet make a doubt and question of this Truth, let him dilligently
mark the Reasons whereupon it is grounded. First, it is a common Proverb,
That where nothing can be had, the King loses his right. We must therefore
consider the extreme necessity wherein some men are, and the poor estate
into which they are brought. Compassion and Love, are to be extended toward
such as crave favor, and are willing, albeit not able to satisfy us,
according to their desire, and our demand. This is the Reason which is pointed
out unto us, in the parable propounded by our Savior, ann expressed by the
Evangelist Saint Luke, in the 7. Chapter, and the 41. Verse. A certain Lender
had two Debtors; the one ought five hundred pence, and the other fifty; and
when they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both. The like appears in
another Parable mentioned in Matthew, Chapter 18, 24. When the Servant was
brought that ought to his Master ten thousand Talents, because he had
nothing to pay, he had compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him that debt.
Whereby we see, that the cause why his Lord had compassion upon him, was his
inability and necessity, he was not able to pay.

Reason 2.
Secondly, it is a means to bring a blessing from God, that is the giver, and
from them to whom we give, and it is accepted for righteousness. If then, our
doing good to others, brings profit to our selves, it is our duty to show
to them our Compassion, in easing and mittigating such burdens as otherwise
we might lay upon them. This is the reason that Moses makes, Deuteronomy. 24, 12,
13. If it be a poor body, thou shall not sleep with his pledge, but shall
restore him the pledge when the Sun goes down, that he may sleep in his
Raiment, and bless thee, and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the
Lord thy God. This Reason is not superfluous, but very effectual, considering
what Hand-fastes and Hold-fasts we are, and how every one seeks to provide
for himself. We think, the whole earth will fail us; we Dream that
whatsoever is lent, is lost; we fear that GOD will forget us, and forsake us.
Hence it is, that Moses does encourage us to Liberality, by these two
Arguments; Namely, that the poor shall pray for us, and GOD will hear them,
and accept of us.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, the example of God is to be set before us: he forgiueth his poor
Debtors that are not able to pay him. We are al deeply indebted to God, we are
desperate debtors, we owe unto him more then ten thousand Talents, and have
nothing to satisfy the least mite of that he may require and challenge of us.
We are in an hard case, if God should deal roughly and rigorously with us. But
when we cannot restore, he does remit; and when we are not ably to pay, he
offers pardon. This reason is urged by Moses, Deuteronomy. 24, 17, 18. Thou shall
not pervert the right of the stranger, nor of the Fatherless, nor take a
Widows Raiment to pledge: but remember that thou wast a servant in Egypt, and
how the Lord thy God delivered thee thence. In which words, he moves them to
show mercy, because they had received mercy; they had received it of God, they
must return it back again unto their Brethren. Thus Christ himself
instructs us by his own mouth, Luke 6, 36.
Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful. We must therefore be
followers of the bountifulness of God. So then, if we lay these things
together, and consider with our selves either the persons of our brethren that
are in necessity, or our own persons, that receive by it a Commodity, or the
person of God that pardons our iniquity, we may easily gather the truth
of this Doctrine, that it is our duty to show mercy toward our poor debtors
that ^e not able to make satisfaction to us, as they desire, and we require.

Use 1.
Let us come to the Uses. First, this serves to teach us, that men are not
always to look to their own benefit and profit, but likewise to the profit
of others. We see by experience, that many are such great Deuourers and
Sea-gulphes, that they are never contented, but seek to swallow up all they
can lay hold upon: These will remit nothing, release nothing, mittigate
nothing. It is a worthy precept given by the Apostle, Phil. 2, 4.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
other men. This is a fruit of true faith, 1 Cor. 13, 5.
and a sign of true love, when we seek to do good one to another. It is a
blessed and comfortable thing unto our own hearts, to be content to leave our
own, to depart from our right, and to suffer loss and damage. We heard
before, how Nehemiah remedied the oppression of the people, whereby he found as
great comfort to himself, as he brought comfort to them, so that he prayed,
Nehem. 5, 19
Remember me, (O my God) in goodness, according to all that I have done to
this people. If we feel the same affection in our selves, we shall find the
benefit thereof in our hearts. On the other side, it shall fall out to be a
matter of great grief and griping to out Consciences, to remember how
hard-hearted and hand-fasted, we have been, even when the Calamity of the
times and the necessity of our Brethren have cried out unto us for mercy.

We may see a great number that lie in wait and ambushment, as skouts and
espials, nay as Thieves and Robbers for their prey, who suck the blood of thetr
poor Brethren out of their veins, and draw the Marrowe out of their bones.
What persons are to be relieved sooner then the poor? And what times and
seasons are there to show mercy, better then of Dearth and Famine? Yet then do
merciless men (as Horsse-Leaches) pull what they can from the poor, to enrich
themselves, albeit it be with the ruin of others. They are glad of such
times, they are most welcome unto them, whereas (in very deed) they should
then especially open their bowelles and breasts to show Compassion to such as
are in necessity. Their minds are only bent to enrich themselves, they praise
it as a fair and fat year for themselves, albeit it be a lean and
lamentable year for all others. This is a most wretched desire: this argues a
small regard toward the poor, which have much ado to maintain themselves,
even when they are helped and succored. We see how the prizes of all things
increase of Meat, of Drink, of Bread, of Houses, of Lands, of Cattle, and other
Commodities: but the earnings and wages of poor folks do not increase, but
rather decrease, so that such as have been able to live and to maintain their
families in reasonable sort, are now driven to beg, and go behind hand, and
live by Alms. If in the general rising of all other things, if in the
raising, or rather racking of Rents, if in the inhancing of the prizes of such
wares as the rich men have to utter, the hyre also of the Day-labourer were
augmented and increased, it would be more easy for them to maintain an hard
and poor life, and by the sweat of their labor to keep their Wife and
Children. But this seems to be corrupt and unconscionable dealing against the
Law of God, against civil Equity, and common Humanity, and to threaten the
decay of many men's estates, that all commodities should alter to extraordinary
prizes, and yet the poor have only his ordinary allowance for the day, and be
made even a common Drudge or Packhorse, to bear the burdens of others upon
his back. The Law of love requires, that the more we see any man distressed,
so much the more we ought to spare him, until he may recover his estate. If
we see him willing to pay us, and grieved in himself that he cannot pay us,
and use all good means to his utmost power to pay us, let us bear with him,
and not show rigor toward him. If we should see a poor Cripple halting, and
scars^ able to draw his legs after him, and another, instead of reaching him
a staff to stay him, or his hand to help him, would cut his sinnewes in
sunder, or smite his Hamstrings, that he should be able to go no further, would
not all men condemn him of cruelty and inhumanity? In like manner, when we
behold our poor Brother in great necessity, having much ado to maintain
himself, and sustain his life, if we thrust him down altogether, how
dwells the love of God in us? Shall not his poverty cry unto him for
vengeance? Let us therefore beware of adding affliction to such as are already
in misery, and know, that the sparing of the poor, is an acceptable service
and sacrifice unto God, wherewith he is exceedingly well pleased.

Use 2.
Secondly, this Doctrine serves for reproof. First, against wretched Usurers,
and extreme Creditors, that will neither spare nor forbear their poor
Debtors any time, albeit their necessity be never so great, albeit their loss
be never so inevitable, albeit their desire be never so earnest to make them
satisfaction, yet they will extort and exact the utmost farthing, to the utter
ruin of them, and of all that belong unto them. To these men the Apostle James
says, James 2, 13.
There shall be condemnation merciless, to him that shows not mercy, and
mercy rejoices against condemnation. For in the last day, when they shall stand
at the judgment seat of Christ, they shall find him as rigorous to them, as
they show themselves hard-hearted toward others. The rich man in the Gospel,
that suffered Lazarus to lie at his gate, without relief and compassion, Luke
16, 24.
would have given an whole world (if he had had it) for one drop of water to
cool his tongue that was tormented in that flame: but when he most of all
wanted comfort, it was denied unto him. The servant in the Parable, that would
not refrain his anger, nor forbear his fellow that fell down at his feet,
and craved respite, but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the
debt, has the same measure measured unto him again, Mat. 18, 32, 33, 34.
for his Lord did call him unto him, and said unto him; O evil Servant, I
forgave thee all that debt, because thou prayedst me, ought not thou also to
have had pity on thy fellow-seruant, as I had pity on thee? So his Lord was
wroth, and delivered him to the Tormenters, till he should pay all that was due
to him. It is laid to the charge of the Jews, that notwithstanding their
outward profession and show of Religion, they were indeed irreligious and
void of true piety, in that they refused to show mercy toward the poor. For
the Prophet Esaias, Chapt. 58, 3. or rather the Lord by the Prophet, says; They
will draw near unto God, saying; Wherefore have we Fasted, and thou see it
not? We have punished our selves, and thou regardest it not? Behold, in the
day of your fast you will seek your will, and require all your debts.

Where the Prophet reproves the hypocrisy of this people that gloried in the
observation of the Ceremonies, and yet they showed no pity to their
Neighbors, but delighted rather to fleese and flawe them to the uttermost. Is
is wisely said of Solomon. Prou. 22. Prou. 22, 16.
He that oppresses the poor to increase himself, and gives unto the Rich,
shall surely come to poverty. Seeing therefore we ought not to pull out the
throats, or grind the faces, or grieve the hearts of the poor that are not
able to pay us, but to show all mildness and moderation toward them; it
condemns their practice that are hot and hasty in pursuing their right, and
in persecuting such as bear honest minds to pay every man his own.

Hence it is, that the Prophet pronounces him happy and blessed, that
considers wisely, and thinks charitably of such as are in poverty and
distress; abilite, they want power to help them, albeit to relieve them, means
to direct them, and counsel to comfort them; Psa. 41, 1, 2, 3
Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in
the time of trouble: the Lord will keep him and preserve him alive, he shall
be blessed upon the Earth, etc. the Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of
sorrow, thou have turned all his Bed in his sickness. Secondly, this Doctrine
is against those, that count themselves clear and beyond all all reproof, if
they keep the Letter of the Positive Law, being notwithstanding therein
cruel, unjust, and unmerciful. Extreme Law, is extreme wrong, and great
cruelty: for even the laws themselves require to be mitigated with equity, and
tempered with reason; and seasoned with conscience. It is not enough for us to
say; I do but Justice; I do him no wrong; I seek but mine own. This cannot
excuse our extreme courses, nor make our wicked words and works warrantable.
The times and occasions may be such, as may make the seeking of our own to be
theft; yea, Murder; when it takes away the Bread of the poor which is their
living.

We see, how the Prophet makes it unlawful for all persons at all times, to
require all their debts of all sorts of men. We see, that the Servant in the
Gospel is punished for requiring al his own: he cast his Fellow-seruant into
Prison by a warrant of Law, and a strict course of Justice; he exacted no more
then was due unto him; he required not two hundred pence, when an hundred only
would have discharged the debt; yet himself was therefore thrown into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For the times may be
so hard, our Brethren may be so poor, and we may be so wealthy, that we ought
to be content to depart from our right, and to yield to the necessity of such
as are in want, and to say with the Prophet; 2 King. 5, 26
Is this a time to take Money, and to receive Garments, and Olives, and
Vineyards, and Sheep, and Oxen, and Men-Seruants, and Maid-Seruants? The
creditor could say thus much for himself, and lay this for his defense, that
came to take away the Children of the poor Widow to make them his Bondmen;
He required but his own. The Apostle condemning the contentions that were
among the Corinthians in Law-matters, says; 1 Cor. 6, 7.
Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Why rather sustain ye not harm? Nay, ye your
selves do wrong and do harm, and that to your Brethren. Wherefore, when we
see men's poverty so extreme, that they have need to have all forgiven unto
them, we must be content, not by constraint, but willingly to loose sometimes
the principal. It is a silly shift to say, I do nothing but that which Law
warranteth me: for we must also be able to say; I have done nothing but that
which a good conscience has warrented me; which equity has warranted me;
which love has warranted me; and (that which is more then all the rest) I have
done nothing, but that which the profession of the Gospel of Christ has
warranted me. If we can say this truly, we have comfort in God, and peace in
our own hearts. This is it which the Apostle speaks touching himself, and
his own practice; 1 Cor. 9, 12.
We have not used this power, but suffer all things, that we should not
hinder the Gospel of Christ. We must diligently consider our calling, and
labor to bring forth the fruits of the Gospel, that the name of God be not
evil spoken off.

Use 3
Thirdly, albeit we ought not to be rough or rash in exacting our own, but to
deal mercifully, and to bear patiently with the poor: yet this must not give
men liberty, to gather other men's goods into their hands, and then to defraud
them as much as they can. There be some, that under a color of Religion, will
cozen and deceive, creeping into men's bosoms, borrowing and getting from them
what they can, with a corrupt mind and a guilefull conscience, and spending it
in idleness, in ryotousnesse, in drunkenness, and such like lewdness. These
are they, that when they are demanded to pay their due, will be ready to
curse their Creditours, and to keep from them their goods with a strong hand,
and then vpbraid them with covetousness, with miserableness, with extortion,
with oppression. Yea, some are so unthankful, so proud, and so wicked, that
they receive the favors of men, and their friendship toward them, as matters
of duty; insomuch that some will say; what have these Rich men done unto me,
but they were bound to do that and more also? And what is this in comparison
of that, which by the Commandment of God they owe unto me? Thus, while these
men ask relief, they think they require nothing but their own, and that
others are much indebted and greatly beholden unto them, that they will take an
alms at their hands. Others (who yet are more proud and profane) do
shamefully abuse, not only the liberality of the rich, but the very word of
God it self, framing it to serve their own turn, and wresting it to please
their own humors, pretending that they Luke 6, 35.
Ought to lend, looking for nothing again. Thus they bend their Scriptures
which way they list, not knowing what they say, nor understanding the purpose
of Christ. For first, to speak properly when we look for nothing again; we
do not lend, but give. When a Man lends, he may look for his own; whereas
he that gives, does it freely.

Again, the purpose of our Savior is to be considered, who in that place
moves us to do good one to another, with a single eye, and with a simple
heart; not to love, because we would be loved; nor to do pleasure, because we
would receive the like; but to love even our enemies, of whom we have no
kindness again. For in the words going before, he says; Luke 6, 32, 33, 34.
If ye love them which love you, what thank shall ye have? For even the
Sinners love those that love them, etc. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope
to receive, what thank shall ye have? For even the Sinners lend to Sinners, to
receive the like. Then afterward follows the former sentence which these men
allege; Love ye your Enemies and do good, and lend, looking for nothing
again; that is, for no such pleasure at their hands, do not lend to them at
one time, to the end that they may lend to you another time: for this were to
respect more our own commodity, then their necessity; and the love of our
selves, more then the love we bear to our Brethren. It stands not with the
rule of Charity, to give away part of our goods with this condition, that he
pleasure us in the like with that which he has. For these give or lend
nothing, but to those of whom they hope to receive the like; and therefore obey
not the counsel of Christ, that would have those called and invited to our
Tables, which cannot bid us again, nor give us any recompense. So then, we
must show our selves willing to make the poor partakers of that we have,
although they be not able to do the like for us. This is it which our Savior
means By lending, and looking for nothing again: And thus much touching the
natural Interpretation of that place, which these men abuse and pervert, as
they do also other Scriptures. But to leave them, and to return to the former
matter; It is a pernicious kind of Theft, in former days scarce heard off, or
at the least not so commonly practiced, that men regard not how great sums, or
what value of other men's good they get into their hands. If a man be helped
in his need, and he forget it; if he do not ackno^ledge it; if he do not
pray to God to requite and recompense it, when himself has no means to do
it, he abuses the liberality showed toward him, and is no better then a
Thief. But to gather the wealth of others to our selves, and to borrow Money,
or take up Wares of credit, as far as they can be trusted; of one, an hundred
pound; of another, fifty; of one more, and of another less; never purposing
to repay, but as soon as they have laid held on it, to break up, is a more
monstrous kind of robbery then the former. For then a report is noysed abroad
that they are Banckrupt, and by and by an agreement must be sought with their
Creditors, to satisfy them forsooth with the third, with the sixth, with the
tenth part: they purposing afterward to live upon their stolen goods and the
labors of other men; whereby oftentimes it falls out, that many godly and
honest dealing men are utterly undone, and their poor Wives and Children
brought to great poverty. It is made a property of the wicked by the Prophet,
to make care to borrow, but to take no care to restore. Psalm. 73. Psalm. 37, 21.
The wicked borrows and pays not again, but the righteous is merciful and
gives. It testifies the wonderful care that was among the Servants of God to
make restitution, in that when the Iron wherewith one was felling of a Tree
fell into the Water, he cried out and said; 2 King. 6, 5.
Alas Master it was but borrowed.

Whereby it appears, he was more troubled for the lack and loss of it, then
if it had been his own. It is likewise to be considered of us, which the
Apostle Paul teaches. Romans 13. Romans 13, 7, 8
Owe nothing to any Man, but to love one another: for he that loves another,
has fulfilled the Law. Wherefore it stands us upon, to restore the things
we have borrowed, and to pay those to whom we are indebted; albeit, it be with
the sale of the necessary things we have. The Widow of the Sons of the
Prophets, at the commandment of Elisha, sells the Oil that God sent her to
pay her Creditor: as we see 2. King. 4. for the Prophet said unto her; 2 Kin.
^, 4, 7.
Go and sell the Oil, and pay them that thou art in debt unto, and live thou
and thy Children upon the rest. Where we see, God would not have the Creditour
defrauded, but rather then the debt should be unpaid, the Lord himself would
pay it: and the Prophet did not give her counsel to rail and rage against the
Creditor; to call him a Miser and covetous Cormorant, or to live in excess and
abundance, without care to satisfy that debt which might be demanded: but
charged her first of all to pay the whole, and if any were left, she and her
Children should feed upon the rest. Objection 1.
But some man may say, what if we be not able? What if we have nothing
wherewith to pay? What are we then to do, or what course are we to take?
Answer.
I answer, God accepts of a ready and 2 Cor. 8, 12.
willing mind, where there is no farther strength or better ability. Offer
thy labor and service; show thy repentance and remorse of conscience; testify
the truth of them by thy sorrow and tears, and if ever God make thee able,
thou must do it actually.

Objection 2.
It may be further objected, though a man be able to restore, how if in doing
it, he shall utterly shame himself and his profession? Answer.
If this of necessity must follow, make choice of some faithful Friend that
may perform this duty for thee, and conceal thy Name. Secondly, it is better
to seek the praise of God, then the praise of men. Thirdly, honor, and praise,
and peace, are promised to all that be truly converted: and the reward of
sin not repented off, is shame, and reproach, and contempt, both Temporal
and Eternal; according to the Testimony of the Apostle, To. 6, 21, 22.
What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the
end of those things is death: but now being freed from sin, and made Servants
unto God, ye have your fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life.
Objection 3.
But if it be farther asked, How if the parties be dead, or what if I know not
the special persons whose goods I possess? Answer.
I answer, restore them to their Heirs; if they have none, or thou know none,
yet keep them not with thee, they will kindle a fire in thy Family, that shall
wast all thy wealth and store, till nothing be left. In this case make the
poor their Heirs, deal as Zacheus, Luke 19. Be merciful toward them.

Objection 4.
Lastly, the question may be demanded, whether the Son be bound to restore
the goods, which the Father has gotten by oppression? Answer.
I answer breefly, whatsoever the Son knows to be euilly gotten, cannot
be justly kept from the lawful and just owners thereof. Ezekiel. 18, 14, 15. etc.
Prou. 28, 8. If the Son follow the abominations of his Father, and walk in
them, or approve of them, he makes himself guilty of the same offenses also.

Use 4
Lastly, seeing it is our bounden duty to forbear, and sometimes to forgive
such as are poor and not able to pay: we may gather from hence, for the
strengthening and confirmation of our Faith, that much more will God with
patience forbear, and in mercy forgive us our debts and trespasses. He
teaches us to ask forgiveness at his hands, Math. 6, 14.
Being assured of it if we forgive. He charge us to forgive, Not only seven
times, Math. 18, 22.
but seauenty times seven times. He instructs us, That if Luke 17, 4.
our Brother sin against us seauenty times in a day, and seauentie times in a
day turn again to us, saying; It repents me, we must forgive him. We have
not one drop of that infinite mercy that is in God, whose compassion is higher
then the Heavens, and greater then the love of Parents toward their Children.
He that commands mercy to others, will not be unmerciful himself: and he
that forbids cruelty to others, will remember to be merciful himself. It is
the greatest dishonor done unto God that can be, to doubt of his favor, and
to call his loving kindness into question. We must build upon his promises as
upon a stable and steadfast foundation that shall never be removed. Heaven and
earth shall pass away, Math. 5, 18.
But his word shall not pass away. We have the word and Oath of God, Hebr. 6,
18.
as two unchangeable Witnesses, so that it is impossible that he should lie, or
we be deceived. We have the Sacraments of God as two Authenticke Seals, to
ratify his promises, and to make them most sure unto us. We have the earnest
penny as a certain pawn left unto us, Romans 8, 16.
And the spirit of adoption testifying with our Spirits, that we are the Sons
of God. We have the grace of Sanctification written in our hearts, whereby we
are dead to sin, and crucified unto the world.

Wherefore, seeing we have so many ways to warrant his gracious goodness unto
us; why do we yet stand in doubt? and wherefore are our minds wavering in his
mercies, James 1, 6.
As a Wave of the Sea tossed by the violence of the Winds? Let us enter into
our own hearts, and consider our own dealinges toward our Brethren. If we
find our selves ready to forgive, and inclined to remit the injuries done unto
us, and willing to release, or at least to forbear the debts, that we may
worthily challenge of many our poor and needy brethren: we may from this
compassion toward them, gather an undoubted persuasion (as a necessary
conclusion) to our selves, that his mercy should be extended in great measure
toward us, and that he will never forget his wonderful compassion, knowing that
whomsoever he loves, undoubtedly he loves unto the end. He is never weary of
well-doing, his gifts are without repentance. He is not as man, that he should
lie; nor as the Son of Man that he should change, James 1, 17.
With whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. We are variable and
unconstant, but he is always the same, and will make good the words that are
gone out of his own mouth.

[ Let me obtain this pleasure in the Lord, etc.] The Apostle in these
words does testify, that these things which he requested of Philemon were in
the Lord; that is, agreeable to the will of God. He does not crave them to
please himself, or to pleasure Onesimus only, but he asks them, because he
knows that the obtaining of the same will be acceptable to God. Here then he
shows what ought to be the end that we propound to our selves, in making
suites and requests to others; we must consider, not so much what may content
us, as what God commands and allows. Doctrine 2. Whatsoever we desire,
provoke, and persuade others to do, must be in the Lord.
From hence we learn, that whatsoever we do move, desire, provoke, and
persuade others to do, must be in the Lord; that is, warrantable, and
conscionable, standing with the will of God and a good conscience. This is it
which the Apostle handles. Phil. 4. Whatsoever things are true, Phil. 4, 8,
18.
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are worthy love, whatsoever things are of good
report; if there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these
things. And afterward in the same Chapter, commending them for a work of
mercy; he shows, That it was an odor that smells sweet, a Sacrifice
acceptable and pleasing to God. Likewise Ester 4. 14. When Mordecai would
persuade Ester Ester 4, 14.
to adventure her credit and life in the behalf of the Church, which was sold
to the mercy of the Sword, and to the tyranny of the Enemies; he shows the
equity and lawfulness of it, though it were dangerous for her, and threatened
death unto her; Who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a
time? As if he should say; Thou owe this duty to God and service to his
Church, being advanced to the Kingdom for this end and purpose, and therefore
it is well-pleasing in his sight. Thus does Nehemiah exhort the Rich and the
Rulers among the peoole, to restore the Lands, the Vine-yards, the Olives, the
Houses, together, with the hundred part of the Silver, and of the Corn, and of
the Wine, and of the Oil that they exacted of them; showing, that in so doing,
Nehe. 5, 9, 11, 12.
They should walk in the fear of God, and redeem themselves from the reproach
of the Heathen. Thus the Apostle persuades the Thessalonians to
sanctification, 1 These. 4, 3, 7
Because it is the will and pleasure of God, who has not called us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness. By all these consents, as by most strong
Evidences and firm Witnesses it appears, that we ought to have the warrant
of Gods word and approved will, to allow whatsoever we require or provoke
others to do.

Reason 1.
This will be made very plain and manifest by sundry reasons. First of all,
true love will require only such things as are honest. Such as proceed
further, and make their own will the rule and line to square out other men's
actions with all, do want true love, and are not indeed true Frrendes. The
Apostle describing the Fruits and effects of love, says; 1 Cor. 13, 6.
It rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. It is a good and
sound note of a right friend, to request such things only as are just and
seemly. The very Heathen by the light of nature could Cicer. de amicitia.
see thus far, and teach how far we are bound to pleasure and profit our
friends.

Reason 2.
Secondly, such requests as are lawful and lawdable, do give warrant in
craving, boldness in asking, and comfort in obtaining. Such requests shall
never make us ashamed to move them, nor cause us to take the repulse or
denial when we have moved them. We see this in the example of Mordecai, when
he craved of Ester to make intercession for her people, she looked more into
her own danger, then into the Churches deliverance; and respected more her
own person, then their safety: notwithstanding, he Ester 4, 13.
knowing his request to be honest and lawful, would not give over, but
continued his suit; though he were delayed, yet he was not daunted; though he
were denied, yet he was not discouraged; but went forward boldly, until he
received a gracious answer. The like we see in the Woman of Canaan, who came
to Christ for her Daughter, that Math. 15, 22.
Was miserably vexed with a Devil; albeit, she received a threefold repulse,
or a threefold delay; yet such was her Faith, that she would take no denial,
but did stride over all things that might seem to hinder her, and never would
cease until she had obtained her request. Whereby we see, that her honest
request was granted, and she went not away empty.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, such motions receive a blessing from God. If we crave and desire
nothing at the hands of others but that which is right, our persuasions shall
be accepted of God, who has the hearts of all men in his own power, to change
and alter as it pleases him. When Ester asked of the King to have Ester 7, 3.
her life given her, at her petition, and her people at her request; she had
it granted, and more also then she asked. On the other side, unlawful and
ungodly suits, do oftentimes turn to the confusion of such as obtain them;
albeit they may flourish for a time, yet in the end they are snared with the
words of their own mouth. We see this in the example of Haman, who after he
was exalted in honor next unto the King, he craved of the King very
earnestly, Ester 3, 9.
That all the Jews should be slain and put to death in one day: this he
obtained, and prevailed in his suit, but he never lived to put it in execution,
but was hanged on the tree which he had provided and prepared for Mordecai.
Wherefore, seeing it is a chief and principal rule in friendship, to request
and require only honest things; seeing such requests (though they be great)
give comfort and assurance of obtaining, and seeing they receive a blessing at
the hands of God: it follows, that whatsoever we provoke or procure men to
do, must have a fair warrant, and be agreeable to the will of God.

Use. 1.
The uses of this doctrine are not to be omitted. First, we learn from hence
other truths for the strengthening of our Faith. So long as any of our Brethren
ask that which is good, and crave of us to give our consent to that which is
lawful, we ought to have our ears and our hearts opened to hearken unto them.
No request among ten thousand is more reasonable, then when the word of
exhortation is offered unto us, and we are moved to repent, and bring forth the
fruits of amendment of life. So long as we follow our own lusts, and delight
in the profaneness of our corrupt hearts, we walk in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, and run the way that leads to destruction. If then any
come unto us, and persuade us to turn unto God, and to forsake our former
ways: who are better, or greater, or surer Friends unto us then these? For who
can wish us greater good, or procure us greater benefit, then to seek to save
our souls, and to make us inheritors of Gods Kingdom? We ought therefore to
make much of them, and not send them away from us weeping. These seek not
themselves, but us; they aim not at their own profit, but ours; it is our
duty one to another, to exhort one another, while it is called To day. Are they
charged and commanded to have mouths to speak unto us, and ought not we to have
ears to hear them, and hearts to obey them? On the other side, it is necessary
to deny whatsoever is unjust, and dishonest, and unreasonable, whatsoever we are
required, and by whomsoever we are importuned. For as it is a commendable
virtue not to deny, Prou. 3, 28
or delay a Christian request put up unto us: so is it as praiseworthy, to
refuse to hearken and yield to any unlawful and wicked desire. What though we
be dear friends, or great acquaintance, or near Brethren? What though we
have a mutual communion of good things among us? Should we therefore abuse
this conjunction that we have one with another? It is accounted by the Heathen
Philosophers, Haec prima lex in amicitia sanciatur, vt neque rogemus res
turpes, nec faciamus rogati, Cicer. de amicit.
as the first Law to be observed in friendship, that we neither request things
shameful and dishonest, neither do them when we are requested. It is an
absurd thing to imagine, that they which refuse to gratify us in ungodly
things, and to follow our corrupt minds, and to be ready at our pleasure, to
call light, darkness, and darkness, light; good evil, and evil good;
should be said to part friendship, and to transgress the limits of peace and
concord. For it is a base and blind excuse, and a weak pretense, not to be
allowed; for a man, when he has done evil, to confess he did it for his
friends cause, or at his friends request. There is no man so closely tied
unto any, that for their sakes he should submit himself to that which is
evil, and so make himself partaker of their sins. There is little
difference between him that commits evil, and another that yields to the
committing of it. Let us therefore know, that God requires of us this duty,
to take diligent heed that we give no consent to evil, nor incline our hearts
to obey those that would provoke us unto it. They are Instruments of the
Devil, that would draw us to iniquity, and pull upon our own heads, the
heavy wrath and displeasure of God: so that we ought as much to abhor them,
and to fly from them, as if we heard the Devil himself speak unto us, and
therefore to say unto them; Come behind me Satan, or avoid Satan, thou art
an offense unto me.

We have a worthy example of this in Joseph, when his Masters Wife cast her
eyes upon him and said; Lie with me, he hearkened not unto her, but denied her
request, and refused to be in her company; Behold (says he) Genesis 39, 8, 9
my Master knows not what he has in the House with me, and has committed
all he has to mine hand: there is no Man greater in this House then I: neither
has he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because thou art his Wife: how
then can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against GOD. A Carnal Man,
that is nothing else but a Lump of Nature, and a Mass of Flesh, and an heap
of corruption, would marvel much at the great simplicity of Joseph in this
place, and think he dealt like an unwise man, who by obeying his Mistress,
might have gotten great honor, purchased much favor, and rid himself from
much trouble, which afterward he fell into; as well through the false
accusation and information of his Mistress, as also through the rashness and
hastiness of his Master. Yea, Joseph himself, if he had looked no farther
then to the beholding of glory and prosperity, might have reasoned thus with
himself; What shall I do in this case? I am in great trouble on every side.
If I do not consent unto her, I shall be falsely accused, euilly entreated,
hardly imprisoned, and cruelly handled; I shall live in all woe and misery all
the days of my life: were I not therefore better to hearken unto her voice,
and thereby avoid all these troubles that hang over mine head: whereas on the
other side, I am likely by her means, to come to honor and preferment, and to
be in greater credit in my Masters House? He does not thus consent with Flesh
and blood, neither consent to her filthy lust; to the dishour of God; to the
injury of his Master; to the blot of his own name; and the wounding of his
own conscience: but stands at denyance and defiance with her,
notwithstanding her great flattery and daily importunity. Thus ought it to be
with every one of us, though it be our Master, our Governor, our Parents, our
Friends, we must not yield to them in evil; we must not grant any wicked
requests that may bring us out of favor with God, and procure his just
judgments to come upon us. It were better for us to be out of favor with Men,
then out of favor with God: and to fall into their hands, then to sin in the
sight of the Lord. It were better to endure a little reproach for a small
season for well-doing, then to undergo the wrath of God for ever, for
euill-doing.

The Mother of Zebedeus Children came with her Sons to Christ, worshipping
him, and desiring a certain thing of him; to wit, that her two Sons might
sit; the one at his right hand, and the other at his left hand in his Kingdom:
he denied them, and said; Math. 20, 22
Ye know not what ye ask: are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall
drink off, and be baptized with the Baptism that I shall be baptized with
all? The like we see in Peter and John, when they were commanded in no wise to
speak or teach in the Name of Jesus, Acts 4, 19.
they answered unto them; Whether it be right in the sight of GOD to obey you
rather then God, judge you? This is duly to be considered, and carefully to
be practiced of us. Let us not be carried away with the entisements and
suggestions of others, knowing that if we follow their direction and counsel
in evil, we shall incur the same punnishment with them.

Use. 2.
Secondly, this serves to reprove and condemn their folly, that in making
suites and requests, never consider what they ought to ask, and what another
may grant unto them; but respect their own lusts; anger, malice, revenge,
honor, and advantage. What did the Wife of Potipher respect in her raging and
burning lust? Did she respect the Covenant of GOD, or the credit of her
Husband, or her own honor or honesty? No, uncleanness had possessed her
heart; Lust carried her eye; Impudency ruled her tongue; and all parts of
Soul and Body were out of order. The Mother of Solomon requested (as she
thought) 1 Kin. 22, 18, 22.
a small request of him, that Abishag the Shunamite, might be given to
Adonijah his Brother to Wife: and the King promised not to say her nay: but
when he heard it, he revoked his promise, denied his Mother, and executed
Adonijah, as one that aspired to the Kingdom. Wherefore, she was not well
advised what she asked.

The like we might say of Herodias and her daughter. For when Herod's Birthday
was come and kept, the dancing Minion pleased the eyes of a light and
lascivious King, so that he promised with an Oath, Mat. 14, 7, 8.
That he would give her whatsoever she should ask: and she being before
instructed of her Mother, said; Give me here John Baptistes head in a
Platter. The mark that these lascivious Women sought after in this request,
was the murdering and making away of John, which also followed the giving of
this counsel, and the asking of this request. It is an evil thing, to make
any evil motion; yea, albeit no evil follow after it, and albeit no consent
be given unto it. It was evil in Satan the Tempter, to tempt our Savior in
the Wildernsse; John 4, 46.
albeit he found nothing in him, and could fasten no infidelity, no
presumption, no sin upon him. So is it in his Instruments, although they
cannot prevail to seduce any unto sin, and draw them to offend God; yet they
have wicked hearts and intents, in laying snares and baits to entrap others.
We see this in Iosephes unchaste Mistress, albeit she could not draw away his
heart from the fear of God, nor weaken the Faith he had in him, yet her sin
was not the less, nor her purpose any whit the better. We see this likewise in
the suit that Haman propounded and obtained; Ester 3, 9.
If it please the King, let it be written that the Jews may be destroyed. Now
albeit the Church was delivered, yet his malice was insatiable, and in the
end turned to his own destruction. This ought to terrify all graceless
Suppliants, that make no choice or conscience what they demand: for when they
are not careful to desire such things as are warrantable and consonant to the
will and heavenly pleasure of God, their own requests do many times in the
just judgment of God, turn to their own confusion. Wherefore it stands all
men upon, to look with a single eye into the cause which they mind, before
they seek it, and sue for it; that it be just, reasonable, conscionable and
honest: against such, as never have in themselves such consideration, but so
they may speed in their purpose, they regard not what they desire. This is a
point worthy to be marked of all, especially of those that depend upon others
to be advanced and preferred. It is a grievous sin to abuse the favor and
authority of others, to bring their bad and lewd purposes to pass. It is the
manner of many men that are in credit with great persons, to be bold to
solicit any of them without difference or due regard of equity; not
considering the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the thing; the making or
marring of others; the doing of good unto them, or the utter undoing of them.
Hence it is, that John Baptist exhorts the Soldiers that came unto him to be
instructed; Luke 3, 14.
Do violence to no Man, neither accuse any falselie, and be content with your
wages. We must therefore take heed what we ask, and into what inconveniences
we draw and drive others into. Our requests must be seasoned with the fear of
God.

Use. 3.
Lastly, we learn, that no man has an absolute power and authority over
others, but limited and restrained within certain bounds. Paul had the highest
office of Apostleship committed unto him, yet he could not require and command
what we list, he could go no further then the will of the Lord, which is
declared and doubled in this place. Albeit God have lifted up our heads above
others, and made us Rulers to command, yet we cannot command what we list. The
Master must remember, Ephesians. 6, 9.
That he also has a Master in heaven. The Father must consider that he also
has a Father which is in Heaven. Such as are inferiors, are not bound to
yield an absolute obedience in all things, but they are tied to obey their
Superiors, so far as they do not disobey the Superior power, which is above
all power in Heaven and earth. Whatsoever they are commanded to do, can bind
the conscience no farther then stands with the pleasure of God. It is not
enough for them to say; I was moved to it by others; I was commanded to do it;
it lay not in my power to prevent it or resist it; I am under the jurisdiction
of others, and am tied to obey. This will not go for current payment, but
bears a counterfeit stamp; it is like the Figge-leaues of Adam wherewith he
covered himself, which served his turn well enough, until God came to
examine him, and to enter into judgment with him. So these weak excuses,
seem wise reasons to justify our wicked obedience, until they come to be
searched and sifted by the light of Gods word. For this cause the Apostle
teaching subjection to Parents, says; Ephe. 6. 1.
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. Whereby we learn,
how to understand that precept which seems to exact a general or universal
obedience, Coloss. 3. Children, obey your Parents in all things; namely, that
it must be in good and lawful things.

In like manner, as the obedience of Inferiors is instinted and restrained,
not left at random and at liberty; so the jurisdiction of such as are in
Superior places, is not so great, as to tyrannize over men's consciences, to
require what they please, and to command what seems good in their own eyes;
but it must know the bounds that God has appointed, and not exceed the same.
This made the Apostle say to the Church of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11, 1
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. He charge them to go no farther
with him, then they saw him to walk with Christ; and therefore in another
place he shows, Gal. 1, 9.
That if any Man or any Angel from Heaven should Preach otherwise then they
had received, he must be holden accursed.

This serves to reprove all such as bind their Inferiors to do whatsoever
they command. This is to set up our selves in stead of GOD. Absolute
obedience in all things without restraint is due to none, but unto him that
has an absolute power and command over all Creatures. His authority is
infinite, and receives no limitation. As for the Sons of men, how great
soever their power be; yet it is finite, and it urges us no farther, then they
have warrant to command us.

Wherefore, they are greatly deceived, and take too much upon them, that think
themselves abused, their places contemned, and their authority diminished, when
they are not in all things obeyed. Nay, they themselves do not sufficiently
know themselves, nor their high callings, that look for more then is due unto
them, and require of their Inferiors, so much as they with a good conscience
cannot perform. These are they that say; Do they not owe us a duty? Are they
not under us? Have not we power over them? May not we command subjection and
obedience unto us? True it is, all reverence and obedience is due unto them in
the Lord; but if they will have subjection against the Lord, and against his
will, they forget their places, they take too much upon them, and they usurp
a Dominion that was never committed and communicated unto them. Let all that
are in authority, beware of this pride of heart, and advancing themselves above
that which ought to be in them.

This we see to have been in Saul, as he persecuted David from place to
place, so he commanded 1 Samuel 22, 17
the Sergeants that stood about him, To turn and slay the Priests of the
Lord; as if they were bound to do it at his desire. The like appears in
Absalom, when he would satisfy his own malice, and revenge the dishonor
done to his Sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13, 28
he commanded his servants, saying; Mark now when Amnons heart is merry with
Wine, and when I say unto you; Smite Amnon; kill him, fear not, for have not I
commanded you? Be bold therefore, and play the Men. He does not go about to
persuade their consciences of the lawfulness of the fact, but he is blind
himself, and seeks to blind the eyes of other; he is carried away with
malice, and fills the hands of others with blood. Thus are the wicked
possessed with pride, and presume in the height of their iniquity, that all
their ungodly commandments whatsoever, are to be obeyed. But as they are
reproved that execute whatsoever they are required to do; so are they
reprehended, that will require every thing that they list, to glut their own
anger and malice. They that do command, and such as are commanded, are both
culpable of judgment. Saul, in commanding to slay the Priests of the Lord,
was an horrible Murderer; so was also Doeg, the Executioner of it.

Absalom charging his Servants to kill his Brother, was a detestible Parricide;
so also the Servants had their hands defiled with blood that obeyed his
commandment. Let us therefore all of us remember the rule of the Apostle. 2
Cor. 13. 8. 2 Cor. 13, 8.
We cannot do any thing against the truth, but for the truth: So let all
Superiors say; We can command nothing against the Lord, but for the Lord. And
let all Inferiors say; we cannot obey against the Lord, but in the Lord; and
whether it be better to obey God or Man, judge you. We must all consider,
before we require obedience, what it is that we would have done, that we may
have warrant to exact it; and others comfort to execute it.

[ Refresh my Bowels in the Lord.] This is another variable phrase, whereby the
Apostle requires, that Onesimus be received again into his Masters service.
This earnestness for him argues, both that the Man before his calling was
most wicked; but now after his conversion, was turned to be most godly and
religious: besides, that his Masters heart was wonderfully estranged from
him. So then, we are herein to consider two things: first, that unless he
had greatly wronged his Master, and done him injury in some heinous manner,
the Apostle would not have been so vehement, nor have doubled his request for
him.

Secondly, unless he had been thoroughly assured and persuaded of his
unfeigned repentance, doubtless he would never have pleaded his cause with such
effectual Reasons, earnest asseuerations, and often repetitions. Now, in these
words of comforting and refreshing his Bowels, he witnesses; that he should
receive exceeding great joy, if Philemon would release Onesimus, and receive
him into his love and favor again, as he desired of him.

Doctrine 3. Men ought greatly to rejoice at the good and benefit of their
Brethren, in temporal and eternal blessings.
We learn from hence, that it is a special duty required of us, to rejoice
at the good and benefit of our Brethren, both in Temporal and Eternal
blessings. When we see any good befall them in matters concerning this life,
or the life to come, it belongs unto us greatly to rejoice, and inwardly be
comforted. The practice hereof we may behold in Iethro, when Moses told him
all that the Lord had done unto Pharaoh and to the Aegiptians for Isreal's sake,
and all the travail that had come unto them by the way, and how the Lord
delivered them; Exodus 18, 9.
Iethro rejoiced at all the goodness which the Lord had showed to Israel, and
because he had delivered them out of the hand of the Aegiptians. The like
appears in the Virgin Marie, Luke 1. 39. Luke 1, 39.
She arose in those days and went into the Hill Country with have, to a
City of Judah, she entered into the House of Zachary, and saluted Elizabeth.
They had both tasted of Gods great mercy, and had experience of his mighty
power: Elizabeth conceived in her old age: Marie conceived being a Virgin,
and One of them rejoiced with the other, in a mutual feeling; not only of
the goodness of GOD toward themselves, but of his loving kindness toward each
other. The same we see afterward, Luke 1, 57, 58.
When Elizabeth's time was fulfilled that she should be delivered, she brought
forth a Son: and her Neighbors and Cozins heard tell how the Lord had
showed his great mercy upon her, and they rejoiced with her. The same
affection did the Angel fore-shew to Zachary to be at his birth; as appears
in the former part of the same Chapter, Luke 1. 14. Luke 1, 14.
Thou shall have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his Birth. The
Apostle John testifyeth, that He rejoiced greatly, when he found the Children
of the elect Lady 2 John 4.
walking in the truth. So the Apostle Paul writing unto the Thessalonians, one
of the most excellent Churches that ever was planted, 1 These. 2.
calls them His Joy, his Crown, his Glory. By all these examples we may
see, that men ought greatly to rejoice and be glad when they behold any good
to befall their Brethren.

Reason 1
The Reasons are very plain. For first, we ought to be of like affection one
toward another, as members of the same body. If we do draw nourishment from
Christ our head, we must yield mutual help one to another. Thus the case
stands in the Members of our natural bodies: and this we are put in mind
of, Romans 12. 16. Romans 12, 16
Be of like affection one toward another, be not high minded, etc. We have
many members in one Body, and all Members have not one office: so we being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one another Members. Seeing
then, we are so neerelie coupled together, our joy ought not to be private to
our own selves, but mutual.

Reason 2.
Secondly, true love works hearty joy for the good of him whom we love.
Where there is no true love, there can be no joy, but envy at the good estate
of another. Every good and godly thing that we see upon them, will be judged
to be too much; and every cross that we see upon them, will be judged to be
too little. But if we do indeed love them, and have our hearts joined unto
them, we will rejoice and be glad in their good, as in our own. This is it
which the Apostle Paul speaks, as we have showed you before, 1. Corinthians. 13.
6. 1 Cor. 13, 6
Love rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. So then, forasmuch
as we are members one of another, and that wheresoever and in whomsoever true
love is to be found, there will also follow a rejoicing in the good things
that befall unto him whom we love: we may well conclude, that when we see God
any way good and gracious to our Brethren, whether it be in matters of this
life, or in things belonging to the life to come, we ought to rejoice and to
be glad thereat.

Use 1.
Let us now proceed and pass to the Uses, and so apply this to our selves.
First of all, seeing we are to rejoice at the good of our Brethren, as at our
own good; it is our duty to be sad and sorrowful at the hurt and loss that
comes unto them. This is that use which the Apostle deducteth from the
contrary, Romans 12. Rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12, 15
and weep with them that weep. This serves to reprove such as are dull and
senseless, that they cannot rejoice at any grace or blessing bestowed upon
their Brethren, they are not affected at it, they care not for it, they delight
not in it, they are not comforted by it. This deadness of Spirit turns us
into the Nature of Beasts; nay, makes us worse then brute Beasts, who are not
wholly without natural affections. It is made a note of a ve^ wicked and
ungodly Man, Romans 1. 30.
To be without natural affection, and to be merciless. The Apostle charge
us, Romans 12, 10.
To be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love. If a Man should
be smitten and wounded, have Pinnes or Bodkins thrust into him, and yet never
stir, or move, or wagge at it, all men would conclude he were past feeling,
and without life, and approaching to death. So is it with us, if we can behold
the miseries of our Brethren, and never be touched at it, nor troubled with
it, we are as dead men, and as rotten members. Secondly, if it make against
them that are as stocks and stones, and are never a whit moved or cheered at
the prosperous estate of their Christian Brethren; then they are much more to
be reprehended, that rejoice at the ruin and downfall of others, reproaching
them, insulting upon them, laughing them to scorn. These men have no spark of
true humanity, but are destitute of all Charity, which ought to abound in us
toward those that are in misery.

These are far from being grieved at other men's troubles, that after a sort
feed upon them, and make a sport at them. If we were in trouble, and any
should thus deal with us, that is; not pity us, but make a pastime of us;
not comfort us, but deride us; not mourn with us, but scoff at us; we would
think our selves greatly abused and injured at their hands. That which we
could not have men offer unto us, that we ought not to do unto them; according
to the rule of Christ our Savior, Math. 7. 12. Math. 7, 12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do you to them: for
this is the Law and the Prophets. This is the substance of the second Table:
And thus far did diverse of the Heathen see. They saw this to be a very great
cruelty, and a savage and brutish usage of men, to throw them down that are
ready to fall, and to cast them flat on their faces that begin to stumble.
If these Men did but consider that all troubles are of GOD, and that no
troubles befall to others, but are incident to the Nature of Man, and may come
upon our own heads, it would be an effectual means to hold us back from
jesting and scorning at others, in as much as it brings the wrath of God upon
us and our posterity.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing it is our duty to be glad thereat, when any good things
befall our Brethren; it stands us upon to search and enquire in love after
the condition of the Saints in particular, and of the Church in general. For
how shall we rejoice and be glad at their good, if we be not careful to know
in what state they are, and how they fare? This duty we may see practiced in
the holy Scriptures; by Abraham, Lot, Nehemiah, David, and diverse others, who
were both careful to succor and relieve such as were in distress, and
watchful to inform themselves of the wantes and necessities of their
Brethren. And thus we may see how one Church provides for another, as the
Church of Antioch, of Macedonia, and of Corinth, 2 Cor. 8, and 9.
for the poor afflicted Members of Christ that were at Jerusalem. This
reproves such, as albeit they see the troubles of the Church with their eyes,
and hear the complaint of the poor with their ears, yet shut their eyes, and
stop their ears, and pass by them, as the Priest and Leuite did, when they
saw him that fell upon Thieves lie wounded and half dead. These shall find as
little mercy at the hands of God, as they show to their afflicted and
distressed brethren. If then we would find mercy in time of need, let us show
mercy and comfort in the time of calamity, when our Friends, our Neighbors, our
Kindred are in trouble. And albeit we never see our Brethren lie in their
affliction, nor ouer-whelmed with sorrow, that we should succor them, yet are
we not thereby justified and discharged, unless we also have bin careful to
enquire of others how they do, what they want, and wherein they stand in need
of our help. It is recorded of Abraham and Lot, that while they offered their
service to entertain strangers, Ge. 18, and 19 Heb. 13, 2, 3. Nehemiah ^.
they received Angels into their houses at unawares. When Nehemiah met with
some of his Brethren that came from Jerusalem, he tarried not until they made
relation of the estate of the Church, to testify his zeal to Gods worship,
his love to the poor Saints, his desire of the prosperity of the faithful,
but he prevented them, and asked earnestly of their welfare. Thus did David
remember the kindness between him and Jonathan, and forgot not to show it to
his posterity, and to the house of Saul: and albeit he had dealt graciously
and mercifully with many, yet he called for more, and left none of them
unregarded.

Let this affection rule in us, and draw out of us this testimony of a loving
heart. Many there are, that will seem to be friends of the Church, and to
regard the good thereof, and when help is craved of them, will not be behind
hand to deal liberally toward the releeuing thereof. This is a good beginning,
and a commendable virtue which is to be cherrished in them, for there are
hundreds and thousands that never come so far, nor proceed to this step,
but declare themselves either open enemies, or senseless Newters, that look
only to themselves, but have no feeling of the estate of others.
Nevertheless, if God have given unto us a bountiful hand, we must not rest
there, and stand at a stay, we must learn a farther lesson, and ascend up
higher, and show more love to the Church, then to give to them that ask, and
to succor such as we see in necessity; for we must give an account of a
farther duty, even use our tongues that God has given us to inform our selves
in the knowledge of their condition that we see not, that are absent from us,
that are unknown unto us. We see how desirous and greedy men are of news, and
to enquire of Travelers the estate of places and persons, that they may seem
to be ignorant of nothing: and in this they are very Athenians, Acts 17, 21.
who gave themselves to nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some
news. But this desire of nouelty, argues the vanity of our minds, or serves
to the delight of the outward man, or at the farthest brings with it only a
momentary pleasure, and slender profit. If we would know such news as may
delight our selves and others, and bring great pleasure, and greater profit
both to our selves and others, let us inquire how the poor people of God do,
let us ask of their welfare, let us use all means to know their estate; this
shall be well pleasing to God, comfortable to our selves, profitable to the
Church, and auayleable to stir up others to follow our example.

Use 3
Thirdly, if it be required of us to be touched with a feeling of the good
things that come to our Brethren; then it follows, that we ought much more
to be moved to rejoice at our own good. He will never be glad at the benefit
that befalls another, that is no way affected at the good that befalls
himself. When we have the means of instruction offered unto us, and we
begin to be converted unto the faith, there is matter of exceeding great joy
and gladness set before us. It has been an old Herod. in Clio.
custom for men to celebtate and solemnize their birth day, the day wherein
they were borne and brought forth into the world: and we have one example of it
in the Gospel, of Herod, Math. 14, 6. Mark 6, 21,
who when his birth day was kept, made a Banquet to his Princes and Captains,
and chief estates of Galile. If this were used among the Heathen, to retain
in memory the rememberance of that time, wherein it was said, A Man-child is
borne into the world, how much more ought we that are Christians, to make the
day of our new birth, a day of joy and gladness, a day of mirth and delight, a
day of feasting and rejoicing in the Lord, wherein we have been borne again,
and made the Children of God. For the first birth is unto death; the second, is
unto life. The first birth gives us a being; the second, gives us a good
being in God; the first birth is to condemnation, the second birth is to
salvation. By the first birth we are made the vessels of wrath; by the second,
we are made the heirs of the heavenly kingdom. The first birth Ezekiel. 16. 1, 2
is in uncleanness; the second birth is in righteousness, and in true
holiness. By the first birth, we bear the Image of the first Adam; by the
second, we bear the Image of Christ the second Adam. By the first birth, we
can do nothing but evil, Genesis 6, 5.
inasmuch as the immaginations of the thoughts of our hearts, are only evil
continually; by the second birth, we are enabled and strengthened by the spirit
to do good, and to walk in the ways of God that are well pleasing in his
sight; so that this ought to be much more esteemed of us, then the former, and
to comfort us above all things and times in the world. We see this in the
example of Zaccheus, Luke 19, 6.
who at his new birth was comforted exceedingly, he received Christ Jesus
joyfully, he acknowledged him as the Father that begat him willingly: he made
a great feast for gladness, and gave great gifts to the poor, with all
alacrity. The like appears in the Iaylor, recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles, Acts. 16, 32, 33.
Who being converted, at the same time he took his two Fathers, Paul and
Silas, and washed their wounds; he set meat before them, and reioysed greatly
with all his household. We ought therefore to know them that have begotten us in
the Lord, and have bin Instruments of our conversion.

These examples serve as a reproof against those, that never had knowledge
either of the time when, or of the place where, or of the manner how, or of the
person by whom they were converted and begotten again as newborn babes in
Christ; that never had the feeling of this grace of regeneration. This is a
wretched condition, and a fearful sign, that they savor still of the flesh,
and lie in the corruptions of the old Adam, and know not what a second birth
means. Thus it was with Nicodemus, John 3, 1, 3, 4
a man of the Pharisees, a Ruler of the Jews, and a Teacher of Israel, when
Christ had taught him, That except a Man be borne again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, he answered, How can a man be borne which is old? Can he
enter into his Mothers womb again, and be borne? We see in all Churches there
is an order appointed (and to good purpose) that a note should be taken, and a
Register kept of our birth, and the birth of our Children. If there be a good
use of this, much more benefit and comfort shall we find by the recording of our
second birth, of our life in God, and our dying to sin, by remembering the
time, the place, the party, and other such like circumstances, to the
everlasting peace of our own Consciences, by whom we have been brought to
this life. And indeed it is impossible that ever we should rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner, except we have learned to conceive great joy and
gladness, when our hearts are opened and softened to receive the Graces of God
into them.

Use 4.
Lastly, seeing we are to rejoice at the good of our brethren, we must from
hence be drawn to an higher and farther duty; Namely, to give thanks to God for
them, as for the blessings bestowed upon our selves. It is our duty to crave of
God such things as they want, and to give him the praise for such things as he
has bestowed upon them. Our joy must not be carnal, but our rejoicing must be
in the Lord. If then we order our joy and gladness aright, it will lift us up
to behold and consider from whence al good things proceed. We oftentimes
receive at the hands of God many good gifts, but never remember to return
unto him the praise. So it falls out, that diverse will seem joyful and glad
at the prosperity and happiness of their brethren, who nevertheless are
tongue-tied, and never open their mouths to give glory to the giver and
granter of them. We must therefore know, that it is our duty to render thanks
to God for his benefits vouchsafed to his people. And this is a notable sign
and token whereby we may try and examine what our mirth and gladness is, and
whether it be rightly ordered and disposed, or not. If it be Spiritual, and
not Carnal; Holy, and not Profane; Heavenly, and not Worldly; it will stir
us up to cast up our eyes and hearts to the Father of Lights, acknowledging al
to come from the seat of his holiness. The Apostle directing the Church what
their joy ought to be, says, Phillip. 4, 4. Rejoice in the Lord always,
again I say rejoice. This use which now we urge of this Doctrine, is
expressly confirmed and concluded in the practice of Iethro, as we see, Exodus
18, 10, 11. before remembered unto us: so soon as he had testified his
rejoicing; at all the goodness which the Lord had showed to Israel,
immediately he said, Blessed be the Lord, who has delivered you out of the
hand of the Egiptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh: who has also delivered
the people from under the hand of the Egyptians: now I know, that the Lord is
greater then all the Gods, for as they have dealt proudly with them, so are
they recompensed.

Thus Moses declares, that the great works and wonders that God had showed to
Israel, wrought great joy of heart in Iethro his Father in Law; but he rested
not there, nor stayed in an outward rejoicing; his joy did end in
thanksgiving, which sanctifies all our mirth and gladness. For if our mouths
be filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy, and yet God be shut out of
our minds, there is nothing in us, but pride and prophannesse of heart. Then is
our mirth true mirth; and our ioyfulnesse true gladness; when God is al in
all, when we acknowledge him to be the author of it. This appears in the
people, Ps. 126, 1, 2, 3
when God brought again the captivity of Syon, They were like them that
dream, and became very joyful: Then said they among the Heathen, The Lord
has done great things for them; the Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we rejoice. Where we see, that their joy of heart was accompanied with
giving of thanks. The like we might say of Melchizedek King of Shalem, and
Priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of
the Kings, and blessed him, saying; Genesis 14, 19.
Blessed art thou Abram, of God, most high possessor of Heaven and Earth, and
blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thine
hand. This reproves those that know no joy, but that which is fleshly, like
unto themselves, who as they are carnal, so they rejoice in nothing but that
which is carnal. The end of this joy is heaviness. It is the faithful only
that are of God in Christ Jesus, that can truly rejoice and be merry from the
heart: as for the joy of others, it is but from the teeth and tongue outwardly,
it comes not from the inward parts. This the Prophet teaches, Psalm. 32, 21.
and 33, 1. Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful al ye
that are upright in heart: Thereby declaring, that the ungodly and profane men
of the World, have nothing to do with this gladness whereof we speak:
their joy is not in the Lord, but in the Flesh, it is not accompanied with
thankfulness, but with all looseness, excess, and riotousnesse.

Verse 21. [ Trusting in thine obedience, I have written unto thee.] In these
words the Apostle excuses, that he has hitherto been so earnest with
Philemon, declaring, that notwithstanding his exact and effectual manner of
handling the matter, he doubted not of his receiving of him into his favor
again. So then, his drift is to show his good opinion of him, that he would
not stick to forgive him, but yield readily to every honest and reasonable
request. He knew not certainly what Philemon would do, he knew what wrongs
he had received, and what losses he had sustained at his Servants hands; yet
we see how grounding himself upon the former trial of his Faith and
Obedience; he hops the best, he doubts nor the worst; he trusts in his
obedience, he fears not his denial. Doctrine 4. Men ought always to hope
well, and to think the best of their Brethren.
From hence we learn, that it is our duty always to hope well, and to
think the best, not to suspect the worst of our brethren. This appears to
have been in Jacob toward his Children, when they had sold their Brother, and
dipped his Coat in a Kids blood, and brought it to their Father. Albeit he
knew they hated Joseph whom he loved exceedingly, yet he would not suspect
them for the murdering and making away of his Son, but said; Genesis 37, 33.
It is my sons Coat, a wicked Beast has devoured him, Joseph is surely torn
in pieces. The like appears in Joseph, who was betrothed to Marie the Mother
of Christ, when he saw that she was with Child, Math. 1, 19
he concluded rather, that it was by committing Fornication before the
contract, then by committing adultry after her betroathing. When the matter was
uncertain and unknown unto him, he judged the best. Thus dealt Jonathan, who
was faithful toward David, he persuaded himself and his friend the best of
his Father. For when David said, 1 Sa. 20, 1, 2
What have I done? What is mine iniquity? And what sin have I committed
before thy Father, that he seeks my life? He said unto him, God forbid, thou
shall not die: Behold, my Father will do nothing, great nor small, but he
will show it me: and why should my Father hide this thing from me? He will not
do it. There was more Charity in the son, then there was piety in the Father;
for he judged better then Saul deserved. Likewise when the Apostle Peter had
reproved the Jews for crucifying Christ the Lord of glory, and delivering of
him into the hands of sinners, he exhorts them to repentance, saying; Acts 3,
17, 19
Now Brethren, I know that through ignorance ye did it, as also your
Governors, amend your lives therefore and turn, that your sins may be put
away, when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. He
hops the best of them, and does not keep or hide in his heart any hard
conceit against any of them. In like manner, the Apostle writing to the
Hebrews, and denouncing a sharp and severe threatening against those that fall
from God, deny his truth, and renounce his Religion, he adds, Heb. 6, 9.
But beloved, we have persuaded our selves better things of you, and such as
accompany salvation, though we thus speak. Whereby he mittigateth and
asswageth all that he had said, hoping better of them to whom he writes. All
these Testimonies, taken both out of the old and new Testament, do serve to
teach us, that we are bound to judge the best, and charged not to nourish any
hard conceits against our brethren.

Reason 1.
The Reasons following will make it more plain, if any thing can yet be
plainer. First, it is a property of love to be charitably affected, as the
Apostle testifies in his description of it, 1 Cor. 13, 5, 7. Love thinks not
evil. Again he says, It suffers all things, it believes all things, it
hops all things, it endures all things. The Wise man also teaches, Prou.
10, 12
That love covers a multitude of sins. So then, where Christian Love and
Brotherly kindness is, there is the best opinion and judgment one of another.

Reason 1.
Secondly, it is a fruit of a righteous man to hope the best, and to judge
charitably of his Brother. The best man does hardly suspect others to be bad.
It is said of Joseph, Math. 1, 19. that being a just and righteous man, he was
not willing to make the Virgin Mary that was betrothed unto him a public
example, but was minded to put her away secretly. Whereby we gather, that the
reason why he would not pursue his right with extremity, but conceived the
best according to the rule of Charity, was, because he was a just man, ready
to give to every man his own. On the other side, it is a note of a wicked
man, to think or immagine the worst of men. It is a common Proverb, A man
does muse, as he does use; as himself, uses to do, so he immagineth of
another. He that judges lewdly of another, by mere suspicion or supposition,
is commonly lewd himself. For such as are wicked, do think others as wicked
as themselves: and such as are Hypocrites themselves, are most forward to tax
others of hypocrisy. Seeing therefore, to be charitably minded, is both a
property of love, and a fruit of righteousness; it follows, that we ought to
hope the best of all our brethren.

Use 1.
The Uses remain to be considered. First, this serves to reprove sundry
abuses that are crept in among us, and are too common in our practice, directly
condemned in the ninth Commandment; which tend to the hurt of our Brothers
good name, as all hard conceits and evil surmizes, all uncharitable opinions,
and suspicions, against them. The good name of a man is very precious, yet it
has many enemies. If then we be charged to conceive the best in doubtful
cases one of another, the capital sin of Calumniation or slander, is heerby
condemned, as the chief opposite to a man's estimation and credit. This has
many branches, that are breaches of the Law: all of one kind and Kindred, and
all enemies unto the good Names of our Brethren. In this number are ranged
these three, as Companions one of another: the Tale-breeder, the Talebearer,
and the Tale believer.

The first beginner of all the mischief, is the Inuenter and Deviser of Tales,
who forgeth them in the fire of hell, who hammereth them upon the A nuile of
malice and envy, who venteth them abroad, and lets them fly upon the wings
of fame and report, thereby maliciously intending the disgrace and damage of
his Brother. There is no sin makes a man so resemble the Devil, as this
does; inasmuch as he has his name from slaundering and backbyting. These men
the Lord does greatly detest, and will shut them out of his kingdom.

Secondly, hereby is reproved the Tale-carrier; the former Merchant brings
in the wares, this man is as a Peddler to utter the wares, and to set them to
sale. And thus the Scripture it self speaks of these broachers and bringers
of them, as Leuit. 19. 16. Thou shall not Merchandise tales, or walk about
with Tales among thy people. This sort of men is not idle, but is always
stirring up and down; they sit not at home, but frequent many places; they are
not strangers, and unknown abroad, but are acquainted with many persons, and
will insinuate themselves into their company. It is a notable Metaphor that the
spirit of God uses, to compare them to Pedlers, or petty-chapmen. We see what
the Trade and fashion of Pedlers is, so soon as they have bought their wares of
some one or more Merchants, they sell the same commodities to others. Thus it is
with Backbyters and Tale-bearers; when they have gathered together a fardle of
tales, of rumors, and reports; as it were with a pack of Wares, they wander
from one place to another, from one house to another, from one person to
another, that they may set out to sale such stuff as they have heard, and
utter them in the absence of their Neighbor, to his disgrace and infamy. These
are they, which increase hatred among enemies, and make discord among the best
Friends. Hence it is, that Solomon says, Prou. 26, 20.
Without wood the fire is quenched, and without a Talebearer strife cease.
Such persons are the very plagues and poison of human society, they wound a
man in his good name, they rob him of his goods, they wrong him in his
friends, they bereave him of his life. This we see in the example of Doeg the
Edomite, who caused the Priests of the Lord to be slain: of Ziba the false and
unfaithful servant of Mephibosheth, who by slandering his Master, obtained his
goods. It is a great injury to rob a man of his goods, it is an heinous Theft
in the sight of God: it is a greater injury to spoil a man of his good name,
which is sweeter then Ointments, and better then Riches; for that which is
stolen may be restored, but the blot of infamy is hardly or never wiped away.
There is some remedy against the biting of Serpents, mad Dogs, and venomous
beasts; but against the tongue of the slanderer and Sycophant, there can none be
found. We see that thieves (who come to spoil and to steal) may be prevented
or shunned, but who can stand before the tongues and tales of the Talebearer?
But it is the greatest injury to bereave a man of his life; which the slanderer
does oftentimes, by sowing discord between party and party, as we showed
before in Doeg, of whom the Prophet David complains, Psalm. 52, 2, 4. That
his Tongue did cut like a sharp Razor, and that he loved all words that may
destroy. They are pronounced happy by the mouth of Christ Math. 5, 9.
that are peacemakers; are not they therefore to be holden accursed, that sow
hatred among friends, as it were Darnell in the fields; that are Make-bates and
pick-thankes, seeking to please the fancies of others? If then, the makers of
peace be the sons of God; surely Tale-bearers, that are makers of debate, are
the Children of the Devil, whose Image they bear. These are the Devils
Merchants, and carry about with them his wares; they are his Apprentises or
Iourny-men, and serve him for wages. And albeit they set up one Trade, yet they
sell not after one fashion. Some come whispering and leasting secretly to the
disgrace of others; some come glozing and perverting the words that they utter,
contrary to their meaning; some have no sooner sold their commodities that
they carry into one place, but they store themselves by and by with new. For,
as they speak to us of other men freely, and fully, and falsely; so they will
speak as largely and lewdly of us, to other men.

Thirdly, here is condemned another enemy of our name and credit, to wit; he
that loves, believes, and entertaineth lies and slanders. These are such, as
deal not toward others, as they would have others deal with them. This sin
is reproved in the Law, Exodus 23, 1. Thou shall not receive a false Tale,
neither shall thou put thine hand with the wicked, to be a false witness. This
the Prophet David teaches. Psalm. 15, 3. He that slandereth not with his
tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor receives a false report against
his neighbor, shall dwell in the Lords Tabernacle, and rest in his holy hill.
But on the contrary, such as slander, and defame, and receive, and believe
false tales, are delivered up to Satan, and are heirs of hell. In theft we
see, that such as receive stolen goods, are accessory to the theft; so he that
willingly hears and receives the reports of whisperers, is guilty of the
crime of back-byting. For it is a true saying; If there were no Tale-inuenter,
there would be no Tale-receiuer; and if there were no Tale-receiuer, there
would be no Talebearer. Against all these Maladies and Mischiefs, an
approved and often tried Medicine, is true Charity; for if there be in us a
Charitable Mind, a Charitable Tongue, a Charitable Ear, a Charitable Heart,
we shall be safe from these euilles. Where there is a Charitable Mind, there
will be no devising and inuenting of slanders. Where there is a Charitable
Tongue, there will be no carting and carrying of false reports. Where there is
a Charitable Ear, there will be no hearing of evil surmises one against
another; And where there is a Charitable Heart, there will be no believing of
them. Many attain to the first step, they have a Charitable Mind, they will
invent and forge no tales; but they miss in the second, they want a Charitable
tongue; for when they have heard false tales, they carry them about from one to
another, and by that means the mischief spreads farther: But many do come
to these two first steps, and yet fail in the third; they have Charitable
Minds and Tongues, they will devise nothing, they will disperse nothing, yet
they want a Charitable Ear, because they take delight to hear false tales,
and to have them brought unto them. It behooves us to watch over our Ears, as
well as our Tongues; and consider, that if we did not desire to hear them,
others would not long take delight to report them.

Use 2.
Secondly, it is our duty to expound and interpret all doubtful things in the
best part, before the truth do plainly and clearly appear unto us, and what
we may to cover their infirmities. We must not be suspicious without great
cause or good ground, but to give all uncertain and wandering reports of our
brethren, the best Interpretation, according to the rule before remembered, 1
Cor. 13, 7.
Love believes all things, it hops all things. True it is, we ought not to
be ouer-credulous and light of belief, to credit all things that are brought
unto us, as David was when he entertained and believed false Ziba against his
faithful subject. Neither ought we to be hard of belief, to believe nothing
that is told us, though never so constantly and certainly, as appears in
Gedaliah, who would not believe Ier. 40, 14, 16.
Iohanan and the Captains of the host, that certified him that Ishmael was
sent to slay him. But this his want of belief, he bought with the loss of his
own life. Again, as we are to construe things in the best sense, and beware
that we wrest nothing contrary to the meaning of the speaker, considering that
they are heinous sinners, that Romans 1, 29.
take al things in the worse part: so we are also bound to show a loving heart,
a tender affection, and a Charitable compassion toward our brethren, in seeking
to defend and maintain his good name, when we hear him slandered, and his good
name impaired. If we hear a malicious enemy broach his malice, by speaking
lies, and uttering slanders against our brethren, ought not we as their
friends, in love to open our mouths in the cause of the dumb, showing our
dislike of their evil reports, and testifying our good affection toward their
persons, and relating the truth in their defense? For we must know, that we
may be slanderers as well by silence, and holding our peace, as by discrediting
them by our tongues. He is a false witness, that hearing his neighbor falsely
accused, does not labor to clear him, when he is able by giving Testimony
unto the truth.

When Jonathan by his own knowledge, perceived that the reports were false
which flatterers had devised, and Saul had immagined against David, (being
then misled and misinformed) he could not hold his tongue, 1 Sa. 20, 32.
but spoke in his defense, in the cause of the innocent, saying; Wherefore
shall he die? What has he done? The like we see in Nicodemus, when he saw the
malice of the Scribes and Pharisees to have bin so great, that they would have
condemned Christ absent and unheard, he stood up in the Counsel, and said;
John 7. 51.
Does our Law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he has done?
This ought to be an example unto us, how to behave our selves, when we hear
good and godly men reviled and rayled upon, wrongfully accused, and unjustly
slandered, we should not be tongue-tied, but open our mouths in their defense.
It is a firm testimony of our love both to their person and profession.
Lastly, we are to show the grief and sorrow which we conceive, when soever we
hear a true report of any faults and sins committed by them that have bin a
blot and blemish unto him. We see this Nehemiah 5 Esra 9. Phillip. 3.
in Nehemiah, in Ezra, in Paul, and many others. So then, such as are ready to
judge the best of their brethren, will be careful to make the best of every
thing, to defend their good name from slanders and reproaches, and to testify
their grief for such evils as break out of them.

Use. 3.
Thirdly, albeit we are to hope the best of others, and to judge charitably of
them; yet we must know, that it is our duty to admonish one another, and seek
to convert one another from going astray^. Hereby we shall save a soul,
clear their good name, and cover a multitude of sins. For it is most
certain, we can never conceive a good Opinion of them, nor have them in any
estimation, nor entertain a Charitable Judgment of their doings, unless we
show our selves forward to exhort and admonish them, when we see they walk
not with a right foot, nor tread in the steps that lead unto eternal life.
When Paul saw Peter dissemble with the Jews, he Galat. 2, 14.
reproved him to his face: so did Nathan the Prophet David after he had
sinned.

It is a witness infallible of our love, in that we admonish our Brethren,
and suffer not sin upon them. It shall be a precious balm, that shall not
break their heads. On the other side, as we are to judge the best of others;
and to admonish those that fall and offend: so we ought not to think that they
hate us that show us our faults, or that they are our enemies that reprove
us. A sharp reproof, is more hardly digested, then a bitter pill is
swallowed. We desire for the most part to be soothed and flattered in our
sins, and to have soft pillowes sowed unto our Elbowes, that we may sleep in
sin, without controulment, and so run into destruction without trouble, and
with much ease. Never were there more miserable times then these ate, in the
which we live. He that reprooueth, makes himself a prey: and he that is
reproved, stormeth and rages at the matter, as if he had received a great
injury, and as if men had gone beyond the bounds of their Calling. But if
there be true Wisdom in us, we must regard those that do admonish us in the
Lord.

Use. 4
Lastly, seeing it is our duty to hope and esteem the best one of another, let
this be acknowledged and confessed of us, that we must judge of no man before
the time; we must take heed of rash judgment, according to the rule of Christ,
Math. 7, 1, 2.
Judge not, that ye be not judged; for with what Judgment ye Judge, ye shall
be judged: and with what measuee you mete, it shall be measured to you again.
Likewise our Savior in the parable of the Householder, which went out at the
dawning of the day to hire Laborers into his Vineyard, signifies, That God
calls at all hours and times of the day; some at one time, and some at
another, according to the good pleasure of his own will. We must despair of
no man's salvation, but hope the best of them, that God will give them
repentance, to come out of the snares and subtleties of the Devil, whereby
they are holden captives to do his will.

This offers unto us these three Meditations. First, it is a comfort to those
that at the last are brought to repentance. No man is excluded from grace in
this life, and from glory in the life to come, that turns unto God with all
his heart. The Thief upon the cross was received to mercy: they that were
called at the eleventh hour, and labored but one hour, had their penny. It
falls out oftentimes, Math 19, 30. and 20, 16.
That the last are first, and the first are last. Let none despair through the
greatness, heinousness, and multitude of his sins, but rather make have, and
delay not the time, to put off from day to day, considering how ready the Lord
is to embrace him, to receive him, to forgive him.

Secondly, albeit the gate of mercy be set wide open for all penitent persons,
yet this ought not to harden men's hearts in carelessness and security. For the
ungodly that continue in their sins, have no defense for themselves and their
presumption in Gods Mercy, by the example of those that were called at the
last hour of the day. Mark, that so soon as the thief and Laborers were
called, Math. 20. 7.
by and by they repented: the reason why they turned from their sins no
sooner, was, because grace was no sooner offered unto them: but when God spoke,
they heard his voice; when God called, they answered without delay: whereas
these impenitent persons have had the means oftentimes offered unto them, and
yet refuse the calling of the Lord.

Thirdly, we are to hope the best of our brethren, to commend them unto God, to
pray for their conversion. There cannot be a greater injury done unto them,
then to pass the sentence of condemnation upon them, and as much as lies in
us, to blot them out of the book of Life. Hence it is, that the Apostle says,
1. Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4, 5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest, and
then shall every man have praise of God. The secrets of God belong unto him,
we are not to search into them, but to adore them.

[ Knowing that thou will do even more then I say.] This is a confirmation of
the former conclusion, drawn from a comparison of the greater to the less, in
this manner: I doubt not but thou will receive him, because thou art ready to
perform more then I require at thy hands, which is amplified and enlarged by
an humane testimony, I know it well enough. Here then we may see, the good
opinion that Paul had conceived of Philemon, that he was willing not only to
grant whatsoever he craved of him, but to yield more then he required.
Doctrine 5. The Faithful being moved to Christian duties, have yielded more
then has bin required of them.
The Doctrine arising from hence is this, that righteous men being moved to
Honest, Charitable, Just, and necessary duties, will yield more then men can
well request and require them to do. The people of God have from time to time
showed themselves ready, not only to do what they have been commanded, but to
practice more then has been charged upon them.

This we see in the Children of Israel, when they were required to bring their
Offerings Exodus 35, 5, and 36, 5, 6.
to the Lord with a willing heart, they brought too much and more then enough,
for the use of the work and the building of the Tabernacle. They were not
slack and backward in furthering the service of the Sanctuary, but zealous and
forward in promoting the glory of God and the place of his worship, so that
they prepared and presented more then was looked for at their hands. When
David saw that the plague was stayed, and the hand of God removed from him and
his people, he was willed to go up and rear an Altar unto the Lord in the
threshing floor of Araunah the Iebusite (where the Angel stood being
commanded to stay his hand) which he desired to buy with his money: but Araunah
said unto David. 2 Samuel 24, 21, 22.
Let my Lord the King take and offer what seems him good in his eyes: Behold
the Oxen for the burnt Offering, and Chariots, and the Oxen for Wood: all these
things as a King, he gave unto the King.

True it is, David would not accept of this kindness, nor offer a burnt
offering unto the Lord his God, of that which cost him nothing, so that he
boght the threshing floor and the Oxen of him at a price; notwithstanding, it
shows the readiness, willingness, and forwardness of this good man to do
more then was required at his hands. And as we saw the free-heartednesse of the
people at the building of the Tabernacle: so we may see the same in preparing
for the building of the Temple, for when David provoked the^ by word and
example to offer freely, and said 1 Chro. 29, 20, 21.
Who is willing to fill his hand to day unto the Lord? The Princes of the
families, and the Princes of the Tribes of Israel, and the Captains of
thousands, and of hundreths, with the Rulers of the Kings work, offered
willingly, and they gave for the service of the house of God, five thousand
Talents of Gold, etc. and they with whom precious stones were found, gave them
to the Treasure of the house of the Lord, etc. So that among them they brought
more to the helping forward of the building of the Temple, then David looked
for.

The like we see in the practice of the Churches of Macedonia, who provided for
the Saints of Jerusalem, not only as they were able, but beyond that which
they were able: for though themselves were brought to great misery, and
extreme poverty, yet they fainted not, but became so forward, that he says of
them, 2 Cor. 8, 3, 4.
I bear them record, that to their power; yea, and beyond their power, they
were willing, and they prayed us with great instance, that we would receive the
grace and fellowspip of the Ministering which is toward the Saints. The
Apostle craves of them a little, and they perform much: he beseeches them
to do according to their power, and they bring unto him beyond their power. By
all these examples, as by a Jury of many witnesses, it appears, that the
faithful will not hang back, but be ready to perform and practice more then
is required of them; they will not do less, but more then is looked for at
their hands.

Reason 1.
Though this truth be plain in it self, yet it will be made much plainer by
reasons. First of all, the obedience of the faithful, will super-abound,
because they set before them the example of God, and delight to come near unto
him. They have experience of his bountiful dealing toward them, he is ready to
grant not only what they ask, but more then they ask. They find him not
only willing to hear them when they pray, Psalm. 21, 3.
But forward to prevent them with his blessings before they pray. When Solomon
desired a wise heart to go in and out before his people, he gave him Wisdom,
Riches, and Honor. Seeing therefore, the godly do feel this unspeakable
liberality of God toward them, that he hears before we call, and grants
before we ask, and answers before we request, we ought to resemble our
heavenly Father, and to put on his Image, that we may show our selves like unto
him in yielding more at the suite of our brethren, then can be required of us.

Reason 2
Secondly, the Children of God have a free and willing mind, and seek to
walk before him with a perfect heart. And what will not a willing heart do?
Will it not strive to attain to perfection? When Moses sets down the
forwardness of the people, in offering to the Lord for the work of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, he makes this to be the cause: Exodus 35, 5.
21, 22.
They had a willing heart. And again, Every one brought somewhat, whose heart
encouraged him, and whose spirit made him willing: both men and weomen; as
many as were free-hearted, came and brought Taches and Earings, and Rings,
etc. The like is mentioned of Araunah the Iebusite, that he had in the service
of God 2 Sa. 24, 22.
The heart of a King. Now where there is a free spirit, a willing mind, and a
perfect heart, there is no dallying or delaying in the duties of piety and
obedience, but so fervent and zealous a proceeding, that we see men voluntarily
inclined to do more then we could desire of them.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, their ioyfulnesse in the works of righteousness and godliness do
exceed the trial of necessity. Though the Lord try his people with manifold
afflictions, yet they are so far from quailing and cooling their willing
readiness, and ready willingness to do according to that they are required,
nay above that they are required, yt they make the same much more excellent and
famous. This is the reason expressed by the Apostle, that the Churches of
Macedonia were liberal according to their ability, and beyond their ability, 2
Cor. 8, 2.
Because in great trial of affliction their joy abounded, and their most
extreme poverty abounded unto their rich liberality. Such joy and comfort do
the faithful take in doing the duties required of them, that they think they
can never do too much, or proceed too far.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, they acknowledge all things to be from God, and to be his; and
therefore they will yield freely, where he requires, and what he requires,
and as far as he enableth them to their uttermost strength. This makes
strive with themselves, even to out-go themselves. The Prophet David
acknowledges this upon the practice of a good duty performed with an earnest
and zealous affection, he blessed the Lord before all the Congregation, and
said; 1 Chro. 29, 10, 11.
Blessed be thou, O Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever and ever: Thine, O
Lord, is greatness, and power, and glory, and victory, and praise: thine is
the kingdom, O Lord, and thou excellest as head over all, etc. The same does
the Apostle remember of them of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8, 5.
This they did, not as we looked for, but they gave their own selves, first to
the Lord, and after unto us by the will of God. All these Reasons being laid
together, and duly considered, do persuade to our Consciences this truth, that
we should show our selves ready to yield more, rather then less, touching
those duties that are required of us.

Use. 1.
The Uses remain to be handled. First, from hence we learn this point, that
forwardness and zeal in good things is greatly to be commended. We cannot
yield more then is looked for at our hands, unless we be earnest and fervent
in the spirit, as men that are led by the spirit. True it is, there is no
warrant to walk without our warrant, or to run too fast without any guide.
Hence it is, that Solomon says, Eccl. 7, 18, 19. Be not thou just overmuch,
neither make thy self over wise, wherefore should thou be desolate? Be not
thou wicked over much, neither be thou foolish; wherefore should thou
perish, not in thy time? Meaning thereby, that as we should not suffer sin to
reign in our mortal bodies (though we cannot wholly drive it away) so we
should not seek a righteousness beyond the Law. This overmuch righteousness
was in him, who being commanded in the name of God 1 Kin. 20, 35.
to smite the Prophet, and in smiting to wound him, refused to obey, because it
seemed strange unto him to wound a man that was godly, and not guilty of any
crime. The like is that which Saul did, 1 Sa. 15, 21.
who being expressly charged and forbidden to save alive any persons or Cattle
that belonged to the Amalekites, preserved the chiefest of the things, and the
choicest of the Oxen and Sheep to offer up in sacrifice unto the Lord. But the
one of them was slain of a Lion; the other lost his kingdom; to teach us,
that to obey is better then sacrifice; and to hearken, is better then the fat
of Rams. So then, we must understand, that albeit we are to be ready to yield
more then well can be required of us, yet we must not think to do more then
God requires of us. If we speak of the duties that God commands, we come far
short when we have done what we can, and we must confess we are unprofitable
servants; but when we speak of good and Christian duties which our Ministers or
brethren crave of us; and desire us to practice, we should willingly perform
more then they ask at our hands. Let us therefore be fervent and zealous in all lawful and honest things. It is good always to be earnest in a good thing.
The Lord abhors and detesteth the Lukewarm Laodiceans, that are neither
hot nor cold, but will spew them out of his mouth. If any should deal in our
cause for us, we would not have him deal negligently and carelessly: shall we
then be remiss and careless, when we deal in matters that belong to God, and
our own salvation? Shall we deal as men benumbed with cold, that seem to have
no life in them, but are frozen-hearted, and have no motion of the spirit of
God in us? Let us not stand at a stay, but always proceed forward, as
Travelers that hasten to the end of their journey: or as Seafaring men, that
think it long until they lie at rode in the Haven, as in a safe harbor from
wind and weather. This serves to reprove al those, that accuse and reproach
others, for being too forward and zealous. If we be not zealous in Religion,
we are of no religion, whatsoever we account of our selves.

Use. 2.
Secondly, this Doctrine is a comfort to our selves, and to other the servants
of God, and an occasion of great joy, when as we our selves or others are
forward and cheerful beyond expectation in good things. A notable example of
both, is offered to our consideration, in the provision that was made, and the
furniture that was provided for the building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. 9.
Where we see, that when David himself having a great zeal and delight in the
house of his God, gave of his own Gold and Silver, and the people and Princes
following his example, spared no cost and expenses, it is said, The people
rejoiced when they offered willingly, for they offered willingly to the Lord,
with a perfect heart: and David the King also rejoiced with great joy. Again,
there is great occasion offered unto us to glorify God, and to praise his name,
whenever he works this willingness in the hearts of his childsen, and when
we see their zeal to abound, and their readiness to go beyond any request
that we can make unto them. It is a property of the good and diligent servant,
who being bidden to go, will run about his business; or being required to do
little, will gird up his loins and do more: as, on the other side, the
Wiseman teaches, Prou. 10, 26. that as Vinegar is to the Teeth, and smoke to
the eyes, so is the slothful to them that send him. When we behold such an
increase in godliness, and a running in the race of Christian duties, let us
be mindful to give God the glory and the praise, who has touched their hearts
to bring forth so great fruits. Contrariwise, it is the cause of much grief
and sorrow, when men deceive the hope and expectation that is conceived of them
in the best things, when we look for a plentiful Harvest, and find only a
few blasted ears; when we expect an increase, and see nothing but a fearful
fainting and languishing in honest and holy duties. This is it which the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews reproves in them, Heb. 5, 21.
When, as concerning the time, ye ought to be Teachers, yet have ye need
again that we teach you, what are the first principles of the word of GOD:
and are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong Meat.

The like reproof is cast upon the Galathians, Chap. 3, 1. O foolish
Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth to whom
Jesus Christ was before described in your sight, and among you crucified? Oh!
see, see, the misery of our days, all come short of the duties that are
required of them, be they never so just, honest, necessary, so greatly to Gods
glory, and the advancement of true Religion. If men would come thus far, to
yield half so much as is requested of them; or as far as they should, we
should judge it much, and it would appear greater then it is. Behold, the
barrenness and backwardness of our days, that yield no better fruit. If a
man would take a Light, and search up and down from house to house, where
shall he find a true-hearted Philemon, of whom we may boldly say, as Paul
does in this place; I know that thou will do even more then I say? I would we
were come thus far, to say of our professors, I know thou will do as much as
I say. We have not learned to perform so much; we have started back from our
former zeal; we are fallen from much, to little; and from little, to nothing
at all; and from nothing, to less then nothing; that is, from no good, to much
evil. For, how many might a man single out by name, and point out with the
finger, who nothwithstanding their happy beginnings, and raising a wonderful
expectation of a glorious end, are now become dry and withered; of whom we may
say, I know thou will do nothing, I know there is nothing in them, I know
they have embraced this present World. These are Job 6, 15, 16, etc.
like those Streams or Channelles, which immediately after a shower of Rain
run swiftly, and promise to the poor Traveler, that wandereth in the
Wilderness, a most comfortable refreshing, but in time of need deceive him:
So is it with such as have embraced the Faith, and seem to have received into
their dry hearts the sweet Deuteronomy. 32, 2.
Dewes, and pleasant showers of the Word, who appear zealous for a time and
afterward fall away, they deceive the hope that has been conconceiued of
them, and the end with them is worse then the beginning.

The Doctrine, that has dropped upon them as the rain upon the herbs, and
the great rain upon the grass, is quite dried up, and no remnants thereof are
to be discerned; according to the saying of Christ, Math. 25, 29.
Unto every man that has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but
from him that has not, even that he has shall be taken away. This is notably
expressed in the parable of the Man that going into a strange Country, called
his servants, delivered and divided to them his goods, and when one of them
went his way and hid his Talent in the earth, it was taken from him that had
been slothful, and given to him that had gained five Talents. Again, if the
time would serve, it were easy to show, how sumptuous, costly, and full of
expenses men are, to maintain their vanities, pleasures, and delights, above
that we can desire or imagine: but in other things most nigh and niggardly and
hand-fasted. We see how wasting and prodigal they are in the pursuit of their
carnal lusts, they think no cost to be too much, no charges too great.

Use 3.
Lastly, it is the duty of every man to labor to be answearable at the least
to the expectation that the Church has had of him, and to endeavor to be as
good as he has made show off, perfourming therein the practice of his
profession, not deceiving any of the Servants of God therein. This requires of
us a careful observation and marking of the manners of men, both of their
beginnings, and proceedings, and not to stand (as idle behoulders) gazing in
the air; that we may understand the time, the means, the forwardness, the
knowledge, the show that has been in many; all which have promised much, and
caused us to expect good things at their hands, and yet oftentimes in vain.
This appears in the song of the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 5. Wherein he sets
before the peoples eyes their great unthankfulness, Esaias, 5, 4.
that albeit the Lord had done for his Vineyard what he could, yet it brought
forth wild Grapes in stead of good Fruit: and therefore he threatens that the
Thorns shall ouergrow it, the Beasts should spoil it, the Rain shall not
nourish it. Thus also the Apostle speaks to the Hebrews, who as he
exhorts them, that leaving the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ they
should be led forward unto perfection, so he threatens such as turn backward
with an horrible judgment that shall come upon them, a fearful curse that
shall overtake them, Heb. 6, 7, 8.
For the earth (says he) that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing of God: but that which bears Thorns and Briars, is reproved, and is
near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Whereby we see that an heavy
curse belongs unto all such as answer not the hope that is conceived of
them: they deceive men much, they deceive as far (as lies in them) God
himself, but especially they deceive their own souls. We pity those
greatly, whom we have seen fresh and lusty, strong and sturdy of body, when
they grow weak, faint, sickly, and decaying in age and strength: but much more
ought we to lament to see those that have been forward and gone before many
others, to have need to be taught again the first principles of Religion, and
to feed on Milk as they that are inexpert in the word of Righteousness. It is
a sign of health, when men grow in strength and stature: and it is a token of
the true Child of God, when men grow in grace. This is it which the Apostle
speaks to the Corrinthians, 2 Cor. 8, 7.
As ye abound in every thing, in faith, and word, and knowledge, and in all
diligence, and in your love toward us, even so see that ye abound in this
grace also. And afterward he says, verse 24.
Show toward them and before the Churches, the proof of your love, and of the
rejoicing that we have of you. Likewise, Timothy had great praise in the
Church, who, according to the prophesies that went before of him, did answer
the expectation of the faithful, approving himself in the sight of God and
men. Hereunto comes the counsel and commandment of the Apostle; 1 Timothy 4,
15
These things exercise, and give thy seife unto them, that it may be seen how
thou profitest in all things. It is a great comfort and encouragement to the
people of God, to see any the members of Christ to prosper and profit in good
things: On the otherside, it ministers occasion of much grief and heaviness
of heart, to behold the zeal of the Spirit quenched, and the light of the
Gospel that has shined in their minds, eclipsed. If a man should look upon
the members of his own body, and see any one of them shriueled and withered; as
Arm, or hand, or Leg, not prospering, not growing, not moving, not receiving
life from the head: it would work sorrow in us, and we would pity others, in
whomsoever we should see such infirmities. In like manner, we must be well
assured, it cannot but greatly grieve the Church of God, to behold the parts
thereof to begin to faint and wax feeble, to grow groueling downward, when
they should cast up their eyes to Heaven, and live as Citizens of that
Kingdom.

22 Moreover also prepare me lodging: for I hope through your Prayers I shall
be freely given unto you.


The order of the words.
THe chief matter of this Epistle concerning Onesimus, has hitherto bin
handled, and is now finished; wherein we have heard diverse and sundry reasons
drawn; partly from the person of Paul; and partly from the person of Onesimus.
Now follows the remainder, intended chiefly by the Apostle, concerning
himself. For we have already showed, that the principal scope of this Epistle
is double: one touching Onesimus, which has thus far been expounded; the
other, touching Paul himself, which now comes to be considered. This point
is knit unto the former, and has an evident dependence upon it, and is
amplified by a transition in the first words [ Moreover also.] Hereby he does
effectually move Philemon, and seeks to obtain his former purpose. For when
he hears that he shall shortly entertain the Apostle himself in his house,
it must needs kindle a greater forwardness and willingness in him to grant
his request, least he make him heavy, and deceive his expectation. Whereas
therefore, Philemon might have thought with himself, and thus reasoned
touching Paul's suit; It skilleth not whether I grant it or not, he has been
a most lewd Servant unto me, and Paul lives far off from me, he is held in
Prison at Rome: either he will not hear what becomes of Onesimus, or if he
do hear, peradventure he shall never be delivered out of prison, but remain
a Prisoner all the days of his life; and therefore I will deal with Onesimus
as seems good to my self. These and such like imaginations, the Apostle
puts out of his head, and tells him he should shortly look for his
coming unto him, whereby he should know what account he made of his words,
and what obedience he would yield to his request.

Hence it is, that for this cause Paul craves to have lodging prepared for
him, rather by Philemon, then any other Citizen at Colosse: not that he
required much provision and preparation to be made for his entertainment,
Phil. 4, 11.
Who had taught others, and learned himself to be content with a little, but
because by this commandment, as by a sharp Sword, he would pierce the Bowels
of Philemon, and as by a strong Engine, batter the Fort and Bulwark of his
heart, and thoroughly persuade him, and prevail with him, to receive Onesimus,
both into his house, and into his favor. In this verse, we have to consider
two points: first, a Commaundment; secondly, a reason whereby the
commandment is strengthened. The commandment is, to prepare him hostage and
lodging: wherein he answers a double doubt and question that might arise in
him, and trouble the motion and matter that Paul intended. For first he might
have said; I may use Onesimus as I list, Paul is far enough from hearing of
it. Again, he might have thought, Theophil enarrat. in epistol. Philem.
It is well he had such a cause to plead, and such a request to make, otherwise
I should never have heard from him. These suspicions the Apostle remooueth,
when he says in this place; I have not written for his cause alone, but for my
self, that thou make account to be mine Host, and to receive me into thine
House. The reason is drawn from the working cause, I hope to be given unto you
through your Prayers, and may be thus frame; If I hope to be given unto you by
your Prayers, then prepare me Hostage, But I hope to be given unto you by your
Prayers: Therefore prepare me Hostage.


Or rather, the latter part of this Verse is the the taking away of an
Objection which Philemon might have made, upon the hearing of the charge given
unto him of preparing him lodging, which may be thus supplied. Shall we look
for thy coming? Why, Thou art a Prisoner? Thou art safe enough from coming to
us, and lodging at mine house: thou must be content with a cold lodging in
another place; thou may well tell us of thy forth coming, but I doubt thou will not yet be coming forth. To this the Apostle answers; I hope in short
time to be delivered: whereunto he annexeth two causes of his hope, that he
might know it was, not builded in the Air without foundation, but grounded and
established sufficiently, relying upon the prayers of the faithful, and upon
the grace and mercy of God.

The Interpretation of the words.
This is the order of the words: Now let us consider the Interpretation of
them as they lie. When he says [ Prepare me lodging] he means the
entertainment of Hospitality, whereof lodging is but a part. The word
signifies al things requisite for the well using of a Stranger; as receiving
to House, food, lodging, and all other necessaries belonging thereunto, whereof
many parts are expressed 1 Timothy 5, 10
by the Apostle, in the description of the Widows that were to be taken to
serve the Church, in attending unto the sick. In the next place when he says,
[ I hope through your Prayers, etc.] it argues, that the Churches of the
Gentiles did pray incessantly unto God, for the deliverance of Paul out of
Prison; as we see in the Acts of the Apostles, when Herod had killed James,
and put Peter in Prison, Acts 12, 5.
earnest Prayer was made of the Church to God for him. So that we see he had
the Prayers of the faithful, and that he did acknowledge the benefit and
necessity of them, that they should prevail with God.

Lastly, when he adds [ I shall be given unto you.] We must understand, that
the word which the Holy Ghost uses in this place, signifies to be freely
and frankly given: noting thereby, that when he should be delivered, and find
the effect of their Prayers, it should be through the free grace and mercy of
God, and not merited by the Saints. So then, according to this order of the
words, and interpretation of the Text, the reading of this Verse is to this
effect. Having now ended my suit moved unto thee touching Onesimus, I am in
the next place to solicit thee for my self; namely, that as thou art
inclined in love to all the Saints of God, so that thou prepare thy self to
entertain me at thy house, with all the fruits of hospitality. For although I
be in bonds, and kept fast in hold, yet my hope is; that by reason of the
continual and effectual Prayers of the Saints, I shall ere long, through the
free mercies of God be given unto you, and to the other Churches, for their
further edification in Christ Jesus our Lord.

General observations pointed out in this verse.
Thus much touching the meaning. Now follow certain general observations,
which I will only point out, and not stand upon at large. First of all,
observe the different manner of the Apostles dealing here, and in the former
words. When he entreats for another, he is large and earnest, but when he
commends to him his own cause and private business, he deals in a word;
he dispatcheth it breefely; he touches it by the way; as if it were a thing
impertinent, or from the matter. This shows, that he had more respect, and a
greater regard to obtain his suit for Onesimus, and to further his salvation,
then to speed in his own suit, which pertained to the supporting and supplying
the necessities of this present life. This teaches us to be more earnest in
another man's cause then in our own, but especially all Pastors, that have
the charge of Souls committed unto them, to be more earnest for the saving of
Souls, then to procure their own ease; and that they seek the benefit of
others, rather then the profit of themselves; according to the rule of the
Apostle. 1. Pet. 2. 1 Pet. 5, 2.
Feed the Flock of God that depends upon you, caring for it; not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. This
affection if it be found in us, shall minister exceeding comfort to our hearts,
when we remember that we have employed our gifts and labors to gain a people
to God, and have not sought theirs, but them. On the other side, woe unto idle
Shepherds, that feed not the Flock, but feed themselves. Such as are to
work in the Lords Vineyard must be Laborers, not Loyterers; they must be able
to feed, not to fleese; they must blow the Trumpet, and not hold their peace.

Secondly, the Apostle does not assure himself or the Churches of God that he
shall be delivered, but [ he hopeth] to be set free, as if he should say; I
have conceived an hope not vain and foolish, without ground of reason, but I
trust in Gods mercy to be set in safety, that I may serve the Church, and
profit you in the Gospel a long time. Now, whether the Apostle being delivered
out of Prison, ever came among the Colossians, and took up his lodging in the
House of Philemon, it is uncertain, and not to be found in the holy
Scriptures. The like hope he conceiueth in other places of his Epistles, as
when he writes to the Phillippians, Chapt. 1. Phil. 1, 24, 25
To abide in the flesh is more needful for you, and this am I sure off, that
I shall abide, and with you all continue, for your furtherance and joy of your
Faith. And in the Chapter following, Phil. 2, 23, 24
I hope to send Timothy as soon as I know how it will go with me: and I trust
in the Lord, that I also my self shall come shortly. The like we see in the
Epistle to the Hebrews (if that were Paul's) Chapt. 13. Hebr. 13, 23.
Know that our Brother Timotheus is delivered, with whom (if he come shortly) I
will see you. Observe in this place, that his hope is not absolute, but
condicionall; not simply purposed, but limited; I hope in the Lord. This is
expressed by him in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 1,
10.
I make mention of you always in my Prayers, beseeching that by some means,
one time or other, I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God, to
come unto you. We must therefore know, that all our steps are directed of
God, they are not in our own power to be ordered at our own pleasure. We must
also beware of all vain confidence and presumption in our selves, and in
vnder-taking our business and affairs of this life, seeing the success is
unknown, and our life is uncertain. Whatsoever we take in hand, we must depend
upon the providence of God, and rely upon his will.

Hence it is, that the Apostle James reprooueth them that say, James. 4, 13,
14, 15.
Go to now ye that say, to day or to morrow we will go into such a City,
and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain: (and yet ye cannot
tell what shall be to morrow.) For what is your life? It is even a vapor that
appears but a little time, and afterward vanishes away: For that ye ought to
say, If the Lord will, both we shall live, and we shall do this and that. God
is the chief Ruler and Moderatour of all persons and actions, nothing is
guided and governed by Fortune, nor falls out by Chance: he sits as it
were at the Stern, and orders al things to his own glory, and the good of
his Church.

Thirdly, he puts them in hope and comfort, that he should be delivered and
come unto them, as a matter that would be welcome and profitable unto them.
Which teaches, that the company, fellowship, and presence of the faithful
Servants of God, is much to be desired and looked after, and much to be
rejoiced in. Thereby they receive mutual comfort one in another, and bestow
mutual graces one upon another, and likewise by having the fellowship one of
another, they whet and sharpen one another. We are ready to grow dull, as an
edge-toole that is quickly blunted and turned. Now the communion and
communication which we have together among our selves, will quicken our Faith,
and kindle our zeal, that it will break out into a great flame. Hence it
follows, that they are happy that delight to frequent the company of the
godly, and of such as may profit us in the best things. He that walks with
the wise, shall be the wiser; but he that is a companion of Fools, shall
learn foolishness. Wherefore, they are hereby reproved, that never think
themselves better at ease, then when they are farthest from them that delight
in the Lord, and take pleasure in lewd and ryotous company, by whom they are
misled and carried out of the right way.

Lastly, we see that the Apostle always ascribes much to to the Prayers of
the Saints. We know, that Paul was one of the chief of the Apostles, whose
gifts were great; whose labors were painful; whose visions and revelations
were wonderful; yet he rejects not the prayers of the Church; as appears
in this place, and Phil. 1, 19.
Phil. 1, 19. I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer,
and by the help of the spirit of Jesus Christ. So then, the excellency of any
member and worthiness of the cheifest in the Church, does not exempt him from
standing in need of the Prayers of the poorest Christian and lowest part of
the Church. Nay, the greater and higher, and more eminent any man is, the more
he has need to be prayed for, and commended to the grace of God; inasmuch as
he is set in a more slipperie place, he lies open to greater danger, and is
exposed to stronger tentations and assaults of Satan, then those that are in a
lower place, and a meaner condition. Such then as excel others in gifts or
calling, ought to desire the prayers of the faithful (which avail much if
they be fervent) no less, if not more then others. Note also the great
necessity and force of prayer, that all persons, as well high as low, stand in
need of it.

Lastly, let every one labor to have a feeling of his own want of the
supplication of others; yea, the higher we are set, the greater will be our
fall, if we be not strongly assisted by all such means as God has left, to
further our salvation and deliverance out of troubles that hemme us in on every
side. Hitherto of the observations: Now let us come to particular doctrines.

[ Moreover also, prepare me lodging.] He requires in these words, of
Philemon, an entertaining of such as are destitute, and driven out of house and
home for the Gospels sake; as if he should say, when any of the poor Saints
are banished, persecuted, and put to great extreamities, as the World does
always carry an hard and unmerciful hand toward them, be careful to receive
them cheerfully, and to minister al comfort ye can unto them willingly. The
word therefore used in this place, has a general signification, and
contains all duties belonging to the entertainment of Strangers. And by
Strangers we mean, not such as ordinarily come to visit us, nor such as
travail about the business of this life, and take up their lodgings in Innes
or Tauernes: but such as fly from place to place, and are compelled against
their wills, to leave Country, or Kindred, or House, for the Gospels sake. The
word used in this place, is not to be restrained to giving of them lodging, as
if they had discharged so much as could be required of them, but under that,
all duties of the same kind and nature are comprehended; as Meat, Drink,
Apparel, and all other things necessary for them. These the Apostle knew
would be joyfully yielded by Philemon to him, and all other the faithful,
especially such as labor in the word and Doctrine. Doctrine 1. Hospitality is
diligently to be used and practiced of all the Children of God.
Hereby we learn for our instruction, that Hospitality; that is, the courteous
and joyful entertainment of distressed Strangers, is to be used and practiced
diligently by all the Children of God. The succouring of Strangers that are
destitute, especially the poor Ministers that are employed, or would be
employed in the affairs of the Church, is required of us.

This we see in the examples of sundry of the faithful, one very famous among
the rest, is the Shunamites Wife, 2 Kin. 4, 8, 9
Who called the Prophet of God to her house to eat Bread; and she said to her
Husband; Behold, I know now, that this is an holy Man of God that passes by
us continually, let us make him a little Chamber with Walls, and let us set
him there a Bed, and a Table, and a Stool, and a Candlestick, that he may
turn in thither when he comes to us. This is it which the Prophet Esaias
commends, Chapt. 58. 7. Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, Esaias 58,
7.
to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that wander
unto thine house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and hide not
thy self from thine own Flesh? This is noted as a part of the innocence and
integrity of Job, Chapt. 31. Job 31, 32.
The stranger did not lodge in the street, but I opened my doors unto him that
went by the way. The like we might say of of the Woman of 1 King. 17. Luke 10.
John 11. Luke 19. Acts 16. 2 Timothy 1.
Sarepta, that entertained Eliah in the time of famine: of Lazarus and his
Sisters, that received Christ into their house: of Zacheus, who lodged him
joyfully: of Lydia, who entreated Paul and his Compaons, to come into her
house, and to abide with her: of Onesiphorus, who sought out the Apostle
diligently, refreshed him oftentimes, and was not ashamed of his Chains. All
these examples, Registered and recorded in the Old and New Testament, teach us,
that God requires it as a special duty at our hands; to entertain, lodge,
and refresh such poor Strangers as are constrained to wander up and down,
either for preaching or professing of the Gospel.

Reason 1.
This duty is urged upon us by diverse reasons in the holy Scriptures. First,
it is to be practiced of us, because it is the commandment of God, that we
should love and lodge strangers, and show all pity and compassion toward them,
to succor them in their necessity. This is it which Moses says, Deuteronomy. 10.
Deuteronomy. 10, 19
Love ye the Stranger, for ye were Strangers in the Land of Aegipt. Hereunto
comes the rule of the Apostle, Romans 12. Romans 12, 13.
Distribute to the necessities of the Saints, give your selves to Hospitality.
This is the precept of the Apostle Peter, Chapt. 4. 1 Pet. 4.
Be ye harborous one to another, without gruding. Seeing therefore God
commands, it is our part to obey, and submit our selves to his will and
pleasure.

Reason 2
Secondly, as God requires this duty of us, so we have his own example to
teach it unto us. It is a property of God to love Strangers, and therefore to
be imitated and followed of all that belong unto him. This reason is expressed
in the Book of Deuteronomy, Chapt, 10, 18. The Lord our God, is God of Gods,
and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and terrible, who does Deuteronomy. 10, 18.
right unto the Fatherless and Widow, and loves the Stranger, giving him
food and raiment, love ye therefore the Stranger. Where we see, he urges this
duty to love the stranger, moved by the example of God himself, who is
always ready to help him, and to defend him: so that it ought to be our
desire and delight to study to be like unto our heavenly Father.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, God does greatly honor such as honor Strangers: they have been so
far honored by God, as that Angels have entered into their houses, been
entertained by them, and have blessed them. This the Apostle teaches, Heb. 13.
Heb. 13, 2.
Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers: for thereby some have received
Angels into their Houses unawares: Declaring hereby, that they which in the
simplicity of their hearts serve God, and comfort his Saints in the duties of
Hospitality, and other fruits of love, shall obtain great honor, and many
blessings from GOD, even more then ever they thought of, or could expect at his
hands; as we see in Abraham and Lot, who became the Hoasts of his special
Servants, most dear unto him, even the most glorious Angels, nay of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was among them. Thus does the Lord honor them that honor
him. Seeing therefore God commands this duty in his word, approves of it by
his example, and honors the performance of it in his Servants, it teaches,
that the kind entertainment of such as are desolate and destitute Strangers,
poor Widows, or fatherless, friendlesse, and comfortless Orphans, is an
acceptable service approved in the eyes of God.

Use 1
The doctrine being thus cleared, the Uses remain to be showed. First, this
declares, that Hospitality is a commendable virtue, and a worthy fruit of
love; yea, an excellent ornament in the Children of God, whereby they receive
good report of the Church. We see this in Rahab, Heb. 11, 31.
Who by Faith received the Spies peaceably, and sent them out another way. We
see this in the old Man of Mount Ephraim* that dwelt in Gibeah, Judge. 19, 20.
who wished peace unto the Leuite and his wife, and brought him into his house,
and gave Fodder unto the Asses; there they washed their feet; there they did
eat and drink; and there their hearts were merry. So the Apostle Romans 16.
commends Phebe, a dear Sister to the Romans, Romans 16, 2.
That they receive her in the Lord as it becomes Saints, and that they assist
her in whatsoever business she needs of their aid: for she has given
Hospitality unto many, and unto himself also. Likewise Gaius is commended
Romans 16, 23 3 John 5.
to the Host of Paul, and of the whole Church: yea, to be faithful to all
the Brethren, and to Strangers, which did bear witness of his love. The
Church was then in persecution; the people of God were often driven into
banishment. There were in those days no Innes to receive Strangers, and to
entertain Trauailers, as there were afterward, and now are in all places.
Every godly man's house ought to be their Inn to receive them. We love the
truth, as we love the entertainment of those that profess it, and suffer for
it. Especially it is required of us, to make much of the true Ministers of
Christ Jesus, when we see them made as Strangers, to want house, living,
maintenance. Seeing therefore many troubles were raised through the tyranny of
the Enemies against the Saints; so that they were constrained to forsake their
Country and Kindred, to enjoy the profession of the Faith, and the peace of a
good conscience: the Apostles of Christ do oftentimes beat upon this point,
and require this duty, to receive such to our houses as the World rejected, and
accounted unworthy of the company of men. If we do good to these poor members
of Christ, that Heb. 11, 37, 38.
are glad to wander up and down in sheeps skins, and in Goats skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented; who, to save their lives from the rage of
the oppressor, and the sword of the persecuter, were driven to hide their
heads in Wildernesses, and Mountains, and Dens, and Caves of the Earth; we
testify our unfeigned love to the truth, and to the Brethren; nay, to Christ
Jesus himself, as we shall see and show afterward. But if we do good to such
as are able to requite it, and to such as are linked unto us by Kindred, or any
other band, it is no true trial, no due proof, no perfect testimony of our
charity.

True it is, kindness and humanity are good, if they be ordered aright, and
ruled according to piety and godliness: but when they extend farther, even to
such as are not able to recompense it, and to such as are unknown unto us,
therein we make demonstration, that we serve God in sincerity, and hold fast
the right rule of Charity. Such as are at home in their own Country, shall
find relief enough, they shall have Kinsfolk to minister help and succor
unto them, according to the saying of the Shunamite, when the Prophet said unto
her; 2 Kin. 4, 14.
Behold thou have had all this great care for us, what shall we do for thee? Is
there any thing to be spoken for thee to the King, or to the Captain of the
Host: she answered; I dwell among mine own people. But such as are poor godly
strangers are destitute of help; they have neither Friends nor Kinsfolks; they
have neither aid nor favor showed unto them; they lie open to all injuries
and indignities. The poor Children of God are often exiled and banished from
their houses, and are as silly Birds whose nests are taken, so that they know
not whether to go, or what to do, or whom to fly unto, or under whose roof
to shroude themselves, from the storm and tempest that has overtaken them.
Now the greater their misery is the more accepted is our charity: and the more
heavy their persecution is, the better accounted is our compassion, which shall
never be forgotten, but receive a reward. This is that promise which Christ our
Savior makes; Math. 10, 42.
Whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones, to drink, a Cup of cold
Water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not
lose his reward. Let us therefore delight in showing the works of mercy, that
GOD may delight in us: and succor the poor Saints that are distressed, that
we also our selves may find help in time of need.

Use 2.
Secondly, this Doctrine serves for reproof. First of all, of such as think
that Hospitality consists in feasting and keeping great cheer, and bidding
the Rich to their Tables: whereas the Scripture understands by it, a
courteous entertainment of such poor Christians as are bannished out of their
Countries. They therefore are much deceived, that commend those to be the only
Housekeepers that feed men of all sorts, without difference and discretion,
and relieve idle persons that flock unto their Gates, and gather together such
as are sturdy and vagrant to receive their Alms, contrary to the rules of the
word, and the Statutes of well-gouerned Commonwealths. These may be said
rather to keep great houses, then good houses; and to be great Housekeepers,
rather then good Housekeepers. It were more charity to punish, then to relieve
such unruly persons, as will submit themselves to no Laws, nor live in any
Family or society, to the end there may be sufficient for them that are
Strangers indeed. And such as wander up and down, and are inccorrigible, are
no better then Thieves, in as much as they live by the sweat of other men's
labors, 2 These. 3, 8, 10.
and as idle Drones suck away the Honey from the Bees, and devour that which
should maintain the faithful of the Land, and such as labor the thing that is
good. Let such therefore, as have their affections ready to receive others into
their houses, and to make them partakers of the blessings that God has
bestowed upon them, use it most commonly toward the poor Saints, and destitute
members of Christ; according to the precept of our Savior. Luke 14. Luke 14,
12, 13, 14,
When thou make a Dinner, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren, nor thy
Kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, least they also bid thee again, and
recompense be made thee. But when thou make a Feast, call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, and the Blind, and thou shall be blessed, because they
cannot recompense thee, for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of
the just. True it is, our Kinsmen, our Friends, and rich Neighbors, may be
invited and bidden, but not they only, as the custom is of our days; we
entertain such, as may entertain us again.

Secondly, this meets with the corruption of our times, we cannot abide those
that are Strangers, but are enemies to the very name when we hear it. But all
neglect of them, and injurious dealing toward them is a great sin, and such
as are haters of Strangers, are grievous Sinners. Such Gene. 19. Judge. 19.
were the Sodomites, such were the men of Gibeah, that offered all violence
they could, to the Strangers that came to lodge among them; it was an evident
sign of horrible impiety and iniquity that reigned among them. They that cry
out so much against Strangers, and use it as a word of reproach, do show
plainly that they do not deserve to be numbered among the Children of God,
nor to be accounted as members of Christ, any more then Dogs and Swine,
inasmuch as out of their own mouths they shall be judged. It is a shameful
barbarousnesse for men to have pity and compassion on them that are helpless.
Among the Heathen and Infidels they were evil thought of, that had not this
reason and understanding to receive them gently and peaceably that were cast
out of their houses and dwellings: how much more is it requisite for us, when
we see the Church of GOD tossed and tumbled, and tormented by Tyrants and
enemies of the truth, to give courteous entertainment to the poor Christians
which are banished out of their Countries, bereaved of their friends, and
separated from their Kinsfolks, of whom they might be succored? If we do not
these things, it is an evident token, that we renounce God, and have no spark
of true piety in us. For the Lord does more rigorously condemn the outrages
and wrongs that are done to strangers, then those that are done to a man's own
Neighbors. The Heathen shame us; nay, shall rise up in judgment to condemn
us in this behalf: for when they intended to show that some man was of a
wicked and slavish Nature, they were wont to say; Get thee hence, thou art an
Enemy toward Strangers: and this check and taunt was more with them, then if
they had branded a man with the Name of an Whore-maister, a Drunkard, a
perjured person, a Murderer, or if they had said; Thou art worse then a brute
Beast. They Homer. Odyss. lib. 22.
accounted the poor man and the stranger to be both sent unto us of God, and
therefore ought not to be despised. They called them to lodge and soiourne
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 1. and 8.
with them, and acknowledge that there ought to be a compassion of the miseries
one of another. They showed not a niggardly mind, Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 8.
but a cheerful look, and a friendly countenance toward such as they had
received to their house.

The Painims have spoken and practiced after this manner: what shall then become
of us that profess our selves to be Gods Children, when we fight so directly
against the order of nature? For God has set one common and general band
among al mankind, and it is required of us, to extend our charity toward all
such as resemble us, and carry the Image of God upon them: but especially it
behooves us to respect such as are more nearly knit unto us by the band of
Faith, and therefore ought to be more dear unto us, then all others. True it
is, all Strangers are to be warned and admonished for their part, that they
abuse not that name and privilege. If a man have a privilege and protection
from a Prince, and then abuse both himself and it, so that under the color of
that benefit and honor done unto him, he commit some outrage and wicked Act,
shall he not be worthy of double punnishment? It falls out sometimes, that a
great number will say, they are driven out of their Country for their
conscience, yet they show a corrupt conscience, defile the Church with their
dissolute life, and give occasion to unbelievers, to blaspheme the purity of
doctrine, and to have their mouths wide open against the professors of it.
Notwithstanding, we must take heed, that for the offense of some, we do not
reject those that are Gods strangers, that we do not leave them helpless, but
succor them as God has enabled us. They are among us, to try our benevolence
and charity. If we show mercy to them, though they be not able to requite it,
yet God is both able and willing to recompense our works of mercy.

Use 3.
Thirdly, it is our duty to take the opportunity offered unto us of God; nay,
it is required of us to seek the opportunity to express our obedience to God,
and our love to his people, in doing all good to such as stand in need. The
practice hereof we see in Abraham, Gene. 18, 1.
who sat at his Tent door, to inuit such as he saw passing by, and had need
of the fruits of mercy to be showed unto them. So Lot his Nephew, who had
been brought up in his house, and had learned of him to express the duties of
Charity; Gene, 19, 1.
sat at the Gate of Sodom (into the which strangers did enter) to call them
to his House, to refresh them with meat, and to defend them from injuries, to
which otherwise they lay open above all other. This reprooueth those that
grudge and are grieved when any occasion falls out, that they are tried what
affection and compassion they bear unto them. We see this evidently in
Naball, toward 1 Samuel 25, 14
David and his men: for when he was entreated by the Messengers that were sent
unto him, to give whatsoever came to his hand; he railed at them, and sent them
away empty; he was lavish of his tongue, but sparing of his pursse; they had
words, but they had nothing but words. It was otherwise with Abraham: when he
saw men come toward him, he ran to meet them, he bowed himself unto them,
he entreated them to receive the means of refreshing themselves at his hands,
he pressed upon them very earnestly, that they should not deny him. To this
purpose we heard out of the Apostle Peter, That we should be harborous without
grudging. We must therefore, not only do good to Strangers, but do good
cheerefullie, and with a ready mind, without murmuring and repining at the
occasion offered unto us. We now dwell in our own Country, and among our
Kindred; we rest quietly in our Houses, and in our Beds; we live in peace
and quietness; but we know not what days may shine upon us, and what times
may come over our heads. We that now hate and abhor strangers in our own
Land, it may happen, that our selves may be Strangers in a Land that is not our
own. Moses, exhorting the people of Israel to be merciful toward such, as
above all others stand in need of mercy; to wit, Strangers, Widows, and
fatherlosse Children; makes this as a reason unto them; Love the Stranger, for
ye were Strangers in the Land of Aegipt. And albeit this reason do not hold in
many of us, neither can be persuaded to deal kindly with Strangers, because we
have been already Strangers: yet this Argument may be alleged unto us, to be
careful to love Strangers, because we our selves may be strangers in another
Land. For we know not where we shall end our days, or in what manner, any more
then when we shall dye, which all of us know to be uncertain. If then we be
hard-harted unto others, we must not look to find others pitiful to our
selves. It is Gods will, that we should be Strangers in this World; as
appears by the example and confession of the faithful. Heb. 11. 9. 10, 13.
By Faith Abraham abode in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country, as one
that dwelt in Tents with Isaac and Jacob, Heirs with him of the same Promise:
for he looked for a City having a Foundation, whose bulder and maker is GOD.
Thus did all the godly cast up their accounts, and confessed that they were
Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth; yea, we are his Children upon other
condition. The Lord is in Heaven, and we live upon the earth, yet he comes
down unto us, and governs us; he shows that he has not forgotten us, but
gives us an example what pity we ought to have of them that fly unto us, as
poor sheep that are scattered by ravenous Wolves; we should deal with them,
as we would have the Lord deal with us, and show that mercy that we expect of
him.

True it is, the Apostle notes it among the properties required of the Pastor
and Minister, 1 Timothy 3, 2. Tit. 1, 8.
That he should be given to Hospitality: but he meant it also in general, to
all the faithful; howbeit the Ministers must show them the way, and hold out
the Candle to give them light. For his purpose is not to bind the Ministers
only to beware of intemperancy, to fly Covetousness, to avoid Pride: and on
the other side, to move them only to be just, sober, courteous, chaste, and
harborous; in the mean season, leaving all others to do what they would, and
live as they lift. Reasons why general duties are appropriated to the Minister.
But the Apostle singleth them out by themselves, and charge these duties
upon them: first, because the word of God should not be evil spoken off by the
enemies, beholding such scandals and faults to be in them. Secondly, to the end
they should approve their Doctrine by their good life, and ratify it to the
consciences of all that hear it, and so make it better welcome to them, and
them more willing to embrace it. Thirdly, that the people should follow them,
and frame their lives according to those virtues and graces which they see in
their Shepherds. And by the way let us note, that if chiefly among others,
the Minister must be harborous, and it be a virtue that commends him to the
Church to be given to Hospitality, then the means should be cheerfully and
plentifully affoorded unto him, that he may be fitted and enabled to perform
it. This duty indeed is looked for from him, and he lies open to obloquy and
reproach when he does not discharge it; and yet in the mean season, his
present ability, or rather disabilitie and insufficiency, is not considered;
yea, the means either are denied unto him, or with great grudging and much
lessening, yielded unto him, contrary to the precept of the Apostle; Gal. 6, 6.
Let him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him partaker of
all his goods. To conclude this point, let us learn to rejoice when we can do
good to the distressed Saints, that offer themselves as objects of our
compassion; and be glad that God has enabled us to help them; Remembering,
that it is Acts 20, 35.
a more blessed thing to give, then to receive. We saw before how God plagued
the Sodomites and the men of Gibeah, for their savageness and cruelty toward
the strangers that came to lodge among them. God oftentimes blesses those
places and persons, where, and by whom they are entertained: as on the other
side, many judgments and punnishments fall from Heaven upon their heads, that
are currish and unkind unto them.

Use 4.
Lastly, it is a great comfort and peace to a man's conscience, that God will in
his Son Christ regard him* when with a single heart he has been careful to
testify his love toward distressed Strangers for the truths sake. Let us
rejoice in this consolation, that we shall be assured that God will pity us,
when we have thus pitied others. This persuasion we see in Nehemiah, who
rests himself upon it, and raises comfort of obtaining from it, Nehe. 5.
19. Remember me, o Lord, in goodness, according to all that I have done for
this people. The like appears in Obadiah, 1. King. 18. 13. who being in
distress and fear of his life, said to Eliah, Was it not told my Lord what I
did, when Iezabell slew the Prophets of the Lord? how I hid an hundred men of
the Lords Prophets, by fifties in a Cave, and fed them with Bread and Water?
These men we see, found great comfort to their own Souls in the practice of
this duty. If the same fruit of Faith, and testimony of love be found in us, we
shall not be left comfortless, when we desire comfort of God. Nay, if this
entertainment of the Saints, whom the profession of the faith in time of
trouble, has made Strangers, be among us, and do abound, it will make us that
we shall be neither idle, nor unfruitful, in the acknowledging of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And that we may yet have farther comfort and encouragement
herein, we must understand, that whatsoever comfort and compassion we show to
the Servants of God, that are harbourlesse and succourlesse, the Lord Jesus
does account it as done unto himself. For Christ is oftentimes left without
help and harbor in his poor members: and in them he wandreth up and down
from place to place, to seek relief.

Thus he shall say in the end of the World; Mat. 25, 35, 40.
I was a Stranger, and ye took me in unto you: I was naked, and ye clothed
me: I was in Prison, and ye came unto me: for verily I say unto you, inasmuch
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it
to me. Let this comfort and refresh us; let this encourage us to love
Strangers, and to perform all duties of love toward them, considering that
Christ Jesus will abundantly reward our well-doing, and accept it far above
the worthiness of the work, albeit it be showed to the poorest and simplest
soul that belongs to his Body. On the other side, this serves as a great
terror to those that are without natural affection, and spiritual
compassion, to consider wisely of the poor Strangers, to whom Christ shall
say; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in unto you; sick and in Prison,
and ye visited me not; for verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to
one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. This serves to increase their
sin, and to make the judgments of God to enter into their bones, considering
that they have not to do only with men, but with Christ: and the contempt is
offered not only to a base stranger, but to our blessed Savior.

He that strikes and wounds the hand, or the foot, makes pain and grief
to arise in the head; inasmuch as one part is touched with a sympathy of the
others misery. The faithful are all the members of Christ's body, whereof he
is the head: if then any of them be afflicted, he suffers with them; he is
grieved for them; he is hurt through them. Let all the enemies of the godly
therefore take heed unto themselves, least they kick against the truth of
God, and hurt the least of the professors thereof, considering that he that
touches them, touches the apple of his eye; yea, touches and pierces Christ
himself, of whom we may truly say; Math. 21, 44
Whosoever shall fall on this stone, he shall be broken: but on whomsoever it
shall fall, it will crush him in pieces. Who is it that dares break out into
this blasphemy, to profess that he wishes to wound Christ, to reproach him,
to defy him, to turn him out of doors, to suffer him to perrish, and to shut
up their compassion from him? But whiles we are ashamed of our poor Brethren,
we are ashamed of Christ; whiles we deny to stretch forth our hands to help
them, we pass by Christ, and look awry or a squint upon him. Would we have
the Lord of life and glory deal with us, as we deal with them, and behave our
selves toward them? We live, if not in the persecution, yet in the necessity of
the Church and Children of God: we cannot but see many want. If the enemies of
the Gospel hate them for the truths sake, shall not we love them for the
truths sake? If we desire to find comfort in the great day of the Lord, let
us now show comfort as God has blessed and enabled us, according to our
ability. He will never be wanting to them, that consider wisely of the
wants of them that fear him. If we do not deny our comfort to them, he will
never deny to minister comfort to us in time of need. But if our hearts be
hardened, and our hands full of cruelty, we deceive our selves if we look for
any comfort at the hands of God. The Rich man and Miser, that had Lazarus at
his Gates. Luke 16, 19, 21, 24.
Clad himself in Purple, and fared deliciously every day, yet shutting his
eyes from beholding the misery, and stopping his ears from hearing the cry of
the poor; himself was cast into torments, and cried with a great cry and a
bitter, and was not heard nor regarded. Then his sumptuous fare could not
refresh him; then his gorgeous apparrall could not comfort him; then his resort
and retinue could not revive him, but he continued in endless, and remidelesse
tortures and torments. If we follow his example, let us fear his end; and
if we practice his sin, we must look to feel his punishment. If we behold
the troubles of the Ministers and Professors of the Gospel, driven out of
house and home, and cast out of Land and Living, and we cannot afford them a
good word, nor give them any thing to supply their wants when God has given
unto us this worlds good, we our selves shall cry and not be heard. We shall
all stand in need of the mercy of God. If we were rich and noble, if were
Kings and Princes, if we have had thousands that have required and received
mercy from us, yet a time shall come, when we shall stand at the Judgment
seat of the Almighty, and call for mercy at his hands. The Lord in that day
shall recompense us according to our works. Have we delighted in the deeds of
mercy, and showed pity to the poor wandering Saints? Let us be of good
comfort, we shall not find God a severe Judge, but a merciful Father and
Savior unto us; we shall receive the fruit of our Labors in due time, gather
as we have scattered, and reap as we have sowed. On the other side, have we
seen the Saints of God sick, and not visited them? Strangers, and not
harbored them? Hungry, and not fed them? We shall hang down our heads in that
day, when we would give all the world for one drop or dram of mercy to come
near us, James 2, 13.
For there shall be condemnation merciless to him that shows not Mercy, and
Mercy reioyseth against Judgment.

Let us consider these things whiles we have time. It was too late for the Rich
man, when once he was in Hell, to cry unto Abraham to have mercy on him, and
to Send Lazarus, that he might dip the tip of his Finger in Water, and cool
his Tongue tormented in that flame: but in his life time, he had showed no
mercy, he had denied the Crummes that fell from his Table; and therefore now
no mercy is showed to him, all comfort is denied unto him. Thus shall it be
with all that are enemies to the distressed Saints, that are constrained to
wander without any certain dwelling, as poor strangers, from place to place
to save their lives, with loss of their Livings: God shall measure out to
them, as they have measured to others, then shall they condemn their folly that
is past, and repent of their Cruelty, when it is too late.

[ For I hope through your Prayers, I shall be bestowed upon you.] Here the
Reason is rendered, wherefore the Apostle requires Philemon to prepare to
entertain him coming as a Stranger unto him; because he was in hope that
their prayers should prevail with God for his deliverance out of prison. It
was the duty of the Church, to make prayer and supplication to God incessantly
for him, to see if he would be entreated to release him out of prison, and to
deliver him from the mouth of the Lion. Touching the effect of them, the
Apostle declares that they were not powered out in vain, but it should
undoubtedly come to pass, that God being stirred up by the prayers and desires
of the faithful, would graciously hear them, and speedily procure his safety
and freedom. Doctrine 2. The prayers of the faithful are available for
themselves and others, both to obtain blessings, and to remove judgments.
From hence we learn, that the prayers of the faithful made to God, are very
auayleable and effectual. The supplications of the Godly, that come from a
faithful heart, and proceed from lips unfeigned, are not idle and unfruitful,
but of great power and force with God, as well to obtain the blessings which
they want, as to remove such plagues and judgments as are heavy upon them.

The Testimonies that might be brought to prove this point, are infinite. The
prayers of Abraham Ge. 20. and 18.
prevailed to heal Abimelech and his servants. The prayers of Abraham should
have prevailed, if ten righteous persons had bin found in Sodom. The course of
the Sun and Moon were stayed Joshua 10.
by the prayer of Joshua, till he was revenged of his enemies. Isaac prayed for
Genesis 25, 21.
his wife, because she was barren, unto the Lord, and the Lord was entreated of
him, and Rebekah his wife conceived: so that she became fruitful* and had two
sons given unto her, of whom came two Nations. Eliah by prayer obtained
Rain, which had bin 1 Kings 17. James 5.
withheld from the earth three years, and six months. So did Hezekiah the
continuance of his life for fifteen years. The Church by prayer Acts 12. 1, 2
obtained the deliverance of Peter out of prison, when as he should have bin
brought forth to the place of execution, and slain as James was. This is that
which the Apostle John sets down, John 5, 14, 15. This is that assurance
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us; and if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know
that we have the petitions that we have desired of him. These consents of holy
Scripture teach us, that the prayers of the faithful are the means and
Instruments appointed of God to obtain his blessings for us, and to remove his
judgments far from us and others.

Reason 1.
And as the examples are many that might be alleged, so the reasons are many
that might be produced to settle this truth in our hearts. First of all, our
Prayers do delight the Lord exceedingly, he loves to hear our voice, as the
Father does to hear his Child. True it is, the grace of Prayer is his own
gift; yet he smells the savor of it as sweet Incense, he hears the
Harmony of it as pleasant Music, he accepts the odor of it, as a burnt
Offering. Heereunto comes the commendation that Christ gives to the Church,
Cant. 2, 14. Show me thy sight, let me hear thy voice: for thy voice is sweet,
and thy sight is c^mely. To this purpose the Prophet says, Ps. 141, 2. Let my
Prayer be directed in thy sight as Incense, and the lifting up of mine hands as
the evening Sacrifice. All the faithful are to him as the sweet singers of
Israel, he takes pleasure to hear them, as we do to hear the best Consort
that is among men.

Reason 2
Secondly, true Prayers are of such strength, that they do after a sort force
the Lord, and constrain him to yield himself as ouercom and vanquished,
inasmuch as it pleases him by this means to be conquered. They are as mighty
weapons, whereby all Christians show themselves valiant Champions, not only to
defeat their enemies, but to prevail with God. It is noted, that Jacob Genesis
32, 24
wrastled with God in the form of man, and he could not prevail against
Jacob: for as God assailed and assaulted him with the one hand, so he vpheld
and strengthened him with the other. He had power with God, as it were to
ouercom and to ^arry away the praise of the victory. Thus shall it be with all
the godly (who are true Isralites) that are fervent in faithful prayer, none
shall be able to stand against them, God will yield himself unto them, as it
is said, he could not prevail against Jacob. The like we see in Moses, Exodus
32, 9, 10. to whom the Lord said, Ex. 32, 9, 10.
I have seen this people, it is a stiff-necked people: Now therefore, let me
alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, for I will consume them, but I
will make of thee a mighty people. As if he should have said, thy prayers bind
me hand and foot, and after a sort take me prisoner, so that I am not at mine
own liberty: thou ouer-rulest me, and ouer-maisterest me by thy prayers. Hence
it is, that the Prophet says, Psalm. 106, 23
He minded to destroy them, had not Moses his servant stood in the breach
before him, to turn away his wrath, least he should destroy them. And the
Apostle rehearsing the Christian man's armor of proof, and weapons of defense,
Ephesians. 6, 18.
names the Prayers and supplications of the Saints, which are not the least
part of that Harness.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, his promise goes with our prayers, he cannot deny the words of his
own mouth, nor frustrate that which once he has spoken. It is that which the
Prophet mentions, Psalm. 50, 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Here we have a Commandment to call
on God; we have a promise and assurance to be heard: we must perform the
condition, to glorify him that has heard us. To disobey the Commandment, is
horrible Rebellion; to distrust the promise, is monstrous Infidelity; to refuse
the condition, is vile ingratitude and unthankfulness. This promise is also
laid before us by Christ himself. Math. 7, 7, 8. Ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for
whosoever asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. This promise of God is the shield of the
faithful, it gives them comfort and boldness in asking, and confidence and
assurance in obtaining. If we had no promise, there could arise in our hearts
nothing but fearing and doubting; nothing but terror and discoragement. So
then, whether we consider, that the prayers of the people of God are as
pleasant Music to delight him, or as a strong weapon to enforce him, or as a
sure building settled upon the Rock of his promise, we may safely conclude, that
they are very available to help us and others, when as they proceed from an
humble and faithful heart, which gives life and quickening unto them.

Use 1
Let us see the Uses that naturally arise from hence. First, it teaches us,
that if prayer be so available, we ought to learn what prayer is. Many there
are, that know the Commandment of God, that he requires this duty at their
hands; they see what they should do, who yet are altogether ignorant in the
right manner of the doing of it. They come to this work as to an ordinary
matter, they perform it of custom, they make it a Lippe-labour, they come
without feeling of the Majesty of God, or their own wants. We must therefore
understand, that to pray, is to put up our requests to God, according to his
will, from a contrite heart in the name of Christ Jesus, with assurance to be
heard.

The first thing required in Prayer.
In which description of Prayer, there is offered to our considerations, these
five things: First, that it is a putting up, and pouring out of our requests
to God: For Romans 10, 14
how shall we call upon him in whom we do not believe? And as he only is to
be believed in, so he only knows our conditions, and hears our cries, and
sees our necessities. It is therefore our duty to seek unto him in our
misery, and to make him a Tower of refuge to resort unto. This the Prophet Esaias
teaches, Chap. 17, 7. At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes
shall look to the holy one of Israel. We must acknowledge, that it is not
left in our own choice to pray, or not to pray; we have an express
Commandment, After this manner pray ye. And again, Pray continually. Let them
therefore be ashamed, that make no care or Conscience to pray, and such as
cannot pray at all. These two may well be joined together, and are brethren in
evil, and Companions in wickedness. For Prayer is a gift bestowed upon all
the faithful, in some measure. Some have this blessed grace in a greater
degree, and some in a less; but al are endued with it in some sort, none do
wholly want it, that want not the spirit. Hence it is, that we read of the
Zach. 12, 10.
Spirit of supplications. David and Daniell were often in the practice of this
duty, and failed not three times a day to humble themselves in the presence of
God. There is no man so simple and sottish, but knows how to ask a benefit
when he wants it: he can ask for bread, when he lacks it: he can crave
drink, when he is thirsty: he can crave apparel when we would be clothed.
We see the practice of this in little Children, they are quickly brought to do
this: and yet I fear me, the greatest part of men, neither desire, nor know
how to desire any thing at the hands of God, who is a liberal rewarder of all
that come unto him, and call upon him. They can beg of men, but they have no
knowledge to put up any supplication to God.

If a Prince should set out an Edict, and make a Proclamation, that whosoever
would come and make humble suit unto him, should have such a fair Lordship or
rich Manor, there are few that would miss it for want of asking: no man would
want words, all men would be eloquent enough, there would be suitors and
suppliants great store, that would make their tongues serve them ripely and
readily for such a purpose. Thus it is between God and us, he has published,
that Joel 2, 32. Romans 10, 13.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved: Let us not
now be wanting to our selves, nor lose a kingdom for want of asking. If we ask
for grace and glory, we shall obtain. That which we would do for a temporal
possession, let us not leave undone to obtain an heavenly inheritance; and if
we would go unto men, let us not neglect or omit to pray unto God.

The second thing required in prayer.
The second thing to be observed in the right invocation of the name of God, is
that it must be offered up according to his word and will. We are not left at
our own liberty, and our voluntary choice how we will pray, the manner
prescribed, allowed, and accepted of God, is when it is done according to his
own will. He will be worshipped according to his own appointment, and not as
we please. This was taught us before, out of the Apostle John, Chap. 5, 14.
This is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us. He does not promise, that whatsoever we crave, we
shall receive; and whatsoever we ask, we shall obtain; but he restrains
the promise, Whatsoever we shall ask according to his will.

This therefore, is the right manner of praying, to pray according to his will,
that commands this duty of us. We must crave of him such things as he
allows, and not lust after the things that he hates and forbids. This
being the rule of Prayer (that is shortly set down) does direct us in all our
supplications to seek to know his will, and then to submit our selves unto it,
if we would pray with fruit and profit. We see among men this order observed,
that such as desire to obtain the favor and help of other, do frame
themselves wholly unto their will. So ought it to be with us, if we would
have God to respect us, and hear us, we must fashion our selves according to
his pleasure, otherwise we deceive our selves, if we hope for any blessing at
his hands. Now the will of God directing our prayers, consists in three
things. First, that our bodies and souls be no otherwise settled, then
becomes those that are to enter talk and communication with God. This the
faithful declared, by lifting up their hands, by casting up the eyes, by
bowing down the knees, and such other gestures, as testified the sequestring
of all their thoughts from the earth and earthly cogitations, and the bringing
of all their mind to the meditation of heaven and heavenly things. Secondly, we
have need in prayer, of perseverance and continuance. We must not give over,
and wax weary. It pleases the Lord oftentimes to defer to hear and to help
us, not that he neglects us, or forgets us, or wishes our hurt, but to
exercise our Faith by delaying. Wherefore all rash presumption ought to be far
from us, which dares to prescribe unto God, either the time, or the manner of
our deliverance, and of granting our requests. It is our duty to wait patiently
upon the Lord, and to refer unto him the means and manner of helping of us. The
woman of Canaan Math. 15, 22.
is a notable example to teach us to continue in prayer, even then when we
seem to have the repulse and denial. The Widow in the Gospel is a Luke 18,
1, 2
worthy president to this purpose, to move us to this perseverance, and not to
give over. Lastly, we must beware, that we ask no more then God gives us
leave to ask in his word. We must require those things that are fitting us to
crave, and beseeming God to grant. Many men never consider these things, but
are rash and heady in their petitions, regarding neither what he in goodness
and Justice can give, neither what is profitable for themselves to receive.
Some crave riches to spend in lust and riot: other wish for strength to be
revenged of their enemies, Romans 12, 21
whom they ought to receive with goodness. Others are not ashamed to ask foul
and filthy things, which one would blush to ask of a mortal man, which the
Heathen Pers. Satyr. 2.
themselves have condemned. These are the causes why our prayers are not heard,
because we ask amiss, and do not submit our wills to his will. Our wills are
carnal and corrupt: his will is pure and holy, and the rule of all
righteousness.

The 3. thing required in prayer.
The third point to be observed in prayer, is, that it proceed from an humble
and contrite heart. If pride do compass us as a Chain, and an high conceit of
our selves possess us, we are deceived if we suppose to obtain any thing at
the hands of God. A proud Beggar is hated of God, and scorned of men. There can
nothing be seen more deformed and despised, then a poor man that is proud.
There is nothing can worse sort together, then a proud heart, and a beggars
purse. God euer-more resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble and
lowly. The Prophet David declares this Psalm. 51, 16, 17. Thou desire no
Sacrifice, though I would give it: thou delightest not in Burnt Offerings. The
Sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit, a contrite and a broken heart, O
Lord, thou will not despise. We must learn therefore truly to feel our own
poverty and misery: let us consider that we need all things that we ask, and
so join an earnest and fervent affection and desire of obtaining. Indeed, we
cannot always have a like feeling, but we must always strive against
deadness of heart, and dullness of spirit* Let us shake off all vainglory
and pride, and give all the glory to God, as the poor Publican did in the
Gospel. Thus have the faithful done, Psalm. 143, 2. Dan. 6, 17. Esaias 64, 5.
Ier. 14, 7.
as appears in David, Daniell, Esaias, Jeremy. We must not be like the proud
Pharisie, Luke 16, 11.
that stood upon his own righteousness, and condemned other of wickedness
and profaneness. Let us also come with Repentance, not only craving pardon
for sins past, and making an humble Confession of faults present, but desiring
grace to be strengthened in time to come.

Lastly, let not our prayer be a lip-labor for form and fashion sake, but
earnest and fervent. When Saneherib invaded Judah, and besieged the strong
Cities, and thought to win them for himself, Hezekiah and the Prophet Esaias
with him 2 Chr. 32, 20
cried to heaven. Thus does the Prophet Jeremy speak, Lam. 2, 19.
Arise, cry in the night; in the beginning of the Watches, pour out thine
heart like water before the face of the Lord lift up thine hands toward him,
etc. Heerunto accords the Apostle, Romans 8, 26, 27. The spirit helps our
infirmities, for we know not how to pray as we ought: but the spirit it self
makes request for us with sights, which cannot be expressed: but he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the spirit; for he makes
request for the Saints according to the will of God. Thus it appears out of
the practice of the Prophets and Apostles, what kind of prayers God accepts.
True it is, they avail much, howbeit they must be fervent. Cold prayers turn
into sin, and never bring with them any blessing. We will seem to draw
near to God, and to honor him, howbeit it is only with our mouths and lips,
which is a vain woorshipping of him. We will needs call upon his name, but our
prayers freeze between our teeth, and are uttered without zeal. These are
they that pray, but it is in such sort, as if they never meant to speed. If a
Child should crave any thing of his parents in that manner, they would take
themselves to be abused.

The fourth thing required in prayer.
The 4. thing expressed in the former description of prayer, is, that it must
be put up in the name of Christ Jesus. He is the Mediator of the new Testament,
he stands between the wrath of his Father and us; he makes continual
intercession for us. If then, we would have our prayers accepted, we must come
in his name, he is the High Priest of our profession, he offers them up unto
his Father, who accepts them not for their worthiness, but for his
worthiness; not for their merits, but for his merits; as we shall show
farther in the Doctrine following. In his Name, did the Fathers come to the
Throne of Grace, and presented their prayers before God, assuring themselves to
be heard for his sake. This is manifest in the prayer that Daniell makes,
Chap. 9. 17. Now therefore (O our God) hear the Prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that lies wast,
for the Lords sake. He acknowledges Christ Jesus to be the heir and Lord of
all things, in whom, and through whom God would accept his prayers. This we
might farther 1 Samuel 3, 21. 2 Samuel 7, 21.
show by other examples; yea, it is taught us by the mouth of Christ himself,
John 16, 23.
Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye sha^ ask the Father in my name,
he will give it you. As no man can come to the Father, but by him, so no man
can obtain any thing but by him. We cannot ask in our own name, Ferus in
Ioh. 16.
that is; for our own merits any thing: we ask and obtain in the name of
Christ. By his name we must understand his incarnation, his passion, his death,
his deserts, his intercession. For, as he that has Christ, has eternal life,
because Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; so he that has Christ,
obtains all things, because he it is alone in whom the Father is well
pleased. It is therefore a lawful and laudable custom of the true Church, to
conclude and shut up their prayers in the name of Christ, declaring thereby,
that their trust and confidence to be heard, stands not in themselves, nor in
any other then the Mediator between God and them. True it is, the Church of
Rome uses this form, and ends in his name, but this is no better then a
mere mocking of Christ. For, albeit they add in the closing up of their
prayers, Through our Lord Jesus Christ; yet the substance of them is full of
Idolatry, and the Saints are made Idols, and Christ a Mediator to bring us to
them, which is as foul a dishonor, as if the eldest son, who is heir of
al, should be used and employed to bring us into the favor of the servant of
the house. So then, we must hold it as a principle of our Faith to direct us
in our prayers, that they be not made in the name of any creature, but in the
name and mediation of Christ alone. And hereby is discovered a manifest fault
and palpable error of ignorant people. They power out many Prayers, and cry out
oftentimes, Lord help me, Lord have mercy upon me, Thus do these poor and
simple blind souls, rush upon the Lord, as it were into the Chamber of
presence, without a guide: they know not the nature of God, that he is as well
a most fearful judge, as a most merciful father: and they are ignorant of
the Office of the Mediator, in whose name they should present their prayers to
him. He that comes in his own name, comes in a wrong name; and he that
comes without Christ, departs without fruit. He sprinkleth our prayers
with the sweet Odours of his merits and mediation, without which, our prayers
and our persons are abominable.

The fifth thing required in Prayer.
The fifth and last thing required in Prayer is, that it must be made with
assurance to be heard. Prayer is to be made in faith, whereby a man must have
confidence that he shall obtain that which he has asked. This affiance being
wanting, makes Prayer to be no prayer. Whosoever doubts whether God will
grant his requests or not, can never pray for any thing earnestly and
effectually. This our Savior teaches, Mark 11, 24. Whatsoever ye desire when
ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. None
can have this persuasion to be heard, none can have this affiance, that God is
both willing and able to help them, but the faithful, who have assurance that
their sins are pardoned, and their persons reconciled unto God in Christ.
Such as stand in doubt of this, can never believe any other promises revealed
in the word, nor be sure that any of his prayers shall be heard. If any come
and make any suite or supplication unto us, whom we know to doubt of our good
will and meaning toward us, can we regard them, or accept of them? So they
can by no means please God, that while they are praying, doubt of his good
meaning, or Almighty power, and know not how he is affected and disposed toward
them. For this cause the Apostle James directing us in the right course of
prayer, commands rhat it be made in faith without doubting, James 1, 6, 7.
Let him ask in Faith, and waver not: for he that wauereth, is like a wave of
the Sea tossed of the wind, and carried away: neither let that man think that
he shall receive any thing of the Lord. It is a great corruption of the flesh,
and such as springs from the bitter root of Infidelity, to imagine that God
does not, or will not regard our prayers, according to that saying of the
Prophet, Psalm. 10, 13. Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? He says in his
heart, Thou will not regard. Objection
But here some may Object and say; How can we have this assurance, seeing many
pray, and yet receive not; they ask, and obtain not. The Prophet David
complains, Psalm. 22, 2.
O my God, I cry by day, but thou hear not; and by night, but have no
audience. And in another place, 2 Samuel 12, 14
He prayed for the life of his child with great earnestness of spirit, with
great humbleness of mind, with great anguish of heart, and yet he obtained not
the life of his son that he desired, for the Child died. Answer.
I answer to this many ways. First, God does sometimes defer to answer his
servants, to make them cry more earnestly. We are made of a dull Metal, we
quickly wax weary in prayer; we must have some means to kindle our zeal. Now,
it is a great error in the faithful, to think that GOD deceyueth us, because
he delayeth us; it is the purpose of God to try us for the exercise of our
faith, and the increase of our zeal.

Secondly, men do sometimes pray that are profane, and lie in some grievous
sin, that is unrepented of, which is as a thick cloud standing between the
Lord and us, and as it were stopping his ears, that he cannot hear us: or as
a bar that lies in our way, that we cannot possibly come into the presence
of God. True Repentance will scatter the Cloud, and remove the bar that is
before us; but till sin be forsaken, John 9, 31.
our Prayers cannot be granted. Many complain that they are not heard, and
murmr that they spend their words as in the Wind; but they never consider
what the cause is, and where the fault lies, and how it is to be reformed.

Thirdly, they pray to satisfy their lusts, and do not ask such things as
they ought to desire, according as the Apostle James vpbraydeth the Jews to
whom he wrote, James 4, 3.
Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might lay the same out
on your pleasures. It is not enough to crave good things, but we must ask
them to a good end. If our purpose be evil, our Prayers cannot be good, our
requests cannot be granted.

Fourthly, we must pray for earthly things, with condition, so far as they
may serve to the glory of God, and our own good: and therefore, we must refer
our selves wholly to his will and pleasure, as we are taught in the Lords Prayer
to say; Thy will be done. Spiritual Graces we may ask without exception, but
earthly benefits with limitation.

Lastly, God hears our prayers two ways. First, when he grants that thing
which we ask. Thus he heard Isaac, Moses, Hezekiah, Iehoshaphat, and others.
Secondly, albeit God do not bestow upon us always those lawful things which
we desire and demand, yet he hears our prayers, and answers our cries, when
he gives some thing proportionable to that we ask: As if we crave earthly
blessings, he gives us heavenly; and if we crave temporal things, he yields
eternal life; and if, instead of deliverance of us out of trouble, he gives us
strength and ability to bear trouble, and patience to endure under the cross
without murmuring. Thus is Christ said to be Heb. 5, 7.
heard in that which he feared, albeit he suffered death. He prayed that the
Cup might pass from him, yet he was to drink of it; his Father had decreed
it, he had undertaken it, and we were to be 2 Cor. 12, 8, 9
redeemed by it. Notwithstanding, he was heard when God gave him strength to
bear it, and sent an Angel to comfort him in his Agony, according to that he
speaks, John 11, 41, 42. Father I thank thee, because thou have heard me, I
know that thou hear me always.

So when Paul felt a prick in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet
him; for this thing he besought the Lord thrice, that it might Depart from
him, and he said unto him, My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is
made perfect through weakness. God did not hear him, and yet he did hear
him. He requesteth one thing, and God grants him another. He craves
freedom from tentation, but he is promised a supply of grace to be made able
to overcome tentations. Thus it fares with every one of us; we must consider
what we ask, and how God hears us. We must not think he forgets us,
when he does not feed our fancies, and answer our expectations: he knows
what is best for us, and he will give us that which he sees to be best for us.

Use 2
Secondly, as this Doctrine sends us to school to learn what true prayer
is, so it serves to reprove three sorts of men. First, such as are grown to
this height of profaneness, that they think it to be in vain to pray unto
God. The faithful find by a blessed experience of Gods favor, that nothing is
more profitable unto them. They would rather leave any earthly Commodity, and
loose their lives, then cease to call upon the Name of God. We see this in
the example of Daniell, Chapter 6. 7, 8. when a Decree was confirmed, sealed,
and published, according to the Law of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 6, 7, 8.
which alters not, That whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or Man for
thirty days, save of the King, he should be cast into the Den of Lions. It
might seem no great matter to forbear and abstain from prayer for so short a
time, yet when Daniell understood, that the writing was passed and published,
he went into his house, and his window being open in his Chamber toward
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his Knees three times in a day, and prayed and
praised his God, as he did afore-time.

It is therefore a Testimony of a very profane and proud heart, not only not
to pray, but to contemn and abhor it as an unclean thing, or as a
superfluous and needless thing. Thus does Job bring in the ungodly speaking,
who differ but one step from Atheistes, the dearest and best beloved sons
of the Devil, Chapt. 21. Job 21, 14, 15.
They say also unto GOD; Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways: Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? And what profit
should we have, if we should pray unto him? Ah, vile Wretches, whether will
your blasphemous mouths reach? Will you thus be at defiance with the most
high and Omnipotent GOD, and set your selves against Heaven? Whereas we are so
oftentimes allured and provoked to prayer, and have most gracious and precious
promises added, that God will hear us? Shall we bid him battle (as if we
were stronger then he) and say; If we cry unto him Day and Night, what do we
gain, or what advantage shall grow unto us? Do not they prosper alike, that
never have God in their minds, and they that frequent diligently and daily the
house of Prayer? Who are more subject to troubles, then such as trouble
themselves with the word of God, and study to keep his commandments?
Wherefore, whether we pray, or not pray, al is one, all is alike, there is no
difference, we loose our labor, we receive no profit. Thus do many speak,
thus do Eccles. 9, 2. Mal. 13, 14.
mo think; the world is full of such vermin and venom. Against which most
wicked imaginations, we must oppose the commandment of God willing us to
pray, the promise of mercy, the examples of the faithful, which have bin heard
when they prayed. Secondly, this Doctrine reprooueth such as go to Saints and
Angels; from the Creator to the Creature, which is a great dishonor done to
God, and a reproach to Christ. Were not he a foolish and sottish suppliant,
that when the Kings son offers to speak for him to his father, would
refuse to use his mediation, and go to one of his servants to entreat for him?
Is it not meet that such a one should be said nay, and depart without his
purpose? Even so, inasmuch as the father sends us unto his son, and the
son calls us to himself, what madness is it to run as well from the
one, as from the other, to go from the son to the Saints; from him that can
hear, to them that cannot help? Nay, as the Father is deprived of his Honor,
and the son robbed of his Office, so the Saints themselves are disgraced. If
a man should set any of the Subjects down in the Chair of estate, and then
bow down before him, and give him any of the Royalties of the King, were not
this high Treason against the Prince, and extreme wrong to the Subject? Thus
the case stands between us, God, and the Saints. If we shall advance the
Saints to so high a degree, as to pray unto them, which is proper unto God,
and (as it were) the Princes Regality; if they did see our impiety, they would
blush at it, and be ashamed of it. The Apostle Peter would not suffer Cornelius
Acts 10, 25.
when he met him, to fall down at his feet and worship him. Paul and Barnabas
rent their cloths, Act 14, 13, 14
when they saw Jupiters Priest bring Bulls with Garlands unto the gates of the
City, to the end they might offer sacrifice unto them. Did they reject this
service done unto them when they lived upon the earth, and shall we think they
do now affect it, or would now accept of it? Away therefore, with the
mediation of the Angels, who know not our hearts, nor hear our prayers. Away
with the mediation of the Saints, who being now in heaven, are accepted of
God, not for themselves, but for the precious merits of their Savior Christ. I
except not the blessed Virgin Mary his Mother, but as once she rejoiced in God
her Savior, so now she triumphs in Christ her Redeemer, and is accepted
through the deserts of her son. To conclude this point, let us remember the
saying of the Apostle John, 1 John 2, 1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the reconciliation for our sins. Where we see, he
joins these two together, to be an Advocate, and to make reconciliation, and
appropriateth them both to the person of Christ. If then, the Saints be our
Advocates, that we should present our prayers unto them; they to Christ, and
Christ to God; they must also make reconciliation for our sins, and appease
the wrath of God the father, which is impossible for them to do, and
blasphemous for us to affirm. It is our duty therefore to repair and resort
unto God the father through the merits of his son Jesus Christ. The Prophet
complains, Psalm. 20, 7.
That some trust in Chariots, and some in horses. So in time of troble, some
seek to Saints and Angels, Leuit. 19, 31 Esa. 8, 19. and 17 8. and 44, 17, 18
others fly to Witches and Idols, but we must remember the name of the Lord
our God. But of this point we have spoken before more at large. Thirdly, it
reproves such as see the want of many blessings in themselves and others, and
feel great judgments and public calamities upon themselves and others, and
yet pray not at all to have the one bestowed, and the other removed. These are
like to brute beasts, that rore and cry out for their prey when they want meat,
but they never consider from whence they receive it; and as the swine that eat
the Mast in the woods, but never look up to the tree from whence it falls: or
as the dog that biteth the stone that is cast at him, but looks not to the hand
that threw it. So do these men; they can mourn and murmr when they sustain
any loss, feel any plague, or find any want; but they have no knowledge to
search out the cause or the means how Gods blessings should be obtained, or
his judgments be prevented. Hence it is, that the Prophets complain of this
sencelesnesse and want of feeling of Gods mercy, and our own misery, as we
see in Ezekiell, and in other places, Ezekiel. 22, 30. Esaias 59, 16. and 63, 5.
I sought for a Man among them, that should not make up the hedge, and stand in
the gappe before the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none. It
is a vain thing for a Physician to know the Disease, and not to apply the
Remedy; so likewise is it a great folly for us to know our own wantes, and
yet to want Wisdom to take a right course to redress the same. What
deadness of heart has entered into us, that we have forgotten the
commandments of God, and cannot remember the examples of his servants that
have obtained great things at his hands, and cannot be encouraged by his
manifold and merciful promises that he has made unto us? Let us then be
provoked to this duty, and not be wanting unto our selves, but respect our
own good and benefit in seeking unto the Lord daily, in calling upon him
early and late. The servants of Naaman reprove him, in that being commanded an
easy and ready way to be cured and cleansed of his Leprosy, yet he hung
back, and would not use the remedy, 2 King. 5, 13.
If the Prophet (say they to their Master) had commanded thee a greater
thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he says to
thee, wash, and be clean? So may it be said to us, to shake off our
drowsinesse, and to work forwardness in us to practice this duty, If the Lord
in our present wants should require at our hands any hard and difficult thing,
ought we not to obey him, and to perform his Commandment? How much more
then, when he respects our weakness, and says only; Ask, and you shall
have; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. We
shall not need now to say in our own hearts, Who shall ascend into Heaven, or
descend into the deep, to bring his blessings unto us from thence. The remedy
is at hand, the means are near even in our mouth, and in our heart; this is
the prayer of faith, which avails much if it be fervent. It teaches us the
way to the Lords treasures, and to put our hand into his Cofers, to take such
benefits as we want, and to put up the arrows of his wrath into his quiver,
which he has drawn against us, to shoot at us.

Use 3.
Thirdly, from hence arises great comfort to all the faithful that call upon
the name of God. For, are the prayers of good men auayleable for our good? Do
they procure blessings, and stay judgments? Then have we great cause to
rejoice, and matter of great joy offered unto us in the diligent practice of
this duty. We are assured, that the Lord will not defraud and deceive us, but
give us those things that we desire, and he knows what we want. Is our Faith
weak? He will strengthen us. Are we ignorant? He will enstruct us. Do we want
the Graces of his spirit? He will supply them. Is our Love cold? He will
quicken it. Is our Repentance imperfect? He will perfect it. On the other
side, are his Judgments among us? He will remove them. Are we in distress?
He will have mercy upon us. Do our sins trouble us? He will discharge us.
Are we in sickness? He will restore us. James 5, 13, 14.
Are we in any misery? He will deliver us. If the consideration of this
gracious dealing of God, and the performance of his precious promises, do not
put life into our dead hearts, and assure comfort to our feeble spirits, and
raise us up when we are cast down: what weapon can be of sufficient force to
pierce our hearts, and to drive us to the Conscionable practice of this duty?
If we had not a blessed experience of Gods goodness toward us, we should
have the less sin to doubt thereof. But seeing there is no faithful Man or
Woman, who has not found the Lord ready to hear him in time of his need, and
that we are compassed about with so great a Cloud of witnesses, let us comfort
our selves, and one another in these things, and be stirred up to call upon
his name.

Use 4
Lastly, are the Prayers of the faithful profitable to all things, and
available to make us partakers of Gods blessings, and to stop the course of
his Judgments? Then we must remember that it is our duty to praise his name
when he has heard our prayers, and granted our requests, either for our
selves, or our brethren. It is a note of an unthankful heart, to obtain a
benefit, and not to acknowledge it; to receive a gift, and not to praise and
commend the giver. This is it which the Apostle teaches, 2. Cor. 1, 9, 10, 11.
speaking of the afflictions which came upon him in Asia, whereby he was
pressed out of measure, passing strength, so that he doubted altogether, even
of life, We received the sentence of death in our selves, because we should
not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead, who delivered us
from so great a death, and does deliver us; in whom we trust, that yet
hereafter he will deliver us, so that ye labor together in Prayer for us,
that for the gift bestowed upon us for many, thanks may be given by many
persons for us. In which words he declares, that as he had experience in the
time past, of the mercy of God, in the deliverance which was given unto him: so
he hops of the like assistance of his spirit, if that the Corinthians would
be mindful of him in their prayers. Where we see, he ascribes much to their
Prayers, and yet, so much, as that he would have the glory of his deliverance
to be given only to God, and thanks to be rendered unto him. A point worthy
to be considered of us, and a duty needful to be performed by us. As he has
promised, and we have prayed: so when he has paid, he is to be praised.
Praise is comely, and well becomes the Saints of God, the want whereof,
takes away the comfort and sweet fruit of his blessings from us. It is a
great offense to be unthankful unto men, but far greater to God, in whom we
live, and move, and have our being. Wherefore, whenever we have opened our
mouths unto God, let us return the Calves of our lips unto him, and never
show our selves more ready to ask, then we are willing to praise and magnify
the Lord, who has granted that which we have asked. And hereby we may try
our selves, whether we be truly thankful unto him, or not.

[ I shall be freely given (or bestowed) upon you.] The Apostle in this place,
uses a word derived from grace, so that it signifies to be given by Grace.
Thus the (...).
word is taken in sundry places of the Scripture, as Romans 8. If he have given
us his own son, how should he not with him Romans 8, 32. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Gal. 3.
18.
give us all things else. And 1 Cor. 2. We have received the spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that are given to us of God. So likewise,
Galath. 3. God gave the inheritance to Abraham by promise. The meaning of the
Apostle is thus much in effect; the Prayers of the Saints shall prevail with
God, and being offered up for my deliverance, shall not return to them
without comfort, nor ascend to him without effect, nor concern me without
effect. Notwithstanding, albeit they shall not go empty away, but have their
full force and power, yet it is to be acknowledged and Learned, that they so
obtain, as that my deliverance is to be wrought out by the free gift of his
Grace, not by the merit and desert of your prayers.

Doctrine 3. The gifts of God bestowed upon his servants, come from his free
grace, not from our deserts.
From hence we learn, that the gifts of God bestowed upon his Servants,
come from his free grace, not from our deserts; from his mercy, not from our
merits: from his Goodness, not from our Worthiness. This is set down in the
second Commandment of the Law, Exodus 20, 6. where the Lord promises
eternal life unto the Keepers of the Commandments, yet they must not look to
obtain it as a due desert, For he will show Mercy unto thousands to them
that love him, and keep his Commandments. Faith is an excellent gift, and a
notable means to bring us to eternal life, John 3, 36.
For he that believes in the Son has eternal life, and he that obeys
not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of GOD abides on him.

We see then, the necessity of having a lively Faith, because to believe in
Christ, brings with it eternal life: yet it is not for the merit of our
Faith, but for the Mercy of God, and the Merit of Christ apprehended by Faith,
Romans 6, 23.
inasmuch as Eternal life is the free gift of God. The like we may say of
Prayer, we have a comfortable promise, that if we ask, we shall receive; if we
seek, we shall find; not because our Prayers do deserve acceptance: and
therefore, when Daniell prayed unto God, he confesses that Dan. 9, 7, 8, 9
righteousness belongs unto the Lord, but unto us open shame, because we
have sinned against him. Whereby we gather, that although our prayers are not
without effect, yet they prevail not by any excellency is sound in them, and
therefore he says; Compassion and forgiveness is in the Lord our God, albeit
we have rebelled against him. Thus also we might perticularly speak of all the
good ordinances of God, and the good duties that proceed from us, as the
saving hearing of the word, the fruitful receiving of the Sacraments, and such
like holy exercises of our Religion: inasmuch as he does accept them, and is
well pleased in the performance of them, howbeit not through our worthiness
that do perform them, but thorough his goodness that does command them,
thorough his mercy that does approve them, thorough his promise that does
receive them, and thorough his liberality that does reward them.

Reason 1.
If we would know the Causes and Reasons why the Graces of God are freely
bestowed upon us, and nothing given in our deserts; First, let us consider that
all matter of boasting is taken from us, and God will have the glory of his
own works, and the praise of his mercy. If he should take any thing of us,
he should loose so much of his own glory, and we would be ready to ascribe
our sanctification and salvation to our own selves. This does the Apostle set
down at large in sundry Epistles; for speaking of Abraham he says, Romans 4, 2.
and 23, 27.
If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with
God. And having showed before, that God accepts of the faithful, making him
just, and without blame, by imputing of Christ's righteousness unto him, he
confirms it by the end of Justification, which he makes to be the glory of
God, saying; Where is then the rejoicing? It is excluded. By what Law? Of
Works; Nay, but by the Law of Faith. As if he should say; If we were
justified, either by our own Works wholly and only, or partly by Faith, and
partly by works, then the glory of our justification should be wholly given to
our selves, or at least not wholly given unto God. To this purpose he speaks
in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephe. 2, 8, 9. and 1, 5, 6.
By grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves; it is the
gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast himself. God will have
the glory of our justification, he will be accounted and acknowledged to be
the Iustifier and Savior of us; he has not left us to justify our selves,
nor to be our own Saviors, as shall better appear afterward.

Reason 2
Secondly, there are no such properties in any man's works, as that they cannot
merit or proceed from any other fountain then Grace. Let us therefore see What
properties must be found in works to make them merritonous.
what properties are necessarily required in works, to make them merritorious.
First, they must be done of a man of himself, and by himself: but we have
nothing of our own to give him, but are most poor men and mere beggars, and
can but pay God with his own. The works that are our own, are sufficient to
deserve his wrath: but have no power at all to procure his favor. For in our
selves we are wretched and miserable, poor, naked, and destitute of all
goodness, so that it is truly said by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 4, 7.
Who separateth thee? And what have thou, that thou have not received? If thou
have received it, why reioysest thou, as though thou had not received it.
Without him therefore we can do nothing: it is he that must work in us the will
and the deed.

Secondly, they must be such works as are not due unto him, they must not be
due debt, they must come from our own free will, they must be such as God
cannot justly challenge at our hands. But whatsoever we do, we do as poor
debtors; nay, we are worse then poor debtors, we are miserable Bankrupts, we
have nothing, we have less then nothing to pay. Our Savior has a worthy
sentence to this purpose, Luke 17, 10. When ye have done all those things that
are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which
was our duty to do. And what could Adam do, and offer unto God in his
innocence, but that which was his duty; and whereunto he was bound unto his
Maker, for his Creation and other blessings bestowed upon him?

Thirdly, the work must be done to the benefit and profit of him, from whom we
look to be repayed. But our goodness and well-doing reaches not to the Lord,
Psalm. 16. We may benefit men, but we cannot benefit our maker, from whom we
have received life and limb, soul and body, and all that we have, but we can
give him nothing. Now they that cannot give any thing to God, can deserve
nothing from him: but we cannot give any thing to God, according to the saying
of Paul, Romans 11, 35. 36.
Who has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed? For of him, and
through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever, Amen:
therefore, it is evident that we cannot deserve.

Fourthly, whatsoever is imperfect, cannot stand in the presence of the most
just and perfect God: we must bring nothing before him, but that which is
absolute, and able to bear and sustain his wrath. But all that we do offer,
or can offer unto God, is maimed and imperfect: such are our best Works, our
Prayers, our Meditations, our Hearing, so that our righteousness is like a
Esaias 64, 6.
menstruous cloth. Whatsoever proceeds from us, is foul and faulty, no man
is able to satisfy the Justice and rigor of the Law, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 3, 10, 12, 20.
There is none righteous, no not one; they have all gone out of the way, they
have been made altogether unprofitable, there is none that does good. no, not
one; and therefore by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his
sight. We must all entreat for pardon and forgiveness of our evil Works,
and not stand upon the perfection and sufficiency of our good works.

Lastly, the work and the reward must be in proportion equal, for if the
reward be more then the work, it is not a reward of desert, but a gift of
good will. The Apostle says, Romans 8, I account that the afflictions of this
present time, are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed unto us. Thus
then we reason; Nothing can deserve, but that which is equivalent to the thing
deserved: but nothing that we can do, can equal or deserve the guiftes, the
least gift of God. So then, albeit we had somewhat to give, and that we were
not as most naked and needy beggars; yet it cannot be compared or correspondent
to that which we receive. For grace and glory are vnvalewable and unmatchable,
no price can purchase them, no money can buy them, no merits can match them. So
then, whether we consider that GOD will have the glory of all his works, or
that there is a great disproportion between Mercy and Merits; in both respects
we conclude, that the guiftes of GOD given unto his faithful servants,
proceed from his free grace, not from our free will, so that they are not
deserved of us, but bestowed upon us.

Use 1.
This Doctrine being thoroughly strengthened, let us see what Uses may be
grounded from thence. First, we learn from hence, that seeing God gives not
by desert, but of his mercy; that whatsoever we have obtained and received by
any prayer, or other means from the hand of God, we must ascribe all to the
glory and praise of his name, and acknowledge him to be the Author and giver.
True it is, we are commanded to call upon the Lord, and to put up our suits and
supplications unto him: and when we have prayed, and God has heard our prayer,
we must not think that we have well deserved to speed in our desires, and
say; For my righteousness, and the strength of my Prayers, I have gotten this
or that: but as we use the means, so we must acknowledge that God finds such
faults in our best prayers, that he might curse us, rather then bless us; and
condemn us rather then hear us; and withal consider, that in hearing us, he
respects more that which is in himself, then any thing that is in us, he is
moved rather of his own mercy, then any absoluteness that he can see in our
well-doing. Let us therefore meditate upon our own wants, and albeit we use
those helps and Instruments that he has appointed, yet let us give him all
the glory to whom it is wholly due. When a great multitude of enemies came
against Iehoshaphat, he set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast
through out all Judah, They asked counsel of the Lord, and prayed unto him:
yet when God had given them the upper hand; they blessed not themselves, but
the Lord; they praised not their own zeal, but his mercy; and they ascribed
not the victory to their fasting and prayer, but to his favor and power: 2 Chronicles. 20 26, 27.
For they assembled themselves in the Valley of Berachah, and there they
blessed the Lord: then every Man of Judah and Jerusalem returned with
Iehoshaphat their head, to go again to Jerusalem with joy, for the Lord had
made them to rejoice over their Enemies.

The like we might say of Hezekiah. The example of the Prophet David is
plentiful in this Argument, he oftentimes prayseth the Lord, because he had
heard the voice of his petition, as Psalm. 65. O God, Psalm. 65, 1, 2. and 98. 1.
and 115, 1.
praise waits for thee in Sion, and unto thee shall the vow be performed,
because thou hear the Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. And Psalm. 98.
Sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done marvelous things: his right
hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory. And Psalm. 115. Not us, o
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory, for thy loving mercy, and
for thy truths sake. And hereby we may discover a deep devise, a dangerous
plot, and a deceitful policy of the Devil. He labors by all means to
keep us from Prayer, he cannot abide that we should call upon the name of our
God. He will tell us of How Satan works to hinder us from praying.
the fearful Majesty of God to dismay us; he will suggest our own baseness
and unworthiness to discourage us; he will object that others pray not at all,
yet do well enough, and that they live in all abundance, and want nothing, yet
are not so devout; he will tell us (to make us secure) that God knows whereof
we have need before we ask, that he needs not to be put in mind of his
mercy, and that he cannot forget the covenant that he has made with us. These
are subtle baits to entrap us, and mighty stumbling blocks to trip us, and
strong tentations to slay us, and by these he oftentimes prevails in the
Children of disobedience. If he cannot obtain his purpose of us at the first,
yet he will not give over, but follow us hard at the heels, till he has
subdued us; and mark our foote-steppes, till he has ensnared us. He will say
unto thee, when thou preparest thy self to pray, what need thou pray at
this time? Thou art now unfit; thou art without feeling; thou have other
business to go about, another time will serve as well, or better then this,
when thou may be better fitted to this work. For if thou pray without
feeling and zeal, thou sinnest, and thy prayer is abominable; wherefore take
heed thou pray not, least thou sin against God.

Thus he prevailed with Saul, when the Priest brought the Ark of God to ask
counsel of him what he should do, 1 Samuel 14, 19
Saul said unto him, Withdraw thine hand: as if he should say; Let us pursue
our enemies, I have no leisure to stand asking counsel of God. If he prevail
with us, to neglect this duty at one time, he will take advantage of it, so
that if he see us ready to pray afterward, he will allege, what need thou
pray yet? Thou omittedst it at such and such a time, and thou speddest well
enough, thou had no evil or hurt by it, why then will thou now begin? It
will but trouble thy Conscience to be always praying, it will hinder thy
business, and cause thee to neglect thy calling: yea, when thou have done all
thou can, thou shall get nothing by it, but shall make thy self a
laughing-stocke, and a gazing-stocke to the whole World; wherefore it were much
better for thee to do as many other of thy good and honest Neighbors, that
are not so curious and precise in these matters, who are beloved in the World,
and look to come to heaven as well as thy self.

Moreover, he will not forget to tell thee, that if thou betake thy self to
this strict course of life, it will bring thee into many melancholy dumps, and
so cast thee down, that thou shall never be merry at the heart. This is the
Devils Logic and Language, or rather his sophistry and subtilty, and thus he
does discourse and dispute with us, to draw us away from this duty. For well
does he know, that prayer is a principal part of our spiritual Armor,
whereby we are safe guarded from him, and all other enemies, and the most
effectual means to kindle in us the saving and sanctified Graces of Gods
Spirit: and therefore when we cease praying, God will stay his hand from
blessing us; he will with-holde his graces from us; he will give us over into
the power of our spiritual enemies, and renounce us from being in the number
of his Children. How Satan poysoneth our prayers, to make them void.
But if he cannot thus far prevail with us, but that the conscience of Gods
commandment and our own duty, will stir us up to this practice: then he
works in us another way, and creeps upon us after another manner. He will
after a sort close with us, and join in the acknowledgment of the necessity of
daily exercising our selves in making Prayer unto God: but withal, he will
foyst in a false finger, and tell us, that by devout Prayer we shall merit
salvation, and that the more our Prayers are, the greater shall be our merits.

Thus he mingleth and tempereth rank Poison with Prayer, so that albeit we
use it, we do abuse it; so that it is all one as if we used it not. Thus he
shows himself to be ready at our Elbow, to puff us up with pride, and to
tell us that we pray oftener then others, better then others, with greater
feeling then others, with greater faith then others, with greater zeal and
assurance then others. Thus he prevailed with the Pharise, mentioned in the
Gospel, Luke 18, 11 12.
he stood and prayed thus with himself; O God, I thank thee, that I am not as
other men, Extortioners, unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican: I fast
twice in the week, I give Tithe of all that ever I possess: Math. 6, 5.
I love to pray in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the streets: Math.
23, 14
but under a color of long Prayers they sought the praise of men, and the
enriching of themselves, and therefore were to receive the greater damnation.
And as in the former times of the Church, when he could not keep them any
longer in Fornication and uncleanness (as if it were a thing indifferent) he
taught chastity, thereby to destroy chastity; and under a false praise of
single life brought in the detestation of marriage, and the practice of
incontinency: so does he persuade Prayer, thereby to overthrow Prayer. For to
move to pray, thereby to merit and deserve, is to corrupt Prayer, and to make
it of none effect. It is the duty of the Minister of God to preach the word, it
has the promise of blessing, and of great reward: but if he go about to
persuade us, that we shall merit eternal life by our faithfulness in our
Ministry, and by diligent instructing of the people committing to our charge,
Lib. de obitu Knoxi.
we must resist the subtle Serpent, and defy him, and deny his merrits. It is
the duty of all the godly that have this Worlds goods, to give alms to the
poor, especially to the godly poor: but if he move us to give Alms, that we
may get Heaven or gain the praise of men, we must strive against his
tentation, and not suffer our selves to be deluded by him. For this is as much
as if he should say unto us, I would have thee pray, but thou shall obtain
nothing: I would have thee give alms, but thou shall have no reward. Seeing
then, we are subject to a double tentation of Satan (who goes about like a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour) so that he will (if it be possible)
hinder us from Prayers, or (if he cannot) will corrupt them with his Leaven of
merit: we must prepare to resist him The means how to resist Satan in his
tentations.
both ways. Whenever he goes about to stay us from praying unto our
heavenly Father, we must resist him strong in faith, and oppose against him
these Meditations. Let us remember Gods most holy commandment, to call upon
him in the day Psalm. 50, 15.
of trouble, and that we are continually to watch and pray, Luke 22, 40, 46.
least we fall into tentation. We have together with the precept, a promise
annexed for our comfort and greater encouragement to this duty, that he is
near to all that call upon him; even to all that call upon him in truth; yea,
the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and his ears are open unto their
prayers.

Let us consider, that there is an absolute necessity of the invocation of his
Name, and of craving his assistance, that we may be freed and delivered from
the snares and assaults of the Devil, and that he would give us strength to
overcome them, and not suffer us to be tempted above our power, but give a
blessed issue of the tentation, that we may be made able to bear it. And as
the necessity is great to call upon him daily, In whom we line and move, and
have our being; so the profit thereof is no less; it brings a blessed
experience and trial of Gods goodness and mercy toward us: It increases his
spiritual graces in us, and makes us zealous in all good works: It obtains
those things that we want, and remooueth the judgments that hang over us, or
are upon us. We have the examples of all the faithful, as a Cloud of Witnesses
to incite us to this duty. And if we put forth our hands to take and use any
of the Creatures or blessings of God without asking him leave, we are no better
then Thieves and Robbers. These and such like Motives, serve to kindle our
zeal in Prayer, and to quench the fiery darts of the Devil which he casts
at us. If he go about to puff us up with pride, through an opinion merriting
by any, even our best works of Prayer, or Preaching, or Almes-deedes, we must
know that all our works are imperfect, and that the good things in us are his
own gifts.

Hence it is, that the Apostle says of himself and all his labors; 1 Cor.
15, 9, 10.
I am the least of the Apostles: by the Grace of God I am that I am, and his
Grace which is in me, was not in vain. I labored more abundantly then they
all, yet not I, but the Grace of God which is with me. And in another place, 1
Cor. 3, 7.
Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that
gives the increase. Again, 1 Cor. 4, 7.
What have thou that thou have not received? If thou have received it, why
boastest thou as though thou had not received it? It is a worthy saying set
down by our Savior, Luke 17, 10.
When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say; We are
unprofitable Servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. Wherefore,
we must labor in all our works to see our imperfections, to cast down
ourselves in humility before the Judgment seat of God, and to refer all
things to his glory. The Apostle gives this general rule; 1 Cor. 10, 31
Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God. And if in these ordinary and natural works, we must aim at that end as
at a mark: how much more, in the Mysteries of our salvation, and the great
keys of our Religion, ought we to give thanks unto God for blessing us with
spiritual blessings in heavenly things? We are not able to inspire Grace into
our barren hearts, it is the gift of God, and therefore he must be confessed
the giver of every good giving and perfect gift, to the glory of his own
Name. And for our selves, let us in all duties of our obedience; Prayer, Alms,
or whatsoever works approved of God, prepare our selves to bring humble and
broken hearts, freed from the Thorns of pride and vainglory.

This is taught by David in the Psalm, Psalm. 51, 17.
The Sacrifices of God are a contrite Spirit: a contrite and a broken heart, o
God, thou will not despise. The like we see, Esaias 66. Esaias 66, 2.
To him will I look, says the Lord, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. And thus was the practice of
Daniell in his Prayer, Dan. 9, 18.
O Lord, incline thine ear, open thine eyes, and behold our desolations: for
we do not present our supplications before thee for our own righteousness,
but for thy great tender mercies. This humility shall appear to be in us, if
we refer the end of all our actions to the honor of God, and make that to be
the scope. Let the principal end be the glory of God: the next, the salvation
of our Souls: the third, the edification of our Brethren in Christ Jesus. Let
us cause our light so to shine before men, that they may glorify our Father
which is in Heaven: and then let us follow those things which concern peace,
and wherewith one may edify another.

Use 2.
Secondly, as by the free bestowing of the graces of God, we are taught to give
him all possible praise, so it takes away all opinion of the merits of works,
wherein proud flesh is ready to trust. For to place Merit and Justification in
our own works, is to raze down a chief Foundation and principal Pillar of
Christian Religion; both because thereby we abolish Grace, and renounce
salvation by Christ, and make every man a Savior to himself, and so exclude
salvation by Christ: all which are shameful Heresies and horrible blasphemies,
and detestable abominations. As many as seek to be justified by the Law, are
fallen from Grace. Therefore the Apostle Paul says, Romans 11. There is a
remnant according to the election of Grace, Romans 11, 5, 6
and if it be of Grace, it is no more of works, or else were Grace no more
Grace: but if it be of works, it is no more Grace, or else were work no more
work. This serves to confute the Romish Doctrine, and gives us just cause to
come out from among them, and to make a separation from them, as being no true
Church of God. For in as much as they take away the foundation and chief
pillars whereupon the house of God stands, they pull it down and bring it to
ruin. We see how they exclude Grace, and bring in Merit. They establish a
twofold kind of Merit, and both of them (as they understand them) plants of
their own setting, but mere Strangers in the Garden of the Scriptures, and
therefore shall fall; according to the Doctrine of Christ, who says; Math. 15,
13
Every Plant which mine heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.
One sort is the A two-folde merit taught in the Church of Rome.
merit of the person; the other, is the merit of the work. The merit of the
person, they make to be a dignity in the person, wheredy he is esteemed worthy
of eternal life; and this they say is found in Infants dying after Baptism,
who, though they want the merit of good works, yet they want not the merit of
their persons, by which they receive the Kingdom of heaven. The merit of the
work, is a Dignity or excellency in the work in it self, whereby it is
fitted and enabled to deserve life everlasting. Hence it is that they teach,
that the work and the deed are meritorious two ways; first, by Covenant,
because God has made a promise of reward unto them. Secondly, by their own
Dignity, because Christ has merited, that our works should merit. A strange
opinion, and a strange language and manner of speaking, never heard of in the
Book of God. As for us, we renounce all personal merrits; that is, all
merrits within the person of any mere man: also all merrits of works done by
any mere man whatsoever. The true merit whereby we look for the favor of
God and life everlasting, is to be found in the person and works of Christ
alone, who is the treasury and storehouse of all our merrits.

Objection.
But here some man might object and say; The promise of reward is made to them
that believe and work, therefore our works do merit: for merit and reward
be Relatiues. Answer.
I answer, there is a double reward; one of Merit, the other of Mercy. Every
good work, be it never so little, done in Faith, done to the glory of God,
done in that manner that he commands, shall be rewarded, but the reward is
not given for the worthiness of the work, but through the liberality of him
that has promised. Hence it is, that eternal life is called an Inheritance.
The obedient Child has promise from his Father to be his Heir, and to
inherit his Lands, Goods, and Possessions, after his decease; yet not for his
obedience sake, but because his Father loves him, and in kindness and
compassion prefers him before others. Let it suffice us, to have the
Kingdom of Heaven as a free inheritance, and not dream as Hirelings, that we
shall have it as an hire and Wages of our work, for then we shall be deceived
of our hope and expectation. It is a vain confidence to set up such an high
price of our works, as thereby to make them able to buy Heaven. These men do
know, neither the weakness of their own strength, nor the unworthiness of
their own works, nor the wretchedness of their own persons, nor the
excellency of Gods Graces, nor the praise of his glory, whereof he is jealous,
which he will not give to any other. They are like to Simon Magus, Acts 8, 18.
who offered to buy the gifts of God for his Money, as a purchase: or like to
the Math. 6, 7.
Heathen, that look to be heard for their much babbling sake: or like to
Servants that do all for their hire. So these Merit-mongers will have no
Heaven, except they may have it as their hire, and as a pennyworth for their
penny; they will not be indebted unto God, nor beholding unto him for it. As
for us, we value not our good works at so high a rate, we know their
imperfections, we crave eternal life as a Sons portion, and an inheritance
freely promised unto us, and freely bestowed upon us.

Indeed, it is the will and pleasure of God, that we should labor and bring
forth good works, to express our thankfulness to him that has adopted us
for his Children; and after our labor, receive the inheritance: yet we cannot
deserve it by our obedience, and we have a better claim unto it, by being
Sons, then working as Servants. We confess, that the reward shall be given
of bounty, not of necessity; by gift, not by debt; by promise, not by desert;
by Gods acceptance, not through our perfection. As for the Papists, that glory
in their own works, let them take heed they do not deceive themselves, and
whilst they rob God of his honor, let them beware they do not rob
themselves, and deprive themselves of the honor promised to the Saints: and
whilst they challenge and lay claim to everlasting life, as to the Wages of
Servants, let them in time look to themselves, least they be denied the
Inheritance that belongs unto Sons.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing all Gods gifts come from him to us, of Grace and Mercy; It is
our duty above all things to desire Mercy, and to crave the free guiftes of
God. The Children of God, whenever they presented themselves into his
presence; they have stripped themselves of all things; they have renounced all
privileges of the flesh; they have acknowledged their own unworthiness, and
have craved nothing but his favor, and to be satisfied with his Image. This
we see in the Prophet David, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 6, 3. 6. and 63, 3, 4, 5.
My Soul is sore troubled, but Lord, how long will thou delay? Return (o
Lord) deliver my Soul, save me for thy mercies sake. He desires nothing but
of Mercy, he pleads nothing but favor; he stands not upon his own
righteousness; he wills not God to respect him according to his own
worthynesse. Again, Psalm. 63. Thy loving kindness is better then life,
therefore my lips shall praise thee: thus will I magnify thee all my life,
and lift up mine hands in thine Name: my Soul shall be satisfied as with
Marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: Where
he prefers the goodness of God before all things in Heaven and Earth,
whiles he aduanceth it above life; signifying thereby, that his life could not
be pleasant unto him, and that he would not wish to live without it. What is
more desired then life? Yet he prefers the loving kindness of God before
it. So in another place, Psa. 130, 3, 4.
If thou (o Lord) straightly markest iniquities, o Lord, who shall stand? But
mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared. Likewise the Church in the
Lamentations of Jeremy, confesses as much, chapt. 3. It is the Lam. 3, 22.
Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. In
all which places we see, that the godly sue for pardon, and cry out for mercy.
If they desire any blessing, they ask it of favor: If they crave to have any
judgment removed, they crave it of mercy: and they esteem his grace above
their own lives, or any earthly thing that they can desire. We must
acknowledge that it is of his mere mercy that we live, and move, and have our
being. It is our duty to praise his name daily for his great mercies toward
us, which are infinite for measure and continuance. If he accept us, it
skilleth not greatly though men reject us, and condemn us. If his wrath be
kindled against us, and his loving countenance be turned from us, what is it
that can delight us, who is it that can comfort us? We see by many and sundry
examples in our Brethren, that have been cast down through the multitude and
greeuousnesse of their sins, and an apprehension of the heavy wrath of God,
and a withdrawing of his favor for a season from them, albeit they have had
Riches, Friends, Lands, Prosperity, and outward peace, yet none of these could
Minister comfort unto them, so long as Gods countenance was hidden from them,
as the Sun covered in a Cloud. But when once he appeared in mercy and
goodness to them again, their bones and bowels have bin refreshed, according
to the words of the Prophet in the Psalm, Psalm. 4, 6, 7.
If thou, Lord, lift up thy countenance upon me, thou shall give me more joy
of heart then they have had, when their Wheat and their Wine did abound. Labor
therefore, by all means to feel his favor; use all means to obtain it,
employ thy self diligently to keep it, and to continue it toward thee, that
in thy life it may be with thee, and in death it may not depart from thee.

23 There salute thee Epaphras my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus.

24 Marchus, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke my fellow-helpers.


The order of the words.
Hitherto, we have handled the chief matter touching this Epistle, containing
his suit for Onesimus, and his commandment to prepare him lodging. Now
follows the Conclusion and shutting up of the Epistle, consisting in certain
salutations, which are of two sorts; either from others, or from himself. The
salutation from others is in these two Verses: the salutation from himself is
in the Verse following. In these Verses he saluteth Philemon in the name of
five persons which were famous and well known in the Church, and of great
authority and credit above many others. This salutation as it was very
honorable unto him, so also it carried with it great weight and moment to
effect his principal purpose with more easiness. For seeing he joins with
him His Fellow-prisoner, and Fellow-helpers in this suit, that he might the
better obtain his request, so that they all put up as it were with one voice
and consent the same petition, Philemon could not but consider, that it was a
very unseemly and unworthy thing to reject so many suppliants in so
reasonable a cause. So then, the sum of these words is this, Epaphras, Marcus,
Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke do salute thee. The first man is described by an
adjoined property, my Fellow-Prisoner; which is declared by the cause, For
Jesus Christ. The rest that are here named, have one common adioynt as a title
of honor ascribed unto them when he calls them his Fellow-helpers.

The meaning of the words.
Thus much touching the Order and Method. Now, let us see the meaning and
Interpretation of the words. By [ Saluting] in this place, we are to
understand, to use all kind and courteous speaking, and to wish all peace and
prosperity of soul and body, which are fruits of that Brotherly Love that
ought to be among all the Saints. Thus did the faithful pray one for another.
In this salutation he names five persons. In the first place, he rangeth
Epaphras, a Citizen of the same City with Philemon and his Countreyman, as
appears in the Epistle to the Colossians, chap. 4. Epaphras Col. 4, 12.
the Servant of Christ, which is one of you, Saluteth you, and always strives
for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and full in all she will of God.
This man had been the Teacher of the Church at Colosse, and had converted them
to the faith of Christ, as we read in the same Epistle, Cha. 1. Colos. 1, 7.
As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servant, which is for you a
faithful Minister of Christ. It seems he was an Evangelist, who succeeded in
the labors of the Apostles, but now being at Rome, he was put in prison, and
here saluteth Philemon as a Fellow-prisoner of Paul, not for any wickedness
and crime that he had committed, but for the Testimony of Christ, and for
preaching the Gospel, and therefore is called not Caesar's prisoner, but
Christ's Prisoner. Whereby it appears, that this Epaphras was falsely accused
by the enemies of the Gospel, and therefore brought unto Rome, and put in hold.

Secondly, he names Marcus, who is mentioned also in other places of the
Scripture, who was Cozen to Barnabas, and the son of that Marie, who was wont
to give entertainment to the Disciples at Jerusalem; yea, such was her
godliness, that she made her house as an Inn to lodge the poor Saints, and
as a public Temple for the people of God to meet together to pray unto him,
and to praise his name. This appears, Col. 4, 10. Marcus saluteth thee
Barnabas Cousin, touching whom ye received Commandments, if he come unto you,
receive him. So* when Peter was delivered out of prison, it is said, Acts. 12,
12.
He came to the house of Marie the Mother of John, whose sur-name was Mark,
where many were gathered together in Prayer.

Thirdly, he saluteth Philemon in the name of Aristarchus, of whom also
mention is made in the Epistle to the Colossians, and there likewise he is
called Paul's prisoner, Colos. 4, 10.
Aristarchus my Prison-fellow saluteth you. As they embraced one Faith, and
believed in one Christ, so they suffered for one cause, and were Companions in
affliction?

Fourthly, he names Demas, who at this time was a constant Confesser of the
truth, and a zealous follower of the Gospel, but afterward he started back
from the Doctrine of Christ, forsook the fellowship of Paul, and embraced this
present world, as the Apostle complains of him afterward, as we see, 2 Timothy
4, 10. Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced this present world, and is
departed unto Thessalonica.

Lastly, he reckons up Luke, to wit, the Evangelist, who came to Rome as a
Companion with Paul, as we read, Acts 28, 14. and is named in the Epistle to
the Colossians, Colos. 4, 14.
Luke the beloved Physician greeteth you. He was a Physician by profession,
and after his conversion he accompanied Paul in his greatest dangers. Of these
men here described, we might speak much, and handle their lives at large,
Centu. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10. and castig. and addit. in lib. 2. centu. 1.
but this is done by others, and this may suffice for the Interpretation of
these verses.

We heard in the beginning of this Epistle, that Paul joined Timothy to him,
as a joint Writer thereof, and directs it to others, besides to Philemon,
that they might be means and Mediators unto him; so in the winding up of the
Epistle, he has mustered together many others: by all which, he sets upon
Philemon, as it were, with an Army of Intercessers and Advocates, to soften and
overcome his grieved and offended mind, and to incline him to mercy and
compassion.

The time when this Epistle written.
Moreover, this salutation gives us some direction of the time when this
Epistle was written. Touching the which time, there is some difference among
the learned. Some are of opinion, that this Epistle was written after the
second that he wrote to Timothy, and this reason is rendered, because in that
Epistle it appears, that Timothy and Mark were not with him, and he wills
them to make speed to come unto him, 2 Timothy 4, 9, 11.
Only Luke is with me: Take Mark and bring him with thee, for he is
profitable unto me to Minister. But in this Epistle it is evident, that these
men were come unto him. Seeing therefore, there he sends for them, and here
they are found to be with him, it should seem that this Epistle is Written
after the other.

This is the Reason urged Illyr. in argum. huius Epistol.
by many, which seems to be of great force to persuade. But if we diligently
mark it, and thoroughly consider of it, we shall find it to be too weak to
bear the weight of this conclusion. For this present Epistle, as also that to
the Colossians was written when he was first taken; the second to Timothy,
when he was taken the second time. For Paul having appealed to Caesar from the
partial dealing of the Highpriests, and the cruel persecution of his own
nation, was brought to Rome in the beginning of Neroes reign, about the third
or fourth year thereof. Now it is evident and known to all, that Nero in the
five first years, was one of the most mild and merciful Princes; and as in
his last years, he exceeded all men in Tyranny and Cruelty, so in his first,
Sueto. in Neron.
he passed all his predecessors in Mercy and Gentleness. In the beginning of
his Empire, Paul pleaded his cause before him, and was delivered out of
prison, and let go whether he would. But the rage of the enemies of the Gospel
being endless, he was taken again about the end of Neroes reign, who waxed
mad against Christian Religion, at which time he wrote the latter Epistle to
Timothy, wherein he fore-telleth the approaching of his death, and the time of
his dissolution, 2 Timothy 4, 6.
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand. Thus
much touching the time when this Epistle was written.

General Observations pointed out in these verses.
Now, let us point out some general Observations out of these Verses that
might be enlarged, and farther stood upon, if time would serve. First, we see
the Apostle sets down a salutation proceeding from others: which teaches
that salutations are an ordinary means ordained of God to nourish and cherrish
mutual love, and that union and conjunction which the members of Christ's body
have one with another, who are only in body, and in regard of bodily presence
severed one from another in this present life; whereas in heart they are joined
together, and shall be hereafter both in soul and body.

Secondly, albeit the Apostle were a prisoner for the faithes sake, yet God
does not leave him alone, he has A Fellow-prisoner joined with him, and many
Fellow-helpers added unto him. And albeit he delights not himself in the
imprisonment of another, but could rather wish him delivered, as appears by
his words to Agrippa (who said he was almost persuaded to become a Christian,)
Acts 26, 28, 29.
I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me to day, were
both almost and altogether such as I am, except these bonds: yet
notwithstanding the Company of the Godly is gracious and comfortable both in
prosperity, and in adversity, both in prison, and out of prison. Thus it is
set down by Luke, Acts 16, 25. when Paul was whipped and imprisoned, and his
feet made fast in the stocks, he had Silas joined with him, and they two spent
the night in praying and praising God together, teaching and admonishing
themselves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with a grace in
their hearts to the Lord, so that the prisoners heard them. Thus we see the
endless Mercy of God, toward his afflicted and distressed Servants, he
rayseth them up some comfort, and some Comforters, verifying the promise made
to his Church, If I depart, I will send the Comforter unto you. He knows our
infirmities, he sees how ready we are to yield and slide back: and therefore
as he strengthens us by others, so he makes us means to strengthen others.

Thirdly, he calls Epaphras a prisoner of Christ, as he also had called
himself before in the beginning of this Epistle. The reason is, because he had
preached Christ. Hereby we learn, that persecutions oftentimes follow the
sincere preaching of the Gospel; not that it is the property of the Gospel,
but the cause is the malice of such as will not embrace and receive the
Gospel; and therefore, they hate and persecute those that believe in Christ,
and give entertainment to the Gospel. This is it our Savior teaches, Mat.
10, 34, 35. Think not that I am come to send peace into the earth, I came not
to send peace, but the sword: for I am come to set a Man at variance against
his Father, and the Daughter against the Mother, etc. and a man's enemies shall
be they of his own household.

To this purpose he speaks in another place, Luke 12, 49.
I am come to put fire on the earth, and what is my desire, if it be already
kindled? The Gospel is the proper cause of peace among the godly, so it is the
occasion of great troble among the wicked. They are therefore much deceived,
that make the Gospel the cause of all division and hurly-burlies that are in
the World. When any troubles arise, the preaching of the Gospel is accused to
breed them, but this is a false imputation. The true cause, is the malice of
Satan, and the fury of his Instruments, that cannot abide the Light of the
Truth to shine among them. So then, let us not think it a strange thing, when
we see such stirs and tumults arise, but Arm our selves with Patience;
Learn to be Wise as Serpents, and Innocent as Doves, and condemn those that
are the authors and beginners of those broils and contentions.

Fourthly, observe the Titles that he gives unto our Lord and Savior, he
describes him by two Names; First, he calls him Christ; then, he calls
him Jesus. Christ, signifies as much as Anointed; Jesus, imports as much as
a Savior, who was so called, Math. 1, 21.
because he saves his people from their sins. From whence, observe that
Christ is the King, the Prophet, and the Priest of his Church, to govern us,
to teach us, to Redeem us, to save us. This is his Office, for these Ends and
Uses he was anointed of the Father with the Oil of Gladness above his
fellows. This serves to our great good, and the benefit of it is communicated
unto us; he makes us Revel. 1, 6.
Kings and Priests to God his Father; he armeth us with power and strength
against sin, the Flesh, the World, the Devil; and makes us able to overcome
them: thorough him we have access to the father, and may boldly appear in
his sight, and offer up our Prayers with assurance, Romans 12, 1.
Yea he enableth us to offer up our selves, our souls, and bodies, an holy,
lively, and acceptable Sacrifice unto him, which is our reasonable serving of
him: he does enstruct us in the will of his Father, enlighten us in the
knowledge of the truth, and makes us (as it were) his Household Disciples and
Scholars, to reveal unto us all things needful for our salvation. Let us
therefore confess him to be the only son of God, perfect God, and perfect
Man, 1 Timothy 2, 5.
the sole Mediator between God and Man, and let us acknowledge no other
Savior able to Redeem and ransom us, to pay so great a price, and to deliver
us from so great wrath and destruction. If we make other Mediators, and set
up other Saviors, we renounce the Mediation of Christ, and Salvation
purchased by Christ. This pierces the very Marrow, and enters into the
bowelles of the Romish Religion, which sets up other Mediators, and
consequently establishes a false Christ of their own, which indeed is no
Christ, no Jesus, no Savior, no Redeemer?

Fifthly, observe with me, that speaking of Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, and
Luke, he calls them his fellow-helpers; whereby he puts the Ministers of
the Gospel, and all the Children of God in mind, to be helpers to the truth,
and to further the preaching and propagation of the Gospel by all possible
means that God has enabled them. For this cause, the Apostle commends many
of the faithful, Romans 16, 3, 9. Greet Aquila and Priscilla my fellow-helpers
in Christ Jesus. We must do all for the truth, and nothing against the truth.

This reproves those that employ their wits, and bestow their strength, to
hinder the truth, and the professors thereof. These have no part nor fellowship
in the Ministration, nor in the sound profession of the Gospel, but are
professed enemies to the faith of Christ. Moreover, this shall Minister
unspeakable comfort unto us, to consider that we have been helpers to the
truth, and furtherers of the Faith which is in Christ Jesus, we shall leave a
good Name behind us, and receive and incorruptible Crown of eternal Glory.

Lastly, note with me, that when Paul wrote this Epistle, he was at Rome,
and he joins with him sundry others, which were the chief and principal,
whose very names might carry some credit and authority to persuade Philemon
in this matter which he undertook; yet in all this Epistle we have no
mention of Peter, who is supposed to have lived there, to have dyed there, to
have been Bishop there five and twenty years. He joins to himself so many
Assistants as he could, to obtain his suite. He writes (as we heard before,
from Rome) to have Onesimus pardoned, and he uses the name of Timothy to that
purpose; why is Peter here forgotten? Why does he not join him with himself
in the same Epistle, if he had been resident at Rome, as a good Bishop ought to
have been? Again, we see he specifieth many by name, Marcus, Aristarchus,
Demas, and Luke: but we have no mention of Peter. And it is said, that Mark
was the Disciple of Peter, and by his Commandment wrote his Gospel: was it
fit to name the Disciple, and to forget the Master? to remember the members,
and to forget the Head? To express meaner persons, and to omit the principal?
Besides, he calls these men his fellow-helpers; Paul was as the
Master-workman and chief builder, they were his helpers and partners in the
business. Was not Peter also one of his brethren, and either a
fellow-prisoner, or a fellow-helper in the Gospel? Wherefore then is he
concealed? Observe with me from hence, and by Conference of many other
Scriptures, Peter's being at Rome is uncertain.
that Peter's being at Rome, is an uncertain opinion, and an ungrounded
assertion.

It was by composition agreed upon between Paul and Peter, Gal. 2, 9.
that Peter should preach to the Jews, and Paul to the Gentiles; how then
could Peter sit as bishop at Rome? Or if he preached to the Jews at Rome, how
comes it to pass that the christian religion was strange, and in a manner
unknown unto them when Paul came to Rome, as appears in the end of the Acts
of the Apostles, where they say unto him, Acts 28. 22
We will hear of thee what thou think, for as concerning this Sect, we know
that every where it is spoken against. Again, when Paul wrote to the
Romans, he wills them to salute many particularly, and by name, both men
and weomen: but he makes no mention at all of Peter, which no doubt he would
have done, if he had at that time also been at Rome. Furthermore, the Apostle
Wrote many of his Epistles from the City of Rome (as we showed in the
beginning of this Epistle) as for example; to the Galathians, Ephesians,
Colossians, Phillippians, to Timothy, this to Philemon, and that other Epistle
unto the Hebrews, (if it were his) and from thence, he sends many
salutations, in the Name of many, that remained at Rome: Among whom, Peter is
never mentioned, but his name and being there, is ouer-passed. Lastly, the
Apostle testifies, that while he was called forth to give an account of his
Faith, 2 Timothy 4, 16.
All did forsake him, and none assisted him: wherefore, either Peter was not
then at Rome, or if he were, he did shamefully forsake him. Thus then we
conclude from these and such like Circumstances, that it cannot be gathered out
of the holy Scriptures, that Peter was ever at Rome. Whereby we learn, that
the Popish Religion is a doubtful and uncertain religion; their Faith is
uncertain; their Hope is uncertain, their Heaven is uncertain. For, the
supremacy of the Pope, and subjection to him, is made a fundamental point of
Religion, and the believing of it necessary to salvation. Bellarmine a
Cardinal of Rome, De Ecclesia militante, lib. 3. cap. 2.
defining the Church, makes it to be a Company of men, professing the faith,
and partaking of the Sacraments, under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome,
so that such as hold no Pope, are judged and censured to build upon a false
foundation, and therefore to be no true Churches, no sound Catholics, no
right Christians.

The chief Controversy between us and the Papists, is, for the Popes
Monarchy and Authority over the Universal Church, which is maintained by many
of them, as a material point, and necessary for every one to hold that
looks to be saved. Which is an Opinion both absurd, and ridiculous, and
unreasonable. The Church Triumphant in Heaven, is not subject to the Pope of
Rome. The Church of the Old Testament, was never subject to the Pope of Rome.
The Church of the New Testament, which was when Christ lived upon the earth,
was not subject to the Pope of Rome. The Primitive Church, that was in the
days of the Apostles, was not subject to the Pope of Rome. For during all this
time, there was no Pope of Rome at all, and yet there was (during all this time)
a Church; or else they must say, that the Triumphant Church, the Jewish Church,
and the Christian Church, are no Churches at all.

Moreover, the necessity of subiecting every soul to this supposed supremacy,
and pretended primacy, does blot out of the number of Churches; the
East-Churches, and the South-Churches, and leaves only the Roman Church, to
whom the Title least of all belongs, or at least, as little, as to any of the
rest. Besides, at the death of every Pope, and in every vacancie of that Sea
(which sometimes has been no small time) the Church should fail and fall:
for how should the faithful then be subject to the Bishop of Rome, when there
is no Bishop of Rome at all in the World. Furthermore, when there falls out
a Schism, so that there are two or three Popes that are together by the ears
for the Popedom and Prelacie, the people are uncertain to which of them to
cleave, and whether of them to obey.

Lastly, it is false, that the members of the Church must be subject to the
Pope, seeing he is no better, nor no other, then that Antichrist which the
Scripture has fore-shewed; time has discovered; and the faithful have felt
and suffered. Thus then we have seen, that howsoever the Romanists make it a
principal matter of faith, to put our heads under the Popes Girdle, to bow
our knees, to kiss his holy feet, and to fear the Thunderbolts of his
wrath, yet all his jurisdiction is besides the Scriptures; nay contrary to the
Scriptures: seeing Peter's Byshopprick and being at Rome is very uncertain. To
say no more: If then it be uncertain whether Peter were ever at Rome, then it
must also be uncertain, whether he were Bishop of Rome; and if it be
uncertain whether he were ever Bishop of Rome, then it must also be uncertain
whether the Pope be Bishop of Rome, and his successor in that Sea; and if the
Popes succession and Dominion over the Church be uncertain, his Triple Crown
shakes, and begins to totter: all which weighty burdens, do hang by a
twines-thred of Peter's being at Rome, which has no foot-step or foundation in
the Scriptures. True it is, we dare not directly and peremptorily say, that he
was never at Rome; we know how hard a thing it is to prove a negative, yet it
is more likely and probable, that he was never there, then that he was ever
there; the Scriptures being Judges. Who would willingly travail in a blind
and uncertain way, where he cannot be assured whether he go right or wrong?
But such is the journey that the popish passengers enter into, they walk in
unknown paths, and tread the Mazes of many doubtful steps.

The Popish Writers cannot agree Bellar. lib. 2. cap. 6. de pont Roma.
in what year Peter came to Rome: One has assigned one time; Another,
points unto another time: They agree Onuph. in Annot. post petr.
not how many years he stayed there, when he departed from thence, how long he
sat Bellar. de pontif. Romans lib. 2. cap. 5.
Bishop there, who succeeded in his place immediately after him; whether
Clement, or Linus, or Cletus, or Anacletus. It is made of absolute necessity
by them to receive the Saeraments; yet by their Doctrine, no man can certainly
know, whether he be partakers of them, or not, inasmuch as they teach, that all
stands upon the Priests intention, which can be known to none but to God and
himself. Thus we see, how weak and woeful a Religion the Romish Religion is,
and upon what silly and sandy foundations it rests. Let us leave these
uncertain by paths, and tread in the beaten way of the Scripture, which
cannot deceive: let us build our faith upon the rock which cannot be shaken,
and forsake that Church that goes a way she knows not, and leads her
Children she knows not whether, and teaches them to receive she knows not
what, and believes those things which she cannot prove. Thus much for the
general Observations.

[ There salute thee Epaphras my Fellow-prisoner, etc.] These Verses do
contain mutual salutations, with kind and Christian wishes one toward
another. This is the winding up of the whole matter, wherein he reports the
friendly greetings of the faithful which they sent to Philemon. This we see to
be very common in the beginning of every Epistle. Doctrine 1. Courteous
speeches, and loving salutations, are beseeming the servants of God.
From hence we learn, that courteous speeches, and friendly salutations, are
to be used of one Christian toward another, whether present or absent. All
kind and courteous dealing ought to be showed mutually toward each other. When
Melchizedek met Abraham, he blessed him, Genesis 14. When the Angel came unto
Gideon, he saluted him thus, Judge. 6, 12.
The Lord be with thee, thou valiant Man. When Boaz in harvest time came among
his Reapers, Ruth. 2, 4.
he said unto them, The Lord be with you; and they answered him, The Lord
bless thee; that is, so soon as he saw the Laborers that reaped his fields,
he began kindly to salute them, and to wish them well: they likewise
returned the like answer back again (as an Echo) unto him.

The Angel Gabriell being sent of God unto the Virgin Marie, he said unto
her, Luke 1, 28. Hayle, thou that art freely beloved: the Lord is with thee,
blessed art thou amongst Weomen. When Christ sent out his Apostles, and gave
them Commission to preach to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel, and
afterward, appointed seauentie Disciples to second their Labors, he willed
them to salute the places whether they came, Math. 10. 11, 12. with Luke 10, 5.
Into whatsoever City or Town ye shall come, enquire who is worthy in it, and
there abide till ye go thence: and when ye come into an house, salute the same,
and first say, Peace be to this house. That which Christ commands his
Disciples, himself practices toward his Disciples; for when he appeared to his
Disciples after his resurrection, John 20, 21.
he said, Peace be unto you. The Apostle writing to the Romans, spends the
greatest part of the sixteenth Chapter in Salutations and Commendations sent
too and fro among the Saints. Thus he concludes another of his Epistles, 2
Cor. 13, 11 12.
Finally (Brethren) fare ye well: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you: greet
one another with an holy kiss; all the Saints salute you. All these examples
teach us this as an undoubted truth, that the use of kind and courteous
speeches are beseeming the servants of God, and becomes their profession.

Reason 1.
We shall not need to seek far to find out the true causes and reasons of
this Doctrine. First, our well wishing one to another is a fruit of our love,
and a means to maintain and continue love among us. To this purpose the
Apostle Peter, does command, not only that they should salute one another, but
such as they loved, and such as loved them, Chap. 5. 1 Pet 5, 14.
Greet ye one another with the kiss of love. If we would maintain love, we
must wisely and carefully entertain such helps as may further us in the
perfourmance of that duty, whereof this that now we speak off is one: so that
we are to express our inward love by outward tokens, to the end it may be
seen and appear unto others.

Reason 2
Secondly, our salutations are remembrances of our care and good affections
toward these whom we greet well. It is a sign that we are not forgetful of
them, but do greatly regard and respect them. This does the Apostle Paul
signify, Colos. 4, 12. Epaphras the servant of Christ, which is one of you,
Col. 4, 12.
saluteth you, and always strives for you in prayers, that ye may stand
perfect and full in all the will of God. Where we see, he joins these two
things together, as depending one upon the other, his saluting of them, and
his praying for them.

Reason 3.
Lastly, to desire the good of others from the heart, is both a fruit of the
spirit, and a good sign and testimony to our own selves that we are chosen of
God to eternal life. To this purpose the Apostle numbering up many notable
fruits of the spirit, makes mention Gal 5, 22.
of Love, Peace, Gentleness, Goodness, meekness, Long Suffering. And in
another place, he exhorts them Col. 3, 12.
as the elect of God, holy, and beloved, to put on the bowels of mercies,
Kindness, Humbleness of mind, Meekness, Long-Suffering, Forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another. So then, if we shall consider that
courteous speeches are tokens of love, remembrances of our affection, fruits of
the spirit, and testimonies of our election, we may conclude, that it is the
duty of one Church to wish well to another, and of one Christian to speak
kindly to another.

We have heard the Doctrine confirmed, but before we come to the uses that
arise from hence, it shall not be amiss briefly to answer an Objection or
two that may stand in our way, which may seem to restrain and forbid that
which here is commanded and allowed. Objection 1.
We read in the book of the Kings, that when Ellisha sent his servant Gehazi
to the Shunamites house, 2. King. 4, 29. Luke. 10, 4.
he bad him if he met any, not to salute him: and if any man saluted him, he
should answer him nothing. And when Christ sent out his disciples to preach,
he gave them the same charge, and willed them to Salute no man by the way.
Where the duty which is here approved, may seem there to be reproved.
Answer.
I answer, the drift and scope of those places is to be considered, and not
the bare words to be urged. The intent of the Prophet speaking to his servant,
and of Christ to his Disciples, is to enjoin those persons to omit for that
time the practice of duties of common courtesy and ciuility, so far forth as
they might stay or any way delay the perfourmance of waightier affairs
enjoined unto them. We must therefore understand the meaning of them
comparatively, as if it had been said: Rather then you should any way hinder
the quick dispatch and speedy practice of that business which is laid upon
you, speak to no man in the way. So then, the meaning of the places is not
simply and absolutely to forbid men to salute others, but so far to require
the omitting of it, as it should be a let and an impediment unto them in doing
their duties.

Objection 2.
Secondly, we read in the Apostle John, in his second Epistle, 2 John 10.
If there come any, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not to house,
neither bid him God speed: for he that bids him God speed, is partaker of
his evil. Here again seems to be another prohibition, contrary to the
precept and Iniunction in this place. Answer:
I answer, this place does not forbid salutations and courtesy of man to man,
but familiarity and acquaintance with Heretics, even such joining and closing
with them, as may seem to give the least applause and approbation to their bad
proceedings, and wicked opinions. Thus much of the loosing of these knottes,
and aunswering the Objections that seem to contradict the Doctrine taught out
of this place. Now let us handle the Uses.

Use 1
First, we learn, that courtesy, with civil, gentle, friendly, and soft
speeches, are to be entertained of the servants of God. This is it which
Solomon teaches in sundry places of the Proverbs, Prou. 15, 1. and 25, 15.
A soft answer puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. And Cha.
25. A Prince is pacified by staying of anger, and a soft tongue breaks the
bones. This is the commandment that the Apostle gives, Ephesians. 4, 32
Be ye courteous one to another, and tenderhearted. This is the commendation
of Gideon, against the rage of the Ephraemites, that were grievously incensed,
and sharply set against him; he answered them mildly and gently, Judges 8, 3.
and thereby their spirits abated toward him. The like we see in Abigail,
when David's wrath was kindled against her husband and household, she pacified
him by her loving and lowly answer, 1 Samuel 25, 32
so that he blessed God that sent her, and her that counseled him, and her
counsel that restrained him from shedding blood. A fire is soonest quenched by
water, and anger is soonest appeased by gentleness. Let us plant this in the
Garden of our hearts, and learn to give good speeches one to another, and show
a friendly Countenance (even to them that wrong us, and abuse us) without any
purpose or desire to revenge.

This is a Virtue hard to be found in these days among the sons of men, they
cannot speak well one of another. This gentleness that teaches us to deal
courteously toward each other, is thinly sown in the furrows of our hearts.
Wherefore, we must know that humanity and courteous dealing are not (as some
immagine) excluded from Christians, as if nothing should be in them, but rigor
and austerity. Indeed they are to deal roughly and rigorously with wilful
and wicked men, that are offensive and unruly, but we must be gentle, meek,
and lowly toward such as are willing to be enstructed. Hence then it
appears, that our common forms of salutation are commendable, both practiced
by word of mouth, and used in writing, standing upon the warrant of Gods word,
and example of the faithful. Let us therefore accustom our tongues to
ciuility, to blessing, and wishing al good one to another. This becomes our
profession, and witnesses to all the world, that we are of pure conversation.

Use 2.
Secondly, this Doctrine serves for reproof of diverse and sundry abuses that
are too rife and common among us. It seems a light and ridiculous thing to
many, to salute, and to be saluted, but it is of great force, and avails much
to the obtaining and getting of good will. It is a point of courtesy and
humanity to salute others, and to pray for them. Let no man say these are very
small and slender matters to be spoken of, and stood upon. We must acknowledge
that our obedience is to be showed even in the least, and not in the greatest
matters only. And a true Christian is to be seen and known, when he will
yield in the practice of lesser points, and such as are not of greatest
importance. Wherefore, seeing every Christian must thus behave himself, it
reproves diverse sorts of men.

First, such as are so strongly possessed, and rankely ouer-grown with malice
and revenge, that they neither will salute such as they meet, nor answer such
as salute them. These men are dainty of their speech, and as sparing of their
words, as if every word of their mouth were worth a wedge of Gold. Hence it
is, that many stand upon terms of their reputation, and look to have others
bend unto them; they say, Some pinch courtesy, who shall begin to speak and
salute first.
Why should I salute him first? Or wherefore should I begin to speak unto
him? Shall I yield my self or bring my self under him to be made his
Footstool? I will not stoop or bow down: he has first wronged me, let him
therefore first seek to be reconciled: and if I should speak to him, I know
he will not answer me, nor look toward me. These are goodly pretenses and
coulourable shiftings to maintain Hatred, Displeasure, and privy Grudgings one
against another, and cause us to pinch courtesy who shall begin to deal
courteously one with another. But art thou resolved, that thou will not begin
first, and as it were break the ye, but wait until another begin to salute
thee? Thou must consider that the very Publicans and Sinners do the same, as
our Savior teaches Math. 5, 46, 47. Mat. 5. 46, 47.
If ye love them which love you, what reward shall ye have? Do not the
Publicans even the same? And if ye be friendly to your Brethren only, what
singular thing do ye? Do not even the Publicans likewise? Will thou not yield
and give place first? Be constant, and settled, and immovable in a good thing:
but in keeping an old grudge or a new displeasure, a goodman ought not to be
stubborn and obstinate to continue therein for ever. Do thou think it a
shame and reproach to thee, to change thy mind. Who does so esteem and judge?
Does God? No, he accounts it thy greatest honor to yield to that which he
commands. Do the godly among whom thou live? No, thou shall rejoice them,
and give good example to other, and and heap coals of fire upon their heads
whom thou have offended, and give a sound testimony of thy unfeigned love to thy
brother that has offended thee. Has he hurt thee first, and done thee wrong?
Be it so: he has done evil, every man will confess it, no man will deny it,
no man can defend it. Do thou good to him again for his evil, and provoke
him by thy example, and do that which becomes thee, without looking wherein
he fails.

Let us seek to be like our Heavenly Father, who makes his Sun to arise
upon the evil and good: and sends Rain on the just and unjust. It is a
common thing in such as are rich and mighty, to pass by the poor, and never
or seeldome vouchsafe them a word of their mouth which costeth them nothing. It
is a praise and commendation to be honorable, yet humble. A proud heart
testified by a scornful eye and a silent tongue, is to be reproved,
wheresoever and in whomsoever it be found. On the other side, it is a great
encouragement to men of the lower sort, when such as are great and mighty in
the world, do kindly salute them, and friendly speak unto them: they are
greatly affected at it, they are moved to love them, and stirred up to be
cheerful in well doing, when they see they are regarded, and not despised, or
accounted base in their eyes, nor respected as their Footstool.

Secondly, such as are reproved make an outward show of the perfourmance of
this duty, but inwardly are as far, and sometimes farther from the right
practice of it then the former. These are such as are true Christians in name,
but not in deed: in show, but not in substance; in word, but not in heart.
These have Charity in their lips, but enmity in their souls. They speak of
peace, but they nourish hatred. A man would judge them to be the flower of
courtesy, and to have all couplements of humanity in them, and yet
nowithstanding, all this is but a mask and vizard to color their hypocrisy.
These are a most vile and wicked kind of men, that have sweet and sugared
tongues, but malicious and envious hearts, and full of venom. This we see in
Ioab, 2 Samuel 3, 27. and 20. 9.
who took Abner aside in the Gate to speak with him peaceably, and smote him
under the fifth rib, that he died: and likewise he dealt with Amasa, he said to
him, Art thou in health my Brother, and took him by the Beard with the right
hand, to kiss him: but with the other hand he smote him with the sword, and
shed out his bowels to the ground. The like salutation we see in Judas, who had
given the multitude that came with swords and staves from the Highpriests and
Elders of the people, a Token, saying, Mat, 26, 48. 49.
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him: and forthwith he came
to Jesus and said, God save thee Master, and kissed him. Thus he betrayed the
son of man with a kiss.

We must have our words and hearts go together, and not one wander and stray
from the other. We must not have our words softer then Oil, and hide swords
and spears within us. This is cruel and deceitful dealing; this is far
from true Christianity; this is far from that plain and simple dealing that
ought to be in us. Such men are the most dangerous and pernicious enemies that
are, they are hardly known, and therefore hardly avoided. One of these false
hearted Brethren, is worse then an hundred open and professed adversaries. A
pit which is covered, so that thou can not see it, is more likely to work
thy hurt, and cause thee to fall into it, then that which is manifest to be
seen. Let us therefore remember, that our words be always seasoned and
accompanied with truth. Let our mouth speak as the heart thinks; and let us
take heed of lying, cogging, cozening, glozing, smoothing, and dissembling,
which are the works of the devil, and the fruits of the flesh, and the badges
of Hypocrites.

Thirdly, as we have heard that they are to be reproved, that disdain to
speak to others; and such as are content to use friendly greetings in word,
but their hearts go not with them: so likewise, such are condemned as use
unkind and discourteous speeches; nay foul and unclean, ungodly and profane
communication. This the Apostle teaches, Ephesians, 4. Ephe. 4, 31.
Let all bitterness and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil speaking be put
away from you, with all maliciousness. Such was the snappish answer of Caine,
Genesis 4, 9.
Am I my Brothers keeper? So for this cause Nabell being a churlish and currish
man, 1 Samuel 25, 10, 11.
is concluded to be a fool and a wicked man.

This uncivil and bitter dealing, is a great sign, and a certain note of an
unregenerate and carnal man. Let us beware of al railing and rotten speeches.
The mouth is the Messenger of the heart, and from the abundance of the heart,
the mouth speaks. A filthy tongue, argues a filthy heart: an unbridled
tongue, a licentious heart. A poisoned tongue, that casts out banning and
cursing, does manifest a cursed and corrupt heart. The tongue that raueth and
rages beyond all measure, and belcheth out blasphemies, and vomiteth out pocky
and plaguey speech (as it were) the ouer-charging of a loathsome stomach, does
show (be it spoken with reverence) a pocky and plaguey heart.

It is a shame almost to speak those things, I will not say which these men
do in secret, but which they speak openly, publickely, evidently. And yet
(alas) how common a thing is it (when men and women are a little heated and
provoked) to wish all evil to fall upon the persons of their Brethren and
their Cattle; nay sometimes upon their own wives, their own children, their
own Servants, their own Cattle, crying out a vengeance on them, a plague of
God to come upon them, a Murraine take them, the Devil of hell go with thee,
and such like; which come from an uncircumcised mouth, nay from an
uncircumcised and unregenerate. Neither, let any allege for the excuse of
their cursed and wretched speeches, It is a custom they have gotten, but that
they mind and mean no such thing, whatsoever they speak; for first, this is
a cursed custom: and a custom in sinning, the greater it is, the worse it is.
The more thou do accustom thy tongue unto it, the harder it is to be left.
Our Savior teaches, Mat. 12, 35. 36.
that A good man out of the good Treasure of his heart brings forth good
things: and an evil man out of an evil Treasure brings forth evil thing:
But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof at the day of Judgment. If then we must reckon and
account at the end of the World and of our life for idle words; what madness
is it for us to cast out and disgorge blasphemous, wicked, and cursed speeches,
which will bring upon us horrible plagues and heavy punishments to be suffered
in hell fire? Hence it is, that Christ says in the words following, Verse. 37.
By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned. Heere-unto the Apostle James agrees, Iam. 1. 26.
Chap. 1. If any man among you seems Religious, and refraineth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain. Neither let
them say, they think not evil, they mean not as they speak: for this does
not take away the evil, but rather increase it, in as much as they add sin
unto sin, hypocrisy to impiety; as it were drunkenness unto thirst. Let
such acquaint their hearts with blessiing, not with cursing: and strive against
their corruptions which are grown to an head and have gotten a custom in
them, remembering the saying of the Prophet, Psalm. 109. Psalm. 109, 17, 18.
As he loved Cursing, so shall it come unto him: and as he loved not blessing,
so shall it be far from him: as he clothed himself with Cursing like a
raiment, so shall it come into his Bowels like water, and like Oil into his
Bones. Let us therefore all of us put in practice the precept of the Apostle,
Ephe. 4, 29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is
good, to the use of edefying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.
Where he declares, that corrupt speech should be to the ear, as unsavory meat
to the stomach. A rotten Sheep is known by his bleating, so is an
unregenerate heart by his words. Wherefore as the taste abhors rotten meat,
so should our minds loath and detest rotten and vnreuerent talk.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing we are taught to use all gentle and courteous communication, and
all loving salutations and well-wishings one toward another; this teaches us,
that we must all diligently study and practice the government of the tongue, to
order it aright and in due manner. This is a worthy study, it is an hard study,
it is a profitable study. Hence it is, that the Prophet says, Psalm. 34, 12, 13.
Psalm. 34. What man is he that desires life, and loves long days for to see
good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. To
this purpose he speaks in another Psalm, Psalm. 39, 1.
I thought, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue, I
will keep my mouth brideled, while the wicked is in my fight. The difficulty
and hardness of this study, the Apostle James signifies and sets down,
when he calls the tongue a world of wickedness, and an unruly evil, Iam. 3,
7, 8.
Chap. 3. The whole nature of Beasts and of Birds, and of creeping things,
and things of the Sea, is tamed and has been tamed by the nature of man: but
the tongue can no man tame. The profit of this study, together with the
hardness, is noted by the same Apostle in the same Chap. Iam. 3, 2.
If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the
body.

Now because it is so excellent and difficult a study to guide and govern the
tongue aright, we must know, that there is an Art and Science thereof to be
learned, and diverse rules and precepts to be observed; that we may know when
to speak, and when to hold our peace. There is no Art whatsoever attained
unto, without knowledge, practice, and experience. The first lesson that we
must learn in this study, is, to crave of God his assisting grace, that may
make this labor easy, and the work pleasant unto us: without which, we shall
find it impossible to hold in the Raines of our unruly and untamed tongues.

Hence it is that the Prophet says; Psalm. 141, 3.
Set a watch (o Lord) before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips:
Declaring thereby, that of our selves we are not able to govern our tongues.
And again he says elsewhere; Psalm. 51, 17.
O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. If God
do not open our mouths, we can never order our tongues as we ought. Before we
speak, we must diligently consider what we speak, and to what end. The
Wiseman tells us, Prou. 18, 13.
That he which answers a matter before he hear it, it is folly and shame to
him.

To this purpose the Apostle teaches us, To be slow to speak, and swift to
hear. This virtue appeared notably in Elihu, Job 32. Who waited till Job had
spoken, for they were more ancient in years then he. In our speaking, we
must be careful that our words be gracious, and seasoned with wisdom,
truth, reverence, modesty, meekness, and sobriety, as it were with Salt,
which are contrary to the foolish, rotten, and graceless talk that abounds
in our days; wherein men are grown to be very Beasts, To. 3, 13, 14.
Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, they use their tongues to deceit, the
Poison of Aspes is under their Lips, their Mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness. Nay, the venom and Poison of their tongues, is worse then the
poison of Serpents: and yet they would think themselves greatly wronged if
they should be charged to be as a Brood of Adders, and a Generation of Vipers.
For who knows not that the Serpent cannot hurt a man, except he be present to
see him and bite him: but such as have not learned to rule the tongue that is
unruly, and to govern it from breaking out into ungodly and curssed speaking
(which is the Devils Language) do hurt men as well absent as present; as well
far off, as near at hand; as much when they are from them, as when they are
with them. The holy use of the tongue is the Esaias 19, 18.
language of Canaan, which we must all covet to speak, that it may be ordered
according to the Word and will of GOD. But when the tongue, which is an
excellent Member, given unto us of God to praise and glorify his Name, is
abused, James 3, 6.
it is kindled by the fire of Hell; according to the saying of the Apostle
James, Chapter 3. The Tongue is Fire; yea, a World of wickedness: so is the
Tongue set among our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on
fire the course of Nature, and it is set on Fire of Hell. This he sets
forth more at large in the words following, and exhorts us, that the harder
it is to rule the tongue, the more care we should use in the government of it,
and apply it to the honor of God, and the good of our Neighbor.

Hence it is, that he reprooueth those that one while are blessing, another
while are cursing with it, blowing sometimes hot, and sometimes cold, sometimes
praying to God, and anon railing at, and reuiling their Brethren; Iam. 3, 10,
11
Therewith (says he) bless we GOD, even the Father; and therewith curse we
Men, which are made after the similitude of GOD: out of one mouth proceeds
blessing and curssing: my Brethren, these things ought not to so to be. Does a
Fountain send forth out of one place sweet Water and Bitter? etc. Let us then
use such meekness and moderation in our speech, as that we do not break out
into Choler: let our answers be soft and mild, that anger be not kindled,
nor increased, nor continued. If any shall revile us, and rage against us, our
duty is to bless, and not to rail. This is the Commandment of Christ,
Math. 5, 44.
I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you and persecute you, etc.
Thus does the Apostle Peter speak, 1 Pet. 3, 8, 9.
Love as Brethren: be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil,
neither rebuke for rebuke: but contrariwise bless, knowing that ye are
thereunto called, that ye should be heirs of blessing. If the least occasion of
strife and contention arise among men, it cannot be decided; nay, nor heard
without such bitter tants and reproaches, as ought not to be, nor to break out
among Brethren. We ought to be of a patient Nature, and follow the example of
God, who bears with us al. The Apostle Jude affirms, Jude 9.
That Michaell the Archangell, when he strove against the Devil, and disputed
about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with curssed speaking, but said;
The Lord rebuke thee. Where we see, that the Arch-angell abstained from all
railing, having to do with the Devil, the greatest enemy of God and his
people. Be it, that we have to deal with bad men, and such as are notoriously
evil, yet we must not take liberty to our selves to use reuiling speeches, to
brawle, and contend, seeing the Angel would not do it, and he would not do it
against a worse adversary then we have, or can have any. We must commit
revenge unto God, who has said; Vengeance is mine, I will repay.

[ Marcus, Aristarchus, etc.] Touching Mark mentioned in this place, we have
spoken already, and declared out of the Acts of the Apostles, that he was a
Jew of the circumcision, and called to be an Evangelist, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 39.
who also wrote one of the Gospels as he had learned of Peter. It appears,
that his Parents were well acquainted with the Apostles, and received them into
their house; whereby it came to pass, that Mark himself was converted to the
Faith, and endued with the gifts of the Holy Ghost, so that he was chosen to
be a Fellow-helper unto them, and travailed with them into diverse parts of the
World. True it is, he did at one time forsake Paul in Pamphilia, and shrunk
in his shoulders from the trouble: yet notwithstanding this weakness, he
ceased not afterward to labor in the preaching and propagation of the Gospel;
Acts 15, 38
and albeit Paul would not take him with him into their company, Who went not
with them to the work, yet Barnabas took him, and sailed unto Cyprus. He was
present with the Apostles at the first and famous Council holden at
Jerusalem, and heard the matters debated and disputed among them. We see here
in this place, and other places of the Scripture, that he had reconciled
himself to Paul, and blotted out the infamy of his backwardness and
backe-sliding; and therefore he is accepted again among them, so that they
gave unto him the right hand of fellowship.

Doctrine 2. We must not utterly cast off the weak, but show our compassion
toward them.
From hence we learn (this Scripture being compared with other) that it is
required of us to have a care and compassion toward the weak, not utterly to
cast off such as have fallen and failed in any duty. When we see any not so
constant in the truth as they ought, and we desire, we must not by and by shake
them off, or stand aloof from them, but rather strengthen and encourage them,
and make much of them. This practice is commanded unto us in sundry places.
The Apostle exhorts heereunto; To. 14, 1, 10
Him that is weak in the Faith receive unto you, but not for Controversies of
disputations: Why do thou condemn thy Brother, or why do thou despise thy
Brother? And in another place of the same Epistle, Romans 15, 1.
We which are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves. To this purpose he writes to the Thessalonians, These. 5, 14.
We desire you, Brethren, admonish them that are out of order: comfort the
feeble-minded: bear with the weak: be patient toward all men. To these
Commandments, we may add sundry examples of the faithful, that have given
us an example to follow. But first let us see the most perfect example of all,
the example of Christ Jesus our Lord, of whom it was prophesied thus; Math. 12,
20 and 11, 28. Esaias 42, 3.
A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench,
till he bring forth judgment unto victory. This appears, in his loving
calling of all unto him that are weary and heavy laden, promising to ease them,
and refresh them: so that he refused not the company of Publicans and Sinners.
When Aquila and Priscilla had heard Apollos, who was weak in knowledge, Acts
18, 26
They took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more
perfectly. The like we see in Paul toward the incestuous Corinthian, whom he
would have received again into the bosom of the Church, and admitted into the
company and society of the faithful. All which commandments and examples do
evidently prove unto us this truth, that such as are weak in the faith are not
to be cast off, but rather cherished and encouraged.

Reason 1.
See the farther confirmation here of by force of reason drawn from the
nature of God, from the members of the Church, from the person of such as are
weak. First, if we consider the gracious and merciful dealing of God toward
such as err of frailty and infirmity, that he is both willing and able to
strengthen and confirm them, we shall be put in mind thereby of our own
duty. The Apostle writing to the Romans Chap. 14. and exhorting them not to
shun, but to take into their company him that is weak in the faith, gives
this as a reason, Romans 14, 4.
He shall be established, for God is able too make him stand. If then, God will
establish them, we must make much of them: and if he will make them stand, we
must not thrust them down.

Reason 2
Secondly, it is required of all the members of the Church to have a special
care not only of the strong, but also of the feeble parts. We see how it
stands in the members of our body, 1 Cor. 12, 21
The eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor the head again
to the feet, I have no need of you: yea, much rather those members of the
body which seem to be more feeble, are necessary, etc. Now as it is in the
natural body, that the chief members have a care of the least, so it ought to
be in the mystical body, wherein the faithful should have the same care one
for another. Add hereunto that we are commanded to exhort and admonish one
another, according as we see them to have need.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, we must take heed least by our rigorous and austere dealing, the
weak brother be discouraged and driven from the faith. It is no wisdom to
lay a great and heavy load upon the back of a weak Beast, least his back be
broken, and the burden miscarry, and the Master be disappointed. To this
purpose it is, that the Apostle, persuading the Corinthians to take unto them
the incestuous person whom they had put out from among them, says: 2 Cor. 2,
7, 8
Ye ought now to forgive him, and comfort him, least the same should be
swallowed up with overmuch heaviness: wherefore I pray you that you would
confirm your love toward him. No man almost is so unmerciful to his poor
Beast, but he considers what he is able to bear. Unseasonable severity can
do no good, but much harm. Seeing therefore God is able to establish the
weak, seeing the parts of the Church must have a care one of another, and
lastly, seeing the feeble minded are not to be discouraged, in all these
respects we may conclude, that the weak in knowledge, in faith, or in
obedience, are not to be despised, but rather to be instructed, strengthened,
and confirmed.

Use 1.
Let us come to the uses, and handle them as briefly as we can. First, this
serves to reprove those that do not only passover, but contemn and despise
such as any way come behind them. If they see a man weak or feeble, they are
so far from helping of him up, that they are ready to disgrace him and cast
him down. These are like to them that are described in the Prophet, who,
together with Hypocrisy nourish pride in themselves and join unto it contempt
to others, Esaias. 65, 5.
Which say, Stand apart, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou. Or
like unto the Pharisie mentioned in the Gospel Luke. 18, 11.
who prayed thus with himself, O God, I thank thee that I am not as other
men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. If a man have
one of his eyes, or legs weaker then the other, will he reject or neglect it,
and not rather look to it, and seek to strengthen it, and cure it? When the
fire is going out, we are wont not to cast water upon it, but to through on more
Coals, or to bring more Wood to kindle it. When the body is feeble and
sickly, we do not use to starve it, or stifle it; but to cherrish it, to diet
it, and keep it warm. So ought it to be in the members of Christ's body, when
we see any stand at a stay, and as it were begin to pine and languish, we
should bring them home into the Sheepefold of Christ: when we see any wounded,
we should bind up their wounds, and pour in Oil and Balm to refresh them:
we must seek them that are lost, and gather them that are dispiersed. As for
those that discourage and discountenance such as are of humble and broken
hearts, and by their unseasonable severity bring them to despair, let them
know, that they are no better then the very Instruments of the Devil, who are
hired as Iourney-men to do his work, and do usurp the very office of the
Devil. He is the accuser, hater, and persecuter of the faithful, but
especially he seeks to undermine the weak, and to swallow them up in the
quick sands of desperation, without help or hope. In this consideration the
Apostle moves the Corinthians to forgive the incestuous person, saying; 2 Cor.
2, 10, 11.
To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for verily, if I forgave any
thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it in the sight of
Christ, least Satan should circumuent us, for we are not ignorant of his
enterprises. Wherefore, as God has appointed comfort to his afflicted and
contrite servants, so they are justly to be taxed, that show rigor, when they
should show mercy, and draw out the sword when they should put it up. Of these
merciless men, does the holy man Job oftentimes complain, who when he lacked
and looked for comfort, but could find none; he was Job 12, 4. and 16, 2.
as one mocked of his Neighbor, and cries out (in the extremity of his
sorrow) of his friends, Miserable comforters are ye all. Thus it fares with
many of Gods dear Children, and our poor Brethren, when as thorough great
anguish of soul, and vexation, they call (as Job once did) for comfort, Job
19, 21. 1
Have pity upon me: have pity upon me (O ye my Friends) for the hand of God
has touched me: yet their acquaintance are strangers unto them, their
neighbors have forsaken them, their brethren are removed far from them, and
their familiars have forgotten them.

True it is, there is a time of severity and sharpness, and such as are
obstinate and intractable, as an untamed Heifer, are to be terrified with
sharp handling, that they may be made fear. But, there is a difference to
be made between sinner and sinner, and the servants of God must discern
aright between Offender and Offender, not judging of all alike, nor dealing
with all alike, according to the Doctrine and direction of the Apostle Jude,
Have Jude 22, 23.
compassion of some, in putting difference: and other save with fear, pulling
them out of the fire, etc. This Wisdom we ought all to crave, that we may do
things in due season, that we may not purge humors when we should restore
Nature; neither yet go about to heal, when we should cut and lance.

The Wiseman to this purpose, has a worthy saying, Proverbs 25, 11. A word
spoken in his place, is like Apples of Gold, with pictures of Silver. Let us
not be in the number of such, Ezekiel. 13, 22. and 34, 4, 5, 6.
As with our lies make sad the heart of the righteous, whom the Lord has not
made sad: nor strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not return
from his wicked way, by promising him life. Let us take heed, that it be not
justly and truly spoken of us, which the Prophet charge upon the
Shepheardes of Israel, The weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye
not healed: neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought again that
which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, but with
cruelty and with rigor have ye ruled them, etc. God will require an account of
us touching his Sheep, and such as we despise, he accounts and respects as
most dear and precious in his sight.

Secondly, must we have a respect to the weak? Then we must acknowledge it to
be our duty, to cherrish such good things as we see in any of our Brethren,
remembering the saying of our Savior, Math. 18, 33. Ought not thou also to
have had pity on thy fellow-seruant, even as I had pity on thee? God does
show mercy and pity upon us; and therefore, if we will be his Children, we
must not be unlike our heavenly Father. Such is the state and condition of men,
that whethersoeuer we turn us, we cannot but see some of our Brethren feeble
and fainting, and ready to sink under the burden; so that they are ready to
perish, unless we put under our hand to uphold them. In this respect, so many
as are members of the Church, ought to be so many Physicians one to another,
that we may be means of curing and comforting one another. We are charged to
be keepers of them, to look unto them, and by all good means to tender their
good. It is an excellent precept given by the Apostle, Gal. 6, 1, 2. Brethren,
if a man be suddenly taken in any offense, ye which are spiritual, restore such
one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be
tempted: bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
Where we see the Apostle urges us to this duty by putting us in mind of our
own infirmity. We so stand to day, as that we are ready to fall to morrow;
nay, we continue this hour, that we are ready to give over the next. Yea,
such is the mercy of God oftentimes toward such as are weak ones, that when he
has made them once to see their own frailties, he makes them at the last
stronger, and more steadfast in the Faith, then such as seemed to be more
forward, and many degrees before them. How weak was Nicodemus? He John 3, 2.
came to Jesus by night at the first, he had a good desire to be instructed,
but he was ignorant in the principles of Religion, he durst not show himself
openly to be his Disciple for fear of the Jews.

The like we might say of Joseph of Arimathea, another Disciple of Christ,
John 19, 38.
(but secretly to avoid danger;) notwithstanding God did so bless them both
with increase of strength, and the spirit of courage and boldness, that the
little light of Grace and spark of Faith that was in them, did so shine and
break out into such a flame, that they were not ashamed to profess themselves
to be his Disciples: when the rest forsook him, they begged his body of
Pilate, they wrapped it in linen clothes, with Myrrh, and Alloes, and sweet
Odours, and bestowed the honor of burial upon him. Thus it falls out
oftentimes, that they which are first are last, and the last are first. We know
not what storms and Tempests hang over our own heads, and what perilous
times may come upon us: we know not what weakness we shall show in them,
how great the Rebellion of the Flesh will be, and what comfort we shall want
our selves. The Prophet pronounces him Psalm. 41, 1.
Blessed, that judges Wisely of the poor, and promises that the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble. If we have any feeling of this happiness,
or have any Faith in our hearts touching this promise, let us make it
manifest, by seeking the good of our weak Brethren. It is an hiddeous and
horrible cruelty and outrage by our want of mercy, and of feeling their
infirmities, to hinder the salvation of any one for whom Christ died.

Hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans 15, 2, 3. Let every man please his
Neighbor, in that which is good, to edification: for Christ also would not
please himself, but as it is Written, The rebukes of them that rebuked thee,
fell on me. It cost a great price to Redeem a soul, and to bring it from
Death to Life; from Hell to Heaven; and therefore, we must use all means
(wherewith the Lord shall enable us) to comfort such as are Comfortless, by
the Comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. There is no Man but
desires to find Peace and Comfort in himself. What is this life of ours
without it? If a man should live many thousand years upon the face of the
earth, and have experience of nothing but sorrow, anguish, misery, and vexation
of Spirit, so that he could feel no quietness, no rest, no consolation, no
tranquillity in these days of his Pilgrimage: would he not desire to be out of
such a life, and prefer death before it? Do we then wish for peace? And would
we find comfort? The greatest comfort in the World that can come unto us, and
refresh and cheer up our Souls, is to win and save Souls. Blessed are
we, if we have been Instruments to gain but one Soul unto God. It is the
greatest gain; it is the best Traffic; it is the sweetest Merchandise. It
shall be said unto us in the last day; Thou good and faithful Servant, well
done: thou have been faithful over little, I will make thee Ruler over much,
enter into thy Masters joy. Let us set this before our eyes, and consider
before hand the price of the reward, when the time of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord.

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing God has such a care of them that are weak, that he would not
have them cut off, but cared for of all men: this ought to serve as a notable
encouragement unto them, to labor to grow in Grace, and to increase more and
more, that they may proceed from strength to strength, and so come to a
perfect man in Christ Jesus. True it is, there are degrees of Faith, all have
not one measure of Grace; and yet the least measure, if it be but as a grain
of Mustard-seede, is of power to save our Souls. If there be wrought in us by
the sanctifying Spirit of God, the beginnings and seeds of Faith; to wit, an
humbling of our selves under the burden of our sins, an acknowledgement and
feeling that we stand in need of Christ, an hungring and longing desire to be
made partaker of Christ and all his merrits, and a flying to the Throne of
Grace from the sentence of the Law, troubling the conscience, trembling under
the same: if these preparations (as it it were ploughings up of the furrows of
our hearts) be found in us, God will not cast us away, but make this weak
measure of Grace to be effectual to salvation. This is a sweet comfort to all
saint hearts, that are every foot like to sink down, and as it were to give
up the Ghost. This ought to be a forcible means to work thankfulness in them,
when in the examination of their hearts, they shall find the least measure of
Grace settled in them, and know their merciful Father willing to acknowledge
it, to accept it, and to reward it. Not that we should flatter our selves in
our wantes, or content our selves in our weakness, to stand always at one
stay: but hereby to be brought forward in well-doing, and to run the race
with all cheerfulness that is set before us.

This a notable sign of a true and sincere heart, when we feel our strength to
come every day unto us, and an access to be added to our former course. For if
we desire to be better and better, and deal as men that run in a race, who
stand not still in the midway, but press with might and maine to the mark:
this is an infallible note of a sincere heart. This is it which the Apostle
testifies. Phil. 3, 14, 15. Brethren, I count not my self, that I have
attained to it, but one thing I do: I forget that which is behind, and
endeavor my self unto that which is before, And follow hard toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. It is the goodness
of God to accept the small measure of Faith that we bring unto him. This
grants not liberty unto us to do nothing, to stir neither hand nor foot,
or to content our selves that we go not backward. For we must all know and
understand, that the beginnings of grace are deceitful and counterfeit,
unless there be a growth and increase.

The kingdom of Heaven is like to Math. 13, 31, 33.
a grain of Mustard seed, which at the first is so small and little, that it
is scarce discerned, but after that it is cast into the ground of a prepared
and purified heart, it rooteth deeply, it grows speedily, it spreads
exceedingly. It is like unto Leaven, which a woman takes and hides in three
peckes of Meal, till all be Leauened. The Master delivering his Talents unto
his servants that he had called, says unto them, Occupy until I come; he does
not bid them hide them in the earth, Luke 19, 13. Hereunto comes the
exhortation that Paul gives unto Timothy, who had greatly profited in
godliness, and was brought up in the understanding of the holy Scriptures from
a child, Chapter. 1. 2 Timothy 2, 6.
I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God which is thee,
by the putting on of mine hands. The word is a borrowed speech from the fire,
which must be evermore kindled and kept with a new supply from going out. If a
man see his Corn that is in the field stand at a stay, and not shoot
forward, he conceiueth little hope of any plentiful Harvest. If we set a
Scholar to School, and he always continue in the same form, and never come
forth in his learning, we will by and by conjecture, he will prove a Dunce. Or
if we see a Child that does not grow in strength and stature, we use to say; he
will never be a tall man; he will never be but a Dwarf. So is it with all
those that have Jeremy 4, 4.
had the plough of Gods word brought in among them, and the ground of their
hearts sowed with the precious and immortal seed Luke 8, 11.
of the word, and their hearts moystned with a gracious rain, Deuteronomy. 32, 2.
as it were the shower upon the herbs, and yet continue dry and barren without
any fruit; it is to be feared, that they will shortly fall back and wither
away. If we have been brought up in the School of Christ, and have heard the
Acts 13, 25.
Lecture of the Law and Prophets; nay, of Christ and his Apostles read unto us,
and often sounding in our ears, and yet find no access of knowledge or
increase of obedience, we may look every day to be thrust out of this School;
yea, to see the School dissolved and turned to another use. If we have had
both 1 Cor. 3, 2. Heb. 5, 13, 14.
Milk and Meat brought unto us, and placed at the Table of the Lord full
fraught with all delicates, 1 Pet. 2, 2.
And yet neither as Newborn Babes desire that sincere Milk of the word that
we may grow thereby: nor yet know that strong meat belongs to them that are
of age, that in the end we may Ephe. 4, 13.
all meet together unto a perfect Man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ, certainly we shall always remain as Children, wavering,
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the deceit of men, and with
craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive. But if we feel the
weakness of our Faith, and the rest of the Graces of Gods Spirit, and
unfeignedly desire the increase and supply of them, he will fulfill our desire,
and we shall know to our endless comfort, that our desire is not in vain:
yea, to feel the weakness of Grace, is of Grace; to see the weakness of
Faith, is of Faith; and that which is yet more, he accepts the desire to
believe in Christ, as Faith it self; the desire to repent from dead works, as
repentance it self: the desire to be reconciled to God, as reconciliation it
self. They are pronounced Math. 5.
Blessed, that hunger and thirst after righteousness, because they shall be
satisfied. Whosoever is a thirst, has promise made unto him, Revel. 12, 6.
John 7, 38.
That he shall have the Well of the Water of life freely given. We know by a
natural feeling what hunger and thirst is, and when we are hungry, when
thirsty; and when not. Properly we are who are said to hunger after
righteousness
hungry, when we are empty, and thereby wax faint and feeble, and finding both
our emptiness and weakness, desire meat to satisfy and content us. Properly
we are thirsty, when we feel a drowth or dryness in us, and desire some
drink to refresh us. In like manner, and by good proportion, they are said to
hunger and thirst after righteousness, that feel they want it, and would
feign have it. If we feel our selves to be out of Christ, and do long after
the blood of Christ to be redeemed with it, and to be justified by it, then we
truly do hunger after Christ. Thus much touching this Doctrine, which arises
only by comparing this Salutation with other Scriptures.

[ Demas, and Luke my fellow-helpers.] In these words also by conference of
other places, arises a good instruction to us that profess the Gospel of
Christ Jesus. For this is he of whom he was forsaken, as he shows, 2. Tim. 4,
10. 2. Tim. 4, 10.
Demas has forsaken me, etc. He is called in this place a fellow-helper of
Paul, yet the vanity of this world drew him back, being overcome with the
toil and trouble that accompanied the professors of the truth, and the
preachers thereof. He does not mean that he had clean renounced the Gospel,
and was become a back-slider and cut off from the Church as a rotten member,
but he shrunk back for his advantage, or because he was loath to suffer
adversity with the people of God: as it he should have said, he preferred the
love of the world before the love of God. But whether ever he recovered
himself or not, and renounced the world which he overmuch loved, we have not
so full and fair a warrant, as we have for Mark: seeing Paul ends with
forsaking of him, and the Scripture leaves him in the embracing of this
present evil world, so that his repentance is uncertain unto us. Behold
here, how this man is set as upon a Stage or Scaffold, a and mark of infamy
branded upon him for ever, so long as the world shall continue, and the name of
Christ Jesus shall be preached, because he withdrew himself from the pains and
publishing of the Gospel, and from the company of Paul, waxing dainty and
delicate, loving his own ease and pleasure too much. Doctrine 3. Many that
seem forward in the profession, do afterward fall backward.
From hence we learn, that many which seem faithful and forward in the
profession, do afterward fall back and give over. Such as seemed to have life
in them, are become dead: such as seemed to have heat in them, are stark cold:
such as did run a great pace, and led the way to others, do now some of them
stand still, many run back-ward, and others do wander out of the way, and
others hinder those that would enter into the right way. These first give their
names to Christ, and afterward shake hands with the world, and embrace the
friendship thereof. We see this truth verified unto us by sundry examples and
lamentable experience of all times. Judas was chosen to be one of the twelve
Apostles, yet he fell away dangerously and desperately, he became a Traitor and
a Devil, according to the saying of our Savior, John. 6, 7.
Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? To this purpose the
Apostle John describes such back-sliders, Chap. 2. 1 John. 2, 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they should have continued with us. Heereunto comes the Parable propounded by
Christ, Math. 21, 28. Mat. 21, 28.
A certain man had two sons, and came to the elder, and said; Son, go and
work to day in my Vineyard: but he answered and said, I will not: yet
afterward he repented himself and went. Then came he to the second, and said,
likewise, and he answered, I will sir, yet he went not. He seemed forward, but
he hung back: he promised much, but he performed nothing at all. The like we
might say of the rich man, he came unto Christ, Math. 19, 16.
and said unto him, Good master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have
eternal life? yet when he was tried, he went away sorrowful, and his good
beginnings were as the morning dew, verifying that which is spoken in the same
Chapter Verse. 30.
Many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

Reason 1.
Our Savior setting down the parable of the sower, yields diverse
effectual reasons to move us to embrace this truth. For first, the Devil is a
subtle enemy that steals upon us, and goes about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour. If the word be not deeply rooted in our hearts,
but do only swim in our brains, and abide in our mouths, it is in
continual danger to be taken away from us. Hence it is, that Christ says,
Math. 13, 19,
Whenever any man hears the word of that Kingdom, and understands it
not, that evil one comes, and catches away that which was sown in his
heart, and this is he which has received the seed by the way side. This enemy
is ever busy with us, and will never suffer us to have any rest, so long as
any good thing appears in us.

Reason 2
Secondly, the Cross is for the most part the companion of the Gospel, which
while some seek to avoid, they make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience.
Our Savior describing another sort of hearers says, Mat, 13, 20, 21.
He that received seed in the stony ground, is he which hears the word, and
incontinently with joy receives it: yet has he no root in himself, and
endures but a season: for as soon as tribulation or persecution comes
because of the word, by and by ^e is offended. So long as we may profess the
truth with peace and liberty of conscience, and with the favor of men, it is
an easy and ordinary matter to be a professor of the Gospel, and an hearer of
the word. But when troubles and tentations arise, they that are not thoroughly
grounded, do quickly fall away.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, as persecutions do follow the Gospel, so for the most part does
shame, reproach, and poverty. And as it is a common thing with us to desire the
ease of the flesh and the pleasures of the body, so we are inclined to covet
the profits and commodities of this life. This caused Demas to forsake Paul,
because he embraced this present world. Hereunto comes that which Christ
teaches, Math. 13. Mat. 13, 22.
He that received the seed among Thorns, is he that hears the word: but the
cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he
is made unfruitful. So long as the world (as a rank Thorn) sticks in our
throats, or rather in our hearts, and we begin to prefer it in our thoughts
and practices, before the truth, it is impossible that we should hold out our
profession unto the end. Wherefore, seeing the Devil is always ready to fist
us, persecution to try us, and the world to ensnare us, we must know that for
these causes it comes to pass, that many fall back, which seemed forward in
the faith.

Use 1
The Uses are many that may be made hereof. First, we may conclude, that
woeful is their estate and condition that shrink away, and melt as wax before
the Sun. The estate of such men is most fearful, inasmuch as they are
become very Dogs and Swine. It had been better for them, that they had never
known the truth: nay, it had been better, if they had never been borne, as
our Savior speaks of Judas. This the Apostle Peter sets down in his
second Epistle, Chapter, 2. 2 Pet. 2, 20, 21, 22.
If they, after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through
the acknowledging of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled
again therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning. For it had been better for them not to have acknowledged the way of
righteousness, then after they have acknowledged it, to turn away from the
holy commandment given unto them. But it is come unto them, according unto the
true Proverb, the Dog is returned unto his own vomit: and, the Sow that was
washed to the wallowing in the mire. It is a notable comfort unto us, when we
are as faithful trees in the Garden of God, That will bring forth their fruit
in due season: Psalm 1, 3.
whose lease shall never fade, when we do not suffer every one to go before us,
but have an holy emulation and striving to go before others, and even to
out-goe our selves: so it is an evil sign and a fearful forerunner of
condemnation; to run, and then to give over running: to wrestle, and then to
give over wrestling. It is an hard thing to make a good beginning: we are not
easily brought to set forward: but to trip while we are in our journey, and to
wax weary of proceeding, is the common custom of our common professors. We
see this in the Children of Israel, while they were in the Wilderness going
to the Land of Canaan, they did not keep a constant course, but sometimes they
stood at a stay; and sometimes they went backward, and sometimes they wished
themselves again in the Land of Egypt. Thus it fares with us that are
Pilgrims and Strangers in this life, when we have once given our hand to the
Plough we are ready to look back, as Lots wife did when she was gone out of
Sodom. Every little thing is able to turn us out of the way: and being once
turned out of it, it is harder to bring us into it again, then if we were
never entered into it. Woe therefore be unto such as follow Demas, Luke 14, 30.
That begin to build but are not able to make an end. Great plagues and
grievous judgments hang over their heads, they do not return And repent,
Revel. 2, 5.
and do their first works, and redeem the time, because the days are evil
He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. Yea, oftentimes God gives over such time-seruers and backe-sliders,
into a reprobate sense, and takes away his holy spirit from them, so that they
prove mere Monsters, and worse then savage beasts. Who were greater enemies
to the Gospel then the Jews, that hade the light among them, and offered unto
them, whereas by their calling they were the outward Church, and the professed
people of God. Judas being an Apostle of Christ, became the most deuelish man
upon the earth, exceeding all the Jews in treachery and impiety. This a
grievous judgment of God, punishing sin with sin, and recompencing great
vengeance upon their heads, that start from the Faith as a deceitful Bow, and
renounce that truth which they have solemnly professed. Let these punnishments
be always before our eyes, so often as we begin to slake our course, and to
grow negligent and secure, that so we may begin to renew our covenant with God,
and to recover our selves from the pit of Apostasy, into which we were falling.

Use 2.
Secondly, this Doctrine teaches the difference between those that are truly
godly and religious, and such as are Hypocrites. Such as profess well for a
time, and afterward slide back, are like the Grass or Corn that grows upon
the house top, which flourishes and waxes green for a season, but it
decays incontinently, and comes not to any seasonable ripeness. Howsoever
therefore there be a great likeness, and a near resemblance between the
faithful and the Hypocrite, yet God will have the one discerned from the
other, and Hypocrisy to be laid open, and seen in his colors as it is. This
is that use which the Apostle John makes of this doctrine. Chapt. 2. where
comforting the Church against the offenses and stumbling blocks that were rise
and common in those days, and persuading them not to be terrified with the
falling back of certain, he makes it plain, that albeit they had place in
the Church as corrupt humors have in the body, yet they were never of the
Church. Whreeupon he concludes, 1 John, 2, 19.
This comes to pass that it might appear, that they are not all of us.
Would we therefore know who are Hypocrites? And would we have eyes to see
them, and judgment to discern them? Behold here a plain mark and evident
token to bring us to a perfect understanding of them; they shall not always
deceive the Church, they shall not always cover their faces with the Vizard of
holiness; they shall in the end be made evident to all men, that every one may
point at them with the finger, and say; This is an Hypocrite, this is a
Dissembler, this is he that went about to deceive both God and Man, but now he
is reueiled, that al men may look upon him, and hiss at him. On the other
side, it is a notable privilege of a man truly sanctified, to be constant
and continually set upon good things, to persevere in good things, and never to
repent of the doing of them: he builds his house upon the rock, and therefore
no blasts or tempests of temptation can overthrow it. He receives the seed
into good ground, and therefore it takes root downward, and bears fruit
upward with patience, he is careful to please God in the duties of both
Tables, both of holiness and true righteousness, and therefore he shall never
be removed.

Use 3.
Thirdly, seeing many begin well, that are as a morning Cloud which is quickly
scattered, and therefore do not continue; we learn, not to be offended when we
see any or many faint or fall away, nor to be discomforted when we have
examples before our eyes of those that have professed the says, and been
thought zealous above many others, who now are fallen into a deep, or rather a
dead sleep, that no life of Gods spirit appears to be in them. Thus it has
always been in the Church, thus it is at this present, and thus it will be
hereafter. When Samaria had received the Gospel, Acts 8, 13.
Simon Magus himself believed also, and was baptized, and continued with
Phillip, and wondered when he saw the signs and great Miracles which were
done: yet notwithstanding this embracing of the faith, was but as the flash of
Lightning, which suddenly appears, and presently vanishes, as appears by
his offering of money to buy the Graces of the Spirit, Verse 20, 23.
and by the answer of Peter, denouncing an horrible curse against him,
renouncing him for having any part or fellowship in that business, discovering
the hypocrisy of his heart, and manifesting to all men that he was in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

The like we might say of Hymenens, Phyletus, and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1, 20. and
2 Timothy 2, 17. and 4, 14.
mentioned by Paul in his Epistles to Timothy; they were counted famous, and
esteemed as Pillars of the Church, yet they fell to renounce everlasting
salvation, which was purchased for us by our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us all
heerby be wise and warned, and take heed that we build not upon men, least the
foundation sinking and shrinking down, we fall and perish with it. True it is,
they shall greatly be punished, that lay a stumbling-blocke before others, and
give occasion unto them to fall and to depart from the faith; yea, it were
better that a Millstone were hanged about their neck, and they drowned in the
sea, then one of the members of Christ be offended. Woe therefore shall be to
those that give a scandal to the Church; yet such as follow them, and forsake
the fellowship of the Saints, through their evil example, cannot be excused.

Will thou refuse thy Corn, because thou see much Chafe and Trash mingled
with it? No man must forsake the Church, because he sees offenses to arise in
it, every man must labor with himself to be good Corn, and then the Chafe
shall hurt us nothing at all. And albeit we see some fall away and make a
separation every day, the Church loses nothing, but is made more pure and
perfect, even as it hinders not, nor hurts the Wheat, that the Tares wither
away. When we behold those that were chief men, and reputed as Angels in
comparison of others, to fall as Lightning from Heaven, let us not be dismayed
or discomforted thereby, though men turn as the wind and the Weather-cocke,
let us stand fast, and build upon the rock that can never be shaken. Albeit we
may point out thousands on the one side, and ten thousand on the other side,
let us not fear the falling of the Church, which stands upon a sure and
certain foundation. Thus does the Apostle comfort Gods people, when sundry made
Shipwreck of their faith, and fell into Apostasy, 2 Timothy 2, 19.
The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows
who are his.

If men show their frailty, and be as a Reed shaken with the wind, it is no
marvel nor new thing, we rest not upon them, we build not our Faith upon our
Teachers that have been the means of our conversion: so that if they should
revolt and renounce the doctrine that they have preached, we must not go with
them, nor follow after them. Indeed we should be grieved to see those that
seemed forward, to turn clean backward; and as we ought to rejoice to see the
Church of God increased, so it cannot but trouble us, to have it diminished:
notwithstanding, this must be our comfort, that God will maintain his Church,
and keep al those safe and sure which he has chosen to himself. As for
others that are unconstant and give over, they were never true believers, but
Hypocrites, which here are for a season mingled together, until the time of
separation. But the guiftes of God bestowed upon his people (whose salvation is
surely laid up with him) Romans 11, 29.
are without repentance. Our Savior handles this point at large, John. 6, 37.
and 10, 28.
John 6, and 10. All that the Father gives me shall come to me: and him that
comes too me I cast not away. And again in another place, I give unto my
sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck
them out of mine hand; my Father which gave them me, is greater then all, and
none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. So then, whenever any among
them that were judged most forward and vpholders of others, give back and
become unbelievers, we must not by and by dream that the Church of God
falls, he will always have a people to call upon him, and worship him, Psalm.
72, 4.
so long as the Sun and Moon endures, from generation to generation. The
Church is grounded upon God, and upon no condition of man. Our salvation is
settled upon the election of God, and founded upon his unchangeable decree which
can never be altered or disappointed.

Use 4.
Fourthly, seeing the Church has always had back-sliders, we learn hereby
to beware of all allurements and entisements, that may be means to draw us
back from the truth which we have embraced. Demas (of whom mention is made in
this place) had been in good account, he has an excellent witness even of
Saint Paul's mouh to be an helper to the truth. Is it a small commendation to
be called the fellow of such an Apostle? Is it a little matter to be set up in
the midst of the house of God, as a burning Lamp, or a shining Candle, to
give light to others in the Church? yet after all this estimation that was had
of him, he loved the world better then the word.

Let us therefore walk warily, and look upon our selves in the person of this
Demas, as in a looking Glass, who is cast in the teeth with his embracing the
profit and pleasures of this life, that hindered him in the work whereunto he
was called. We must take heed that things present do not swallow up the love
of things to come, as they do in many who wax cold and have no desire of the
Kingdom of Heaven. These are they that have their eyes so dazeled and darkened
with these flitting things, that they break out in an admiration of them, and
say: It is good for us to be here: but never think that these delights must
have an end, and that the world shall be restored. The Apostle Paul teaches us,
that the present estate of the world is like a woman in travail, Romans 8, 22
Romans 8. We know that every creature groneth with us also, and trauaileth in
pain together unto this present. The Creatures, as now they abide, are not in
their perfection by reason of Adams sin (which brought in all disorder and
confusion.) There is nothing but is subject to vanity and misery, every thing
has some blot of corruption. What a shame then is it for us that are the
Children of God, and have received the first fruits of the Spirit, not to draw
toward perfection, and not to keep company with the senseless Creatures. Let
us learn so to love the truth, as that we prize it above all corruptible
things; that must have an end, so as this present world may not stay us from
desiring and longing after spiritual blessings. Among all the baits and
snares wherewith many are taken, nothing is so dangerous or so common, as the
love of this world. Take a veiw of many that did run well, but now run not
at all, and you shall find they are right Demasses, the world is a beam in
their eyes that they cannot see, a Thorn in their feet, that they cannot
walk, a canker in their mouths that they cannot speak, a clogge to their
consciences that they cannot proceed, and a snare to their souls that they
cannot profit or prosper in good things. Our days are full of two many
examples of men that are fallen into a deep sleep of carnal security, so
that nothing can wake them. Others there are, that shrink back for fear of
troubles and crosses, as it may appear this Demas also did. He saw many
storms come toward him, and he thought it best to put into some Haven or
harbor. In the time of peace and prosperity, in quiet and joyful times, and
in such golden days as our eyes have seen, and our hearts have enjoyed, many
will seem, and do seem to persevere in the faith, and to embrace the word:
but when the Sun arises in his strength, and persecution comes for the
words sake, by and by they are offended. Satan is privy to this corruption
lying hidden in our Nature. For when as God said unto him, Job 1, 8, 9.
Have thou not considered my Servant Job, how none is like him in the Earth? An
upright and just Man, fearing God and eschewing evil? He answered the Lord
and said; Does Job fear God for naught? Thou have blessed the works of his
hands, and his substance is increased: but stretch out now thine hand, and
touch all that he has, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy Face. We
see heeerby, that God will have those that think they believe, and would have
others to think so also, to be tried and known what they are. Do thou make
show of Religion? Do thou glory in thy profession? It pleases God to offer
thee the means and occasions to try thee, he sends the persecution of the
tongue; thou art reviled, scorned, slandered, and derided for professing the
truth, for hearing the word, for frequenting of Sermons: and then it comes to
pass, that rather then they with endure these crosses, they shrink away, and
strike hands will evil men, and embrace the friendship of this present evil
World. Thus we see how Satan busieth himself to undermine us, and to
overthrow us, and what tentations he sets before us on the right hand, and
on the left hand; on the right hand, the profits of the World, and the
pleasures of the Flesh; on the left hand, crosses and persecutions for the
words sake. These are the means that he uses; these are the allurements
whereby he prevails; these are the discouragements whereby he terrifieth us.

Use 5.
Fifthly, seeing we are ready to revolt and slack our peace that we have run
toward the mark that is set before us, let no man be secure and careless, or
presume too much upon his own strength, as though it were impossible for him
to fall: but let every man grow circumspect, and beware of Carnal security.
Hence it is, that the Apostle Paul, mentioning sundry judgments that fell
upon the Israelites for their sins and offenses, gathers this Exhortation;
wherefore 1 Cor. 10, 12
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. They had the use
of the Sacraments, and other pledges of Gods favor, yet they could not
privilege them, or defend them from the punishments that God brought upon
them. Let no man therefore trust too much to the zeal of one or two yeaers,
but persevere to the end, and know he must be faithful unto the last gasp. God
has not hired us for a season, to labor in his service for a day, or a month,
or a year, neither gives us leave to depart at a time appointed, nor makes
us a Certificat under his hand, that we are at liberty to serve another: but
we must all know, that there is one condition of worshipping him; to wit, that
we dedicate both our Soul and Body, both our life and death, both our
beginning and ending unto him.

What did it profit Gene. 19, 25.
Lots Wife to go out of Sodom, commanded by the Angel, and accompanied by
her Husband, in as much as she looked back, and was turned into a pillar of
Salt? What profit was it Jude 5.
to the Israelites to depart out of Aegipt, and to pass over the Red Sea;
seeing afterward they fell to murmuring in the Wilderness, and were destroyed
of the Destroyer? What gain, or what good was 2 Kin. 9. and 10
it to Iehu, to slay the Priests of Baall with the sword, and to be zealous for
the execution of the judgments of the Lord, to deface the Image, and to throw
down the house of Baal, and to make a Iakes of it for ever, seeing he departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam, and regarded not to walk in the Law of the
Lord God of Israel, but worshipped the Golden Calves that were in Dan and
Bethel? It were as good never to begin, as not to continue unto the end. When
we have once given our Names to Christ, and tasted of the good word of God,
and see many men come far behind us, we flatter our selves in an opinion of
our sure standing; we are ready to say: If all the world should turn to be
back-sliders and Apostataes, yet we would never slide away. But let us take
heed we be not deceived, for God will not be mocked. It is a worthy saying of
the Prophet Ezechiell, Chap. 18, 24. If a Righteous Man turn away from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, and do according to all the abominations
that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his righteousness that he has
done, shall not be mentioned: but in his transgression that he has committed,
and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die. It is not enough to
purpose well, it is not enough to begin well, it is not enough to proceed
well; it is required of us to persevere well, and to continue in a constant and
settled course unto the end.

If a man continue unto his latter days, and then give over, all is gone, al
is lost, all is in vain. If a Child that is set to School, do go lustily
forward in his Learning a long time, and afterward prove an idle boy, and one
that will take no pains, he will never prove Learned, nor is ever like to come
to any preferment. If a man begin to build an house, and have laid a good
foundation, it is never the better, unless the work be brought to an end and
perfection. He that runs in a race, though he set out never so swiftly, and
have passed a great part of the way never so resolutely, yet if he stay in his
course, and hold not on to the end, 1 Cor. 9, 24.
he receives not the prize, he obtains not the reward. He that is Valiant
and Courageous in the beginning of the fight, never wins the field, nor
gets the Victory, unless he continue to the end of the battle. We are
taught and trained up in Gods School, we are parts of the building of his
house, and as lively stones fitted to make an holy Temple unto him: we all
run in a Race, and prove Maisteries: We are the Lords Soldiers to fight hand
to hand against Sin, the World, and the Devil: let us therefore hold out
till we come to the mark, and receive the end of our Faith, even the
Salvation of our souls.

Saul began well, but he declined, and in the end became an open persecuter.
Ioash 2 Chr. 24, 17.
behaved himself uprightly all the days of Iehoiadah, and repaired the house
of the Lord; but after his death, he fell to Idolatry, he left the house of the
Lord God of his Fathers, and he served Groves and Idols; so that wrath came
upon Judah and Jerusalem, because of this trespass. The Israelites that would
have returned into Egypt, dyed in the Wilderness. It shall not be needful to
heap up mo examples; we have too many such stumbling blocks lying in our way,
and set before our eyes; let us take heed by their falls, and learn Wisdom
by their foolishness: and constancy by their inconstancy.

Use 6.
Lastly, seeing many slide back, that have seemed forward men, and of great
and eminent note above others: it is our duty (in regard of the small
strength, and the little power of our own Nature, to pray heartily and
earnestly unto God, not to lead us into tentation, nor to take away his holy
spirit from us, but that he would stay us up by his grace. We must entreat at
the hands of God for our continuance, as well as for our first conversion. For,
as the opening of the heart, and the beginning of our regeneration and new
birth, is of Grace; so we proceed in the midde way, and persevere unto the end,
not by our selves, or any thing in us, but by the same grace and goodness of
God, who works in us both the will and the deed. Hence it is that the Psalm.
51, 12.
Prophet prays unto God, To restore unto him the joy of his salvation, and to
establish him with his free Spirit. And in another place he prays to the
Lord, who had kept him in his youth, that he also would be his keeper in his
old age, when his head was hoare, and hairs gray; Psalm. 71, 9, 17 18.
Cast me not off in the time of age, forsake me not when my strength fails: o
God, thou have taught me from my youth, even until now: therefore will I tell
of thy wondrous works; yea, even unto mine old age and gray head, o God,
forsake me not, until I have declared thine Arm unto this Generation, etc.
The Prophet knew well enough his pronenesse and inclination to go back, and
that it is at easy to fall through dotage as noneage, and by the weakness
and coldness of old age, as by the lusts and frailty of youth. Yea, we see
many that have held a good course a long time, and dedicated their young
years, as it were bringing their first fruits to God, who notwithstanding
have turned out of the way when they have been going out of the World. Even as
it falls out sometimes, that such as have failed safely in the wide Sea, and
kept an upright course, that they have escaped the dangers of storms, and
tempests, and Rocks, and quicke-sandes, have notwithstanding been cast away
in the very Haven, through negligence and security, and want of heed taking: so
is it with many, that have stood out in dangerous times when the Winds have
blown, and persecutions have been hot, who in calm weather and peaceable
times, in their latter times have suffered shipwreck, and have dashed the
Barks of their Souls against the vaine-pleasures and vanities of this World,
which drown Men in perdition and destruction.

Hence it is, that the Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, prays unto God
for them in this manner; 1 These. 5, 23
Now the very GOD of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that your
whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. He saw they had need of Gods gracious assistance, even
unto the last breath of their body to uphold them, and to keep them in his
fear. Let us therefore remember what the Prophet speaks of those that are
truly regenerate, Psalm 92, 12, 13, 14. The righteous shall flourish like a
Palm Tree, and shall grow like a Caedar in Lebanon: such as be planted in the
House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall still
bring forth Fruit in their age, they shall be fat and flourishing. If we be in
the number of these men described in this place, always fruitful in good
things, and never barren of heavenly graces, we shall be assured, that we
shall never be removed. Trees (as we see by experience) grow barren when they
grow old: but such as are planted in the House of God, must be most fruitful
in their age. But with many it is clean contrary: the more old in age, the
more old in sin, and sapped in all sorts of wickedness.

This is a searefull sign and prognosticate of a final Apostasy, when our
ending is not answerable to our beginning. Objection
But here some man may say, Can the faithful fall away for ever? Can they
loose their Faith altogether? Answer:
I answer, such as live in the Church, and seem to themselves and to others to
have faith, may fall away: but such as have the faith of Gods elect, can never
fall away, God does stablish them in Christ, 2 Cor. 1, 12. And they are kept by
the power of God through faith unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1, 4. So that our life
is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3, 3. The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance: and he that has begun this good work in us, will also finish and
perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1. 6. We are persawaded, that
neither life, nor death, nor Devil, nor any means whatsoever, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God. Notwithstanding, we must beware of carnal
security, least these gifts of God be weakened and diminished in us; for
albeit they cannot dye, yet they may decay and decrease; and we may fall,
though not fall away; and our Faith may be less, though not utterly lost.
Christ Jesus has somewhat against the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Revel.
2, 4.
because he had left his first love. He was not finally fallen from Grace, but
is highly praised for his patience and perseverance, but is charged to have
slacked his course, and to have cooled his zeal; and therefore, he is not
said to have lost his Love, but to have left his first Love, so that they were
not so earnest, so seruent, and so zealous as they were at their first
Conversion. We have therefore continual need to be often in prayer, that we
may euer-more increase in heavenly Graces, and be preserved by the power of
God, that we be not overcome by the power and subtlety of Satan, who desires
nothing more then our Destruction; nothing less, then our good and salvation.

25 The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with your Spirit, Amen.


The order of the words.
Hitherto of the first part of the Conclusion, which is the salutation sent
from others: Now of the salutation that comes from himself, which is as his
last farewell, and shutting up of the whole Epistle, and (as it were) a
solemn taking of his leave of him, and the rest; which is thus much in effect,
[ Grace be with your Spirit.] The first part, or former word, is amplified and
enlarged by the efficient cause from whence it comes and proceeds; to wit,
Christ Jesus, who is also declared by that Sovereign Authority which he has
over all: Our Lord. Lastly, the whole Prayer is garnished with a certain
exclamation of hearty wel-wishing to them in the last word, [ Amen.] Thus much
touching the Order.

The Interpretation of the words.
Let us come to the Interpretation of the Words, and search out the meaning of
them by other places of Scripture. Wherein we are to consider what is meant by
grace: why it is called [ The Grace of our Lord Jesus;] why he is called [ A
Lord.] why [ Our Lord,] what is meant by [ Spirit,] what is meant by [ your
Spirit,] and lastly, what is meant by this word [ Amen.] First, touching [
Grace] (whereof we have spoken before, Verse 3.) we must understand, that there
is a twofold Grace mentioned in the word of God; Called Gratia gratu^ faciens
One, which makes a man gracious and acceptable to God, which is the free
favor and love of God, whereby he is well pleased, and exceedingly contented
with his elect in Christ his beloved son: which is in God himself, and in no
Creature whatsoever, either Saint or Angel. The other, is Grace freely Called
Gratia gratis data.
given to men, both common to the elect and Reprobate, or proper to the elect
only, which are supernatural and saving graces. The former, is called the
first Grace, which is no inharent quality in us, but an essential property in
God, and the cause of all graces in us, and the Fountain of all benefits that
flow unto us. Thus it is taken in many places, as Romans 1, 7. and 3, 24. and 4,
16. and 11, 6. The latter, is called the second Grace, because it is derived
from the former, as we see 1. John 1, 16. and 1. Pet. 1, 14. and 5, 10. and 2.
Pet. 3, 18. Now in this place, I understand it of the favor and Love of GOD,
with the which he began his Epistle before, and with which here he closes
it up, ending even as he made his entrance.

Secondly, he calls this [ The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ] for two
Causes; first, because he is the fountain of it, he is as the Wellspring, we
have it not of our selves, we have it from him, according to that which the
Evangelist John sets down, John 1, 16.
Of his fullness we have all received, and Grace for Grace. Secondly, it is
called [ the Grace of Christ,] not of God the father, not of God the
Holie-Ghost, but of Jesus Christ our Lord, because he is the means, or as the
Cunduit-pipe, whereby he it is brought and conveyed unto us; Thus the same
Evangelist speaks in the words following; John 1, 17.
The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. He it is
that is the Mediation and Propitiation for our sins, he has purchased the
favor of God, he has wrought reconciliation for us, so that through him we
are accepted of God the Father, and beloved in his beloved, Ephe. 1. 6.

Thirdly, we must consider the Title given to Christ Jesus, he is called a
Lord or Ruler, and that in many respects: First, by creation, in that he made
us of nothing when we had no being, John 1, 3.
For all things were made by him, and without him was nothing made that was
made. Secondly, by right of Inheritance, Heb. 1, 2. Psalm. 2, 8.
For he is made Heir of all things. Thirdly, by right of Dominion, for he
has Dominion over all things, and over us also; so that he rules, preserves,
and keeps us as his own to eternal life, being bought with his most
preciour blood. None of them can be lost that are committed unto him, neither
can any pluck them out of his hands. All things are put under his feet, and
subject unto him.

Fourthly, he is said to be our Lord; he is not only a Lord, having right and
might granted unto him over others, but he is called our Lord. First, because
the Father gave him a people and chosen Generation, over whom he should rule.
So then, by reason of this donation appointed unto him before all worlds, he is
truly called our Lord. Secondly, in regard of the work of redemption which he
has wrought for us, he alone has paid the ransom for us, and delivered us
from the power of the Devil: so that he has the greatest right of possession
in us. Lastly, we are thereby put in mind, that we ought so to believe in
Christ our Lord, that we put our trust and confidence in him, and that we rest
thoroughly persuaded, that by him we are thoroughly freed and delivered from all
evil. It is not enough for us, or sufficient to salvation, to believe Christ
Jesus to be a Lord, but we must believe him to be our Lord. For we all know
and believe that the Devil is a Lord, and rules in the hearts of the Children
of disobedience; he is the God of this. World, and a Prince that bears great
sway: but we do neither know nor believe him to be our Lord, as we believe
Christ Jesus to be the Lord of us all.

Fifthly, he adds [ With your Spirit.] He craves this Grace to be with his
Spirit: whereby he means as much, as if he had said with you; one part of man
being named for the whole, the more principal part being put for the whole
person. For man consists of two essential parts, of Soul and Body. True it
is, the Apostle Paul does sometimes divide man into three parts; the Spirit,
the Soul, the Body; as when he prays for the Thessalonians; 1 These. 5, 23.
That their whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, should be kept blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. By the Spirit, he understands the mind,
reason, or understanding, which elsewhere he calls the Ephe. 4, 23. Heb. 4,
12. Ephe. 4. 17, 18.
Spirit of your mind. This is nothing else but a faculty of the reasonable
soul, which is seen, in invention and judgment. By the the Soul, he
understands the inferior faculties and powers, as the will, and affections:
both which follows the body, which is the Instrument whereby the Spirit and
Soul do work. By the Spirit in this place, is not meant only the mind, or
only the Soul, but the whole man is to be understood; as it is expounded
Phil. 4. 23. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. And Col. 4,
18. Grace be with you: yet he names the spirit, because it is the principal
subject and seat of grace.

Sixthly, the Apostle proceeds and says [ Your spirit,] he speaks not to
Philemon alone, saying, [ With thy Spirit;] but he enlarges his heart, and
says [ With your Spirit,] as speaking to many. Whereby we are to understand
those to whom this Epistle is written and delivered, to wit; chiefly to
Philemon, whose Title it bears, and to Apphia his wife, to Archippus the
Minister, and to the Church that was in his house, to all these he wishes the
Grace of Christ.

Lastly, he ends with the word [ Amen,] which is as much as even so, or so be
it, or so it shall be. Indeed it is no part of the former prayer, but it
betokens and signifies two things; First, an hearty desire, whereby we wish
that we may be heard, and that God would answer unto our requests. Secondly,
the certainty of our confidence, and the confirmation of our Faith, whereby we
trust that we shall be heard. It is an Hebrew word retained by the Apostles in
their Epistles, and in other places, wherewith we are taught to conclude our
Prayers withal, by Christ our Savior. It is added, to show that we should
come with boldness, and believe that we shall obtain, trusting in the truth
of Gods promises.

The postscript of the Epistle.
Having thus laid open the sense and meaning of the words in this last Verse,
it shall not be amiss to speak somewhat of the words following, which are
the subscription and vnder-writing of this Epistle, in these words: Written
from Rome to Philemon, and sent by Onesimus a Servant. It is most likely, that
this Epistle was written and sent at one and the same time, with that entitled
to the Colossians, both because the same persons are named in both the
Epistles, the same persons writing, and the same persons sending salutations to
others; and both of them in the Postscript, are said to be sent by Onesimus,
as it were by a Carrier; only herein rests the difference, that this Epistle
was delivered to Onesimus alone, to be carried to Philemon a private man; but
the other was conveyed by Tychicus and Onesimus, to the whole Church of the
Colossians, whereof Philemon and his Family were but one part. But touching
this subscription, as also others in other Epistles, we must understand that
they were added by men, and are no part of the Cannonicall Scripture, which is
the rule of our faith, and to which we must yield, without all contention or
contradiction; and from which, we cannot appeal without intolerable injury to
the spirit of God. For, howsoever diverse of these Post-scripts may be true, yet
it is very plain and evident, that some of them are false, and many of them
very uncertain. Of this sort, is the former Epistle to the Corinthians, which
is said to be written from Philippi, and likewise to be sent by Stephanas
and Fortunatus, etc. where two things are avouched, and both of them seem to
be false. For first, it appears 1 Cor. 16, 5.
that he was not then ar Phillippi a chief City in Macedonia, that is in
Europe, 1 Cor. 16. 8. and 19.
but at Ephesus which is in Asia. Secondly, it may be gathered, that it was
sent by the hands of Timotheus and Erastus, 1 Cor. 16. 10.
partly out of that Epistle, and partly out of the Acts of the Acts, 19. 21,
22.
Apostles. The like we may say of the Postscript of the latter Epistle; of
both the Epistles to the Thessalonians, of both the Epistles to Timothy, of
that to Titus, and others. And as we show that these Post-scripts, whether true
or false, were not written by the Apostles, but by some other men after their
days, Beza.
for the most part either unlearned, or not so well advised: so we might
affirm and confirm the same touching the Inscriptions or titles prefixed and
set before the Epistles of Paul, James, and the rest.

For first, both the inscriptions and subscriptions, are variably set down in
Coppies, that there can no certainety be gathered out of them, which of them
should stand as Authentical. Secondly, some of them have both strange and
unfit Titles; as when the seven Epistles, written by James, Peter John, and
Jude; are called sometimes Canonical; and sometimes Catholic Epistles: which
are Names not found in the Scriptures, and seeming derogatory to the rest of
the Epistles, as though none were Canonical but they. Thus much shall serve
and suffice to give warning, both touching Inscriptions and Subscriptions, both
which are of one stamp, and no part of the pure word of God: whereof more
might be spoken, if it were either necessary, or profitable, or expedient.

Observations pointed out in this verse.
The next point, according to the order observed in the former words, is to
point out such observations as might be enlarged and amplified for our
instruction. First of all, we see here, that as in the entrance of the
Epistle, and as it were at their first meeting, he wished unto him the Grace of
Christ, so he does in the farewell and departing: thereby teaching, that
nothing is better or more to be desired then his Grace: that all our
Salutations and Farewels, should be grounded in his Grace: this must be the
beginning and the ending of all our talk and communication.

Secondly, when the Son of God is called Jesus, we observe again that he is
a perfect and absolute Savior, the alone Savior, inasmuch as the work of our
Salvation and Redemption is wholly and only wrought out by him, and no part
left unfinished, and reserved for any Creature in heaven or in earth: Acts 4,
12.
For among Men there is no other Name given under Heaven, whereby we may be
saved, but by the name of Jesus. And the Apostle says. Heb. 7. Heb. 7, 25.
He is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Let us learn by this Name, given to the
Son by the Father, and brought from Heaven by an Angel, that in our selves
we are as lost Sheep, and going astray. We are wretched Sinners, lying under
the heavy wrath of God; he came to seek and to save that which is lost. We
are Prisoners, he came to set us at liberty; we are wounded, he came to cure
us; we are dead, he came to restore and revive us. No man can truly and with
a feeling heart say, Christ is my Savior, unless he find, that without him
he is utterly lost and cast away. Again, this is a wonderful comfort to our
hearts, that being shut up under sin and condemnation, the Lord had mercy
upon us, and made an everlasting Covenant of Grace with us, that his own Son
shall be our Redeemer. Hence it is that the Angels 1 Pet. 1, 12.
Who desire to look into the Mysteries of the Gospel, so greatly rejoiced
when Christ was borne, and themselves sent to publish the glad tidings thereof.
Luke 2. Luke 2, 10, 11
Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all the people; that
unto you is borne in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. If
these blessed Spirits be thus affected at the birth of Christ, who came not to
be a Savior and Redeemer unto them, because they did want the benefit of
Redemption: how much more ought we to rejoice whom this glorious work does
cheefely concern; yea so much, that if we wanted this Savior, it had been
better with the Beasts of the field, and the creeping things of the Earth,
and the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the Air, then with us, with us (I
say) that were fallen from him. For the end of the unreasonable Creature, is
the end of his woe; but the death of man without a Mediator, is the beginning
of woe.

Thirdly, the Son of God is called Christ, which signifies as much as
anointed. In the time of the Old Testament, three sorts of men were anointed
with Material Oil; Kings, Prophets, and Priests. This Legal anointing, was
a Type and Figure of the anointing of Christ let is, who John 6, 17.
was set apart from all Eternity, to do the Office of a Media our beetweene
GOD and Man, Psalm. 45. 7. Esaias 61, 1. John 3, 34.
and had the fullness of the Spirit powered into his Man-hoode; and therefore
he is a King, to gather and govern his Church; a Prophet, to reveal and
teach the will of his Father; a Priest, to make satisfaction and intercession
for the sins of his people. From nence we learn, that when we are baptized
into Christ, and are called to the profession of the Gospel, we are after a
sort consecrated and set apart to be Revel. 1, 6.
spiritual Kings, spiritual Prophets, and spiritual Priests: we have the
same Oil of gladness, not indeed as he has it which is without measure, but
a small pittance of it, and a little measure, whereby we are called Christians
of Christ; that is, men anointed with the Oil wherewith Christ himself was
anointed, albeit in a far inferior degree. This the Apostle John sets
down, 1 John, 2, 27.
The anointing, which ye received of him, dwells in you, etc. and that same
anointing teaches you all things. Every one pleases himself in the title
of a Christian, all men challenge the name of Christians as their proper right,
and would cry out of extreme wrong, to be denied a portion in this honor: but
ask them what Christ signifies, and how themselves become Christians, they
are able to answer nothing at all. But let us take heed we do not deceive
out own hearts, and flatter our selves in a bare title, when the truth of the
thing does not belong unto us. If a poor simple Beggar that has nothing but
rags and rents to brag and boast himself off, should foolishly persuade
himsefe he were a King, and Monarch of the world, could this vain opinion any
whit avail him, or minister any comfort unto him? In like manner, if we
delight to be called Christians, and yet want the anointing of Christ, we are
as far from being true Christians, as the former beggar is from being a
Prince of the earth. Wherefore, if we will have the thing, with the name, and
the truth, with the title, we must be as Kings, bearing sway over our own
lusts, and proclaiming continual war against the Devil, the World, and the
flesh. We must thus reign over our selves, and then we shall be Kings indeed.
We must be careful to have the word dwell plentifully in us, and endeavor to
instruct others. We must offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto the
Father; we must make prayers and supplications unto him, and resign up our
selves, our souls and bodies to his service. A carnal Christian that lives
in the flesh, is no Christian. An ignorant Christian that walks in
darkness, is no Christian. Such then, as are led by their own lusts, and
carried away by their own corruptions, giving themselves over to all
looseness of life, are not spiritual Kings, but very Slaves and Bondmen, nay
the basest Vassals that breath upon the earth. Such as are blind in the
matters of God, and have nothing in their minds, but gross ignorance, knowing
nothing of religion, nor desiring to know nothing of the means of salvation,
cannot be spiritual Prophets, but sottish persons, and blind men that are
not far from falling into the pit of destruction. Such as approach not to the
Throne of grace with broken and contrite hearts, and call not upon God, are
not spiritual Priests, but come nearer to the profane Athiestes, who are
said, not to call upon God, and think it no profit to pray unto him.

Fourthly, let us consider the third title given to the Son of God, he is
called, our Lord: which teaches us to acknowledge him to be the Ruler and
Governor of his Church, and of every particular member thereof. And if he be
the Governor and guide, woe unto them that will not be ruled and governed by
him. When he persuades us to perform obedience to the morrall Law, he gives
this as the reason Exodus 20, 2.
I am the Lord thy God. Thus does the Prophet bring in the lord speaking unto
us, Mal. 1, 6.
If I be your Lord, where is my fear? We must therefore conform our wills to
his will, and resign body and soul to be ordered and directed by him. All men
are willing to acknowledge Christ a redeemer, but not a Ruler: a Savior, but
not a Lord. Every man would gladly and willingly have a portion in Christ's
redemption, but they regard not to perform him any obedience. They are
forward to hear of this Mediatorship: but they take no delight to hear of his
Lord-ship: they love not to be under his dominion, they care not for the
bearing of his yoke, they desire not to yield subjection to his word. They
determine to make their lusts to be their Lords, and themselves servants and
slaves to their sins. These are such as have another Lord set over them,
which rules in their hearts, to wit; the Prince of darkness, and the God of
this world, his works they do, his lusts they fulfill, and to him they obey.
These are those enemies mentioned by Christ, Luke 19, 27. that will not that he
should reign over them, who in the end shall be brought and slain before him.
Wherefore, if ever we look to find Christ our Savior, let us first make him
our Governor: if we would have him be our justification, let him become also
our sanctification; if we would have him ease us of our burden, and refresh us
of our weariness, we must take his yoke upon us, and suffer our necks to be
acquainted with it.

Fifthly, observe that the Grace here asked for Philemon and others, to whom
the Apostle wrote, is called the grace of Jesus Christ; to teach us that Gods
graces and benefits come upon us thorough him, and as nothing was made without
him that was made, so nothing is given without him that is given. If then, we
would have right and interest in any of the blessings of God, we must labor
to be in Christ, and to have assurance that we are in Christ. If we touch and
taste any of them, and yet be not ingrafted into him, we are Usurpers, and no
better then Thieves and Robbers; we have no more right and Title to any of the
Creatures or Graces of God, then the Thief has to the true man's purse. Christ
Jesus is heir of all things, and we by him. For, if Romans 8, 17.
we be sons, then are we heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed
with Christ: as for the ungodly, they are Bastards, and not sons, and the
Bastard cannot inherit, he is barred from claiming any interest in the
inheritance.

True it is, such as are out of Christ, do many times abound in earthly
blessings, and they enjoy Houses, and Lands, and Temporal possessions, and
they can show their Writings, and Conueyances, and Leases, and Deeds, and
Evidences, how they hold their inheritances from men: yet notwithstanding all
these, in the midst of them they are miserable, and that for three causes.

Wicked men's case, even in earthly things, is most miserable.
First, because albeit they may have many things, yet they can have right to
nothing, and they lay hold on such things as do not belong unto them. God made
the world, and all things therein for his own sons, not for the base borne;
for his Servants, not the Devils slaves. They are like the Moth which breeds
in another man's Garment, but is soon shaken out: the Moth has no right to be
there, and therefore is brushed off, or picked out, and cast away. This is the
comparison Job 27, 16, 17, 18.
of the Holy Ghost, teaching that all unregenerate persons are Intruders, and
can lay no lawful claim by the Law of God, to the things they possess; and
therefore, the Landlord of the world, may and will thrust them out at his
pleasure.

Secondly, as their right is nothing, so they want the right use of them. If
they had right unto them, yet had no comfortable use of them, it were a great
judgment: but these men have neither. The Apostle teaches, Titus 1, 15.
that Unto the pure, are all things pure: but unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving, it nothing pure, but even their Minds and Consciences are defiled.
There is no peace to the wicked: in the midst of joy they are in heaviness, in
the midst of life they are in death, Dan. 5, 6.
like Belshazzar, who in the midst of his Feast and fullness, saw the
handwriting upon the wall, as a Prognosticate of his destruction.

Lastly, albeit they have the blessings of God, and keep them in bondage, yet
withal they possess the Curse of God, which always waits upon them, and
is ready to seize upon them. The Thief lives always in fear of the Judge,
and of the day of Assizes, so do these men live in continual danger of Gods
Judgment and punnishment, which shall one day meet with them.

Sixthly, observe that he desires grace to rest in their spirits: and albeit he
mean heeereby their whole persons (as we have showed before in setting down
the Interpretation of the words) yet hereby he assigns the proper Seat of
Grace, to be the Soul. For the Grace of Christ, is an inward and spiritual
thing, and therefore takes up the inward and spiritual part of man. Indeed,
when once grace is entered into the heart, and sits there as a Queen to order
all our thoughts and affections, it will spread it self through the whole man,
and afterward as it were go out of the doors into the outward actions. We see
hereby where grace is especially felt: for as the Soul is the subject of it,
so the Soul has the especial feeling of it. Our Justification and
forgiveness of sins, the peace of conscience which passes all understanding
is felt in the Soul: yea, Glorification and eternal life through Jesus Christ
is felt in the Soul. This teaches us to labor earnestly Heb. 13, 9.
to have grace in the heart, that from thence it may flow into all our actions.
It is not enongh to have gracious tongues, gracious words, gracious mouths, we
must first have grace within, and give unto God our hearts. Nothing is more
detestable to God and man then Hypocrisy: there appears grace without, but
there dwells none within: there is great show, but little truth, or rather no
truth at all.

Lastly, observe with me the last word, whereby the Apostle shuts up the
Salutation and the whole Epistle, to wit, [ Amen.] This is set down in a word,
and yet it contains more then the prayer it self. For in prayer we testify
our desire, by this we witness our Faith. By this we observe that unto our
requests and petitions in prayer, must be joined Faith and Belief, that God
will grant the things craved. This appears in the Prophet, Psalm. 89, 52.
Psalm. 89. Praised be the Lord for evermore, So be it, even so be it. We are
taught thus to shut up our prayers, by Christ our Savior in that platform
which he has left us. Thus the Apostle closes and concludes his Epistle, 2
Cor, 13, 13
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the Holy Ghost, be with you all, Amen. And indeed prayer avails only in them
that believe: Iam. 1, 6, and 5, 16.
It is the prayer of faith prevails much, if it be fervent: yea, we must ask
in faith and not waver, if we think to obtain any thing at his hands. From
hence we learn, that we ought always to labor to give assent to Gods
promises when we pray, and to strive against doubting and infidelity. All the
promises of God 2 Cor. 1, 20.
are in Christ; yea, and are in him Amen, unto the glory of God through us.
This we see in the Father of the Child possessed, Mark. 9. When Christ Jesus
said unto him, Mark. 9, 23. 24.
If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes: he
answered, Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief. To pray without Faith, is not
to pray at all. And to say Amen in the end of our prayers, and yet to pray with
doubting, and without believing, is to make a lie, and to teach our tongues to
deceive our hearts. For this is a great jar and discord, when infidelity is
in the heart, and faith in the tongue: when inwardly we waver, and outwardly
the mouth utters, Amen. More-ouer, so often as we use public prayers, they
must be pronounced and delivered with that plainness, feeling, and zeal, as
that the people, being thereby moved, and their faith and affections going with
that which is delivered and prayed for, may answer Amen unto that which is
desired. This is it which the Apostle touches, 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 14, 15 16.
I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also: I
will sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also: Else
when thou blessest with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the Room of
the unlearned, say, Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what
thou say. This reprooueth the Popish and Romish Liturgy, that use in divine
service a strange and unknown tongue, whereby the people are nuzeled in
ignorance, and can receive no 1 Cor 14, 19, 1^.
edification or instruction. And hereby consider the deep devise of the
Devil, how far he has prevailed in this false Church. For when he saw he
could not thus far have the upper hand, as utterly to cast the word out of
the Church, and to take away the use of prayer; when he perceived it to be
impossible to root out the word of God, and to abolish the invocation of his
holy name, he fell to work another way, and that is, to suffer the things to
remain, and to take away the right and profitable use of them, so that albeit
the word is read, it is read without knoledge: and albeit prayers be made, yet
they are made without comfort. Thus the names of the word and prayer
remaining, the benifite of them is taken away. The like we might say of the
Sacraments, especially of the Supper of the Lord: they will seem to have it,
yet in truth they want it: to allow of it, and yet they destroy it and abolish
it. If the Devil should utterly remove these things out of the way, so that
the names, neither of the word, nor of prayers, nor of the Sacraments were
heard among them, all men might discover this deceit, no man would easily be
seduced by this palpable grossness: but he is a more cunning worke-man, he
can hide his snares from being seen, so that he will not have them utterly
removed and renounced, that the people might say, we have the word read unto
us, we have good prayers said among us, we have the Sacraments with us, yet
all is done in a strange manner, the Priest uses a strange tongue, and the
people are nurtured in strange ignorance. For the word is heard ignorantly,
prayers are made ignorantly, and the Sacraments are received ignorantly. The
whole frame of the Popish Religion is maintained by ignorance. Thus much of the
general observations, that might be enlarged and farther amplified, which I
have briefly pointed out: and albeit all of them be very pertinent, yet I will
in this manner pass them over. Now let us handle the particular Doctrine that
arises from this Salutation.

[ The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with your Spirit, Amen.] This is the
last clause of the Epistle, wherein he wishes the same that he did in the
beginning, to wit, the grace of Christ. If there had been any more notable or
excellent blessing to crave and desire for him then this grace of Christ, no
doubt he would have asked it, and should have obtained it for him. He would
have made some mention of it, either in the beginning or at the latter ending,
or in some other place of this Epistle. But seeing we find no other blessing
rehearsed or required, beside this grace of Christ, it is most certain the
Apostle knew no greater or better gift then this grace of christ. And indeed,
he which names and commends the grace of Christ, does except or exclude
nothing which is good for us, or profitable unto us, either in this life, or in
the life to come. For the grace of Christ, whereby we understand the free
favor of God, which we by no duties or works have deserved, or can any way
deserve, comprehends under it, as it were within the compass of it, every
good thing, and every perfect gift. For the spiritual blessings of God; as
Remission of sins, Justification, Sanctification, and eternal Life, do all
flow from this grace as from a Fountain. Now it is called the grace of Christ,
and that fitly and worthily; because he has obtained it for us, by the price
of his own precious blood he has deserved to have the same bestowed upon us.
For the grace of God the Father properly belongs unto him, and Christ Jesus,
his natural son, in whom alone he is well pleased, is the Treasure and
Storehouse of his Father, by whose hand is bestowed whatsoever is bestowed
upon us.

Doctrine 1. Spiritual things are to be prayed for, and preferred before
earthly things.
Seeing therefore the Apostle makes so great reckoning of this grace, that he
speaks of it first and last, and remembers it in the beginning and in the
ending, and sends this Salutation unto him, we learn from hence, that
Spiritual things are to be prayed for and preferred before earthly things:
they must have the first place, and earthly things be set in the last place.
This appears in that form of blessing, which God prescribes unto Aaron and
to his Sons, Number. 4, 6, 23, 24.
Thus ye shall bless the Children of Israel, and say unto them, The Lord
bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be
merciful unto thee, The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace. Here we see what the Priests and Levites were especially to crave; to
wit, the favor of God, and his free grace. This is plentifully proved in the
Psalms of David, as Psalm. 4. Psalm. 4, 6.
Many ask, who will show us any good; but Lord, lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us: where he shows, that the multitude call for Riches, and
Honor, and Pleasure, and account them the only good things: but the godly
prefer the favor of God before all, and make it their chief felicity. And
in another place, Psalm. 80, 3.
Turn us again, o God, and cause thy face to shine, that we may be saved. The
Church was now in affliction, they wanted temporal blessings, yet their chief
desire was, to feel the loving countenance of God to shine upon them. This
appears farther unto us, in the Lords prayer, left unto us by Christ our
Savior, to direct us to pray: he teaches and prescribes this order unto us,
that Mat. 6, 9.
we first of all ask such things as concern God and his glory, and then
those things that belong to our selves. Thus are the prayers directed that the
Apostle Paul makes, and offers up for the Churches to which he writes, he
craves above all things grace and peace: he desires, that they might have
Ephe. 1, 7, and 3, 16. Collos. 1, 9.
the Spirit of wisdom and of revelation, that the eyes of their mind may be
lightened, that they may be strengthened in the inner man. Yea, this is so
plain and pregnant a truth, that the very Heathen in their best meditations
have confessed Virgil. eclog. 3. A love principium.
this, that God must have our first thoughts, and the beginning of all our
works, who blesses those that are so begun, and gives unto them good
success. If all these Testimonies, produced out of the Old Testament, alleged
out of the New, and confirmed by the uniform consent of the Gentiles, be laid
together, we may gather from thence, that in our prayers and judgments we are
to prefer and desire especially and principally spiritual things.

Reason 1.
If any doubt remain in us, let us consider the reasons, that so it may be
removed. First, Spiritual and Heavenly blessings are beyond all comparison
more excellent, and bring more sound joy of heart then earthly blessings can
do. The Prophet testifies this by his own experence Psalm. 4, 7.
Thou have given me more joy of heart, then they have had, when their Wheat,
and their Wine, did abound. The things of this life are corruptible: the
things of the life to come are incorruptible. The Apostle Peter speaking of
the inheritance of eternal life, calls it 1 Pet 1, 4.
immortal and undefiled, and that withers not, reserved in heaven for us.
But among the earthly Treasures, what more excellent then Gold? Yet he calls
it 1 Pet. 1, 7, 18.
the Gold that perishes: and afterward, Ye are not redeemed with corruptible
things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain conversation, but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without spot. If then
all worldly things, even those that be most pure and precious, be transitory
and corruptible, they are not chiefly to be esteemed.

Reason 2
Secondly, howsoever the wedge of Gold prevails much with men, and can in a
manner do all things: yet it is of no force with God, it cannot remove his
judgments or turn away his wrath from us, it cannot redeem or pay the
ransom of one Soul, we were boght with a greater price. Hence it is, that the
Prophet says, Psalm. 49, 6, 7.
They trust in their goods, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
Riches: yet a man can by no means redeem his Brother, he cannot pay his
ransom to God. If riches (that can do much) could do this, then the richest
should be the happiest: and the poorest men should be the most miserable. But
this stands not with the will and wisdom of God. To this purpose the
Prophet Ezekiell says, Ezekiel, 7, 19. Zeph, 1, 18.
They shall cast their Silver in the streets, and their Gold shall be cast far
off: their Silver and their Gold cannot deliver them in tht day of the wrath of
the Lord: they shall not satisfy their Souls, neither fill their Bowels, for
this ruin is for their iniquity. The rich man thinks himself fenced against
all dangers of soul and body, and knows not his own error, and ignorance,
and folly. It is the spiritual Armor that gineth strength, it is the
spiritual Graces of God that do defend us: one drop of them is better then an
whole River or a great Sea of earthly blessings.

Reason, 3.
Thirdly, the obtaining of spiritual things is the cause of the other
blessings. They bring with them, when they come, earthly things. When we get
wealth, we do not by it get Heavenly wisdom: for many times, they have the
greatest riches, that have the least Religion. But when we get Godliness into
our hearts, it brings with it a competent and convenient measure of all
outward things. The Prophet says, Psalm, 34, 10.
The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall
want nothing that is good. He knows what is good for us, better then we do
for our selves: as the Father knows what is good for the Child, better then
the Child does, and therefote he does not say, they shall want nothing, but
nothing that is good. Likewise, the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 1 Timothy 4, 8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, and has the promises of this life,
and of the life to come. He does not say, that riches are profitable to all
things, neither does he affirm that they have the promises of this life and
of the life to come; but Godliness has those profits and promises. So then,
if we lay these things together and consider, that the spiritual blessings
being incorruptible, and invisible, and eternal, are in themselves more
excellent; that they are of great force and power with God; whereas the
earthly, are vain and transitory, weak, and unable to remove any judgment,
and that Heavenly blessings are causes of the earthly, and companions with
them: we may truly gather and collect from hence, that it is our duty to
prefer and pray for spiritual things before transitory, for heavenly things
before earthly, for eternal things before temporal.

Use 1.
Now let us see what uses will arise from hence. First of all, this serves to
condemn the practice of the greatest part of men that go clean against this
rule. There is no truth of God oftener confessed in word, that is more commonly
denied in deed. We are willing to acknowledge in judgment the excellency of
spiritual things, above all things that are mortal and mutable, and among
spiritual blessings the price and privilege of Gods grace, which brings a
goodly train and troop of his greatest Treasures: yet notwith-standing our
judgment, The first reprofe.
our affections are chiefly set upon the world, and our desires run after
earthly things. Such men are wholly earthly and carnal, according to the rule
of our Savior, Math, 6, 21.
Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Such can never lift up
their minds unto Heaven, that account the earth, and earthly things, their
chiefest Treasure: as on the other side, they can never settle their desires
and studies upon the earth, that esteem the Heavens and Heavenly things their
greatest Treasures. When the Stomach is ouerladen with meat and ouer-burdened
with the same, there follows an obstruction and stopping of the passages of
Nature: so the inordinate desires of the world pressing down better things,
brings a forgetfulness of God, and so ouerfilleth the heart, that it
oppresses and suppresseth all care and cogitation of a better life. For even
as we see, that when the shadow grows lesser; the heat grows greater; but
when the shadow grows greater, the heat grows lesser, so it fares and
falls out with us, when this (world which is but a shadow) takes up the
least room in our hearts, then the love of the world to come, is the greatest
in us: but when this present world and the things therein, occupy the gretest
space and place in our hearts, then the heat that was kindled in us toward
heavenly things is abated and diminished. These two, the love of this world,
and of the world to come, are so cross and contrary one to another, that they
cannot rest and remain in the highest degree within us, but one cools and
quenches the other, one overcomes and ouermastereth the other. We would
account him a fool and destitute of ordinary understanding, a simple man or a
very Child, that would prefer Copper before Gold, a grain of Barley before a
Pearl or precious Stone, or would make choice of Chafe before the Wheat, or
choose the Husks before the Corn, and yet there are a thousand and ten
thousand worse Fools in the World, which take themselves to be great wise men,
prudent and politic men of deep and profound reaches, who would disdain and
scorn at it to be accounted either Childish or foolish. Naball was 1 Samuel 25.
25.
a rich man, and no doubt took himself and was taken of others to be a wise
man: yet setting his mind wholly upon his goods, he is called by the Scripture
a fool. The rich man mentioned in the Gospel, Luke. 12, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
when his ground brought forth fruits plentifully, thought with himself, I
will pull down my Barnes and build greater, and said to his Soul, Soul,
thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and
take thy pastime: but though he were rich, and therefore thought himself wise,
yet God said unto him, O fool, this night will they fetch away thy Soul from
thee, and then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided? Neither
was this the case and condition of this man alone, but it is the case and
condition of every one that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich in
God. This rich man is dead and gone: but he has left a plentiful of spring
and a great generation behind him. Look upon men's lives, and see whether the
cares of this life, be not the first in their thoughts, purposes, prayers, and
practices. Give them enough of this world, and let him that will, take the
world to come. All their study, all their toyling and moyling is for the red
and white earth, that is, for Gold and Silver, and other trash of this world,
as if they could never be full of it, as if they would never be weary of it, as
if they should never depart out of it. It is said of Solomon Prou. 30 Prou.
30. 15.
The Horsse-leech has two Daughters which cry, bring, bring, so is it with
these worldly minded men, they can never be satisfied, they always cry out for
more, they will not be content, they cannot say, they have enough. It is a
token of a brood basely borne, that respects not the inheritance of sons:
so it is an evident sign that we are not the sons of God, when we mind not
the Kingdom that the father has prepared for us, and the son has purchased
unto us. The Beasts were borne and fashioned to look downe-ward: man created
after the Image of God, looks upward and beholds the Heavens. It is a great
discord and jar between the eye and the heart, which should go together:
when the eye is cast upward, and the heart of man grows downward: the eye is
fixed above, and the heart delights to be always groueling upon the ground,
and glued unto the earth.

Secondly, as this Doctrine meets with their corruption that have their
conversation below, in the center and bowels of the earth, Phil. 3, 20.
The 2. reprofe.
whereas it should be in heaven from whence we look for a Savior, even the
Lord Jesus Christ: so it reprooueth such as regard not the obedience to the
first Table, and duties of piety and holiness which are to be performed
immediately to God. Our Savior, speaking of the first Table of the Law,
calls it the first and great commandment: first, in dignity and order; in
dignity, because it comprehends and contains the duties we owe to God: In
order of Nature, because from the love of God proceeds the love to our
Neighbor, Likewise great, because it is of greatest weight and stretches
farthest, and is chiefly to be respected of us. Hence it is, that when an
expounder of the law asked him a question, Math, 22, 36, 37, 38.
Master, which is the greatest commandment in the Law? He answered him, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, this is the first and the great commandment. These precepts are
first commanded, but they are last practiced and least regarded. They are
called of Christ, great: but they are very small and little, in the eyes of the
greatest part and sort of men. If they lead an honest and civil life before
men, if they deal justly and truly with their Neighbors, they think all is
well, they esteem themselves as perfect men, though they live ignorantly,
profanely, and irreligiously, though they have no knowledge of God and of his
word, though they regard not his worship privately or publikelie. If they
can say, we are no Thieves, or Murderers, we are not defiled with
Fornication, and Adultery, we pay every man his own, and do as we would be
done unto; they suppose they bear as good a Soul to God, as the best, and
shall be saved as soon as any. But ask them any thing of the worship of God,
or mark what their practice is touching his worship, they have no love to it,
they take no delight in it, their meditation is not upon the word, their care
is not to sanctify the Sabboath, and consequently the duties which they
perform toward men, have no right ground to stand upon, and therefore, though
they may bring profit to others, yet can they minister no comfort to
themselves. The first Table is the heart of all Religion, and the foundation
whereupon the duties of Righteousness are builded. If they proceed not from a
religious respect to God, they are as an house set upon the Sand, which wants
a sure groundwork.

Use 2.
Secondly, we are put in mind from hence, not to care over much for earthly
things, or to run so far after them that we forget our selves where we
are. True it is, we are bound and charged in duty to use the means that God
has appointed for us, and to exercise our selves with diligence, labor, and
industry in our callings; but we must not trust in these means and put our
confidence in them, and distrust the care and providence of God toward us.
There is a double care for the things of this Life: there is a good and godly
care, which is necessary for every one; the contrary whereof, is to be
careless, idle, wasting, and spending vnthristily and wickedly, such things
as are gotten by our labor. This providence and forecast is commended and
commanded in many places of the Scripture. This the Apostle teaches and
speaks off, 1. Tim. 5. 1 Timothy, 5, 8.
If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. The other sort
of care, is a care joined with grief and pensiveness, and of this the Apostle
says, 1 Cor, 7, 32.
I would have you without care. This care is an ouer-great care, disquieting
the heart and makes it bond to the unrighteous Mammon; this is always to be
condemned, as that which breeds in us a distrust in Gods providence, and
choaketh the love of heavenly things, and therefore is hurtful and
pernicious. This our Savior reproves in the Gospel according to Matthew,
Chap. 6. Math 6, 25.
I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink, nor yet for your Body what ye shall put on, etc. Behold the
Fowls of the Heaven, for they neither sow nor reap. Which of you by taking
care, can add one Cubite to his stature? And why care ye for Raiment? Behold
how the Lillies of the field do grow, and yet they neither labor, nor spinne.
Therefore take no thought what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or
wherewith ye shall be clothed, for your Heavenly Father knows that ye have
need of all these things, etc. We have the Lord to care for us, who knows
our wants, and the means how to supply them. He made all things before we had
our being, to teach us his providence. All the Mines of Silver and Gold, that
lie in the heart of the earth, are his, and at his commandment. Hence it is,
that the Apostle says, Heb. 13, Heb, 13, 5, 6, 7.
Have your conversation without Coueteousnesse, and be content with those
things that ye have: for he has said, I will not fail thee, neither forsake
thee: so that we may boldly say, The Lord is mine helper, neither will I fear
what man can do unto me. Can we therefore doubt of his succouring of us, and
the supplying of our wants? If we consider his power, he is God: if his will,
he is our Father. Will God forsake or forget his Creatures? Or can a father be
unmindful or unmerciful toward his Children? This were to make him no God, no
Father, which is Blasphemy and impiety. The Prophet David having himself had a
long experience of Gods watchful eye over him, teaches us also to depend upon
him, Psalm. 55. Psalm. 55, 22.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: he will not suffer
the righteous to fall for ever. It is great vanity to be ouergreedy and gaping
after the transitory things of this world, to be carking and caring in the
seeking for them, and to eat the bread of sorrow in going about them. We
should use them, as though we used them not: and enjoy them, as though we
possessed them, not. To this purpose the Apostle Peter says, Chap, 5. 1 Pet,
5, 7,
Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you. Wherefore then should we
nourish immoderate and excessive cares in our bosoms, seeing we have assurance
of Gods care toward us? Let us trust in him, and be secure without all
distrust and fear. If we have spent our days in the following and pursuing
after the vain profits of this life, let us bethink our selves what we have
done, and study to redeem the time that is to come, and consider wherefore we
were created and redeemed. The things that are seen are temporal, the things
that are not seen they are eternal. Let us above all prefer those things
that are able best to prefer us. Let us not live here as men that spend all
their days in catching after feathers, and following toys and trifles that
cannot profit. If we should see a man wast his years, from day to day, and
from month to month, and from year to year, and having lived forty or fifty
years has done nothing but catch after shadows, run after Butter-Flies,
follow after Gew-gawes, or behold the Moone-shine in the waters, or always
look down upon the earth, or always blow up Feathers in the Air: would we
not think him stark mad, and judge him out of his wits? Every man is ready
to accuse him of Madness, no man would think he did him wrong to call him so,
or crave pardon for that he has done. But be not too hastye to censure such,
and to pass the sentence of Madness upon them, least the Parable be applied
to thy self, and be verified of thy self. The wise man, who knew best who are
Fools, and what to judge of folly, preaches and proclaymeth both in the
entrance and end of his words, Eccle, 1, 2, and 12, 8.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. If
then these things be all vain, nay; Vanity it self: it is more then certain
that such as spend their time, and wast their years, and consume their strength
in catching after these toys, these shadows, these shows, these feathers,
these follies, these trisles, and spend more years in pursuing after these
earthly things, then they do hours in attaining Heavenly things, may truly
be accounted Fools, or Madmen, or sottish, or such as are possessed with a
Spirit of giddiness, that run up and down hither and thither, and know not
what they do.

We use commonly to pittye such as are mad and beside themselves and out of
their right wits. None are farther out of the way, nor more destitute of true
Wisdom then these men are, that have the least care of the best things, and
the greatest care of the least things. Let us beeware, least while we think
our selves to be wise, we become stark fools; while we think our selves
spiritual, we be proved to be carnal: and while we loath madness and folly
in others, we love madness and folly in our selves?

Use 3.
Lastly, seeing spiritual things must be placed and preferred before earthly,
we learn another duty from hence, namely that we ought to make greatest
account of the greatest blessings, and such as are highest of all, must also be
highest in our estimation. These we ought especially to pray for, of the want
of these, we must have a special feeling. We are ready to ask for our daily
bread: but we do not desire the bread of life, we do not hunger and thirst
after Righteousness. We are wholly ignorant of the right manner and method of
praying, we regard not to observe the order which God has ordained.

Christ Jesus instrcting us to pray, Math, 6.
and leaving us a perfect pattern how to make prayer, both for matter and
method, has made this the fourth Petition, to have our daily bread given unto
us. But we will not pray after this manner, we will not observe this direction,
we make this our principal care, we make it the first Petition, nay; we make
it both first and second, the third and sourth, the fifth and sixth: we make it
the beginning and the ending, we set it before and behind, we enter with it,
we conclude with it, we make it all in all, to have earthly blessings, and
temporal commodities, and bodily necessities supplied unto us. What a shame is
it unto us, that if we will not know the pre-eminence of heavenly things,
above these mortal and transitory vanities, we should be such great strangers
at home and so ignorant of our selves and of those parts whereof we consist.
Who is so simple that does not understand, that the soul is more noble and
excellent then the body? If then it be more worthy as being a spirit, an
immortal spirit: ought we not in the first place to provide for it? Ought we
not to adorn it with all spiritual graces? Ought we not so to quallifie it,
as that it may be inheritour of eternal glory? Let us therefore affect the
things of certain abode, and seek after Wisdom, Faith, Sanctification, and
the true Riches of the Spirit. If our Treasure be in Heaven, our hearts will be
there also.

Let us lay up and lock up our Treasure in Immortality: let us be sure to lay
a good foundation against the time to come. One thing is necessary, this is the
good part that shall not be taken away from us. All human things are full
of uncertainties, and the means of their decaying and vanishing are manifold,
the Rust, the Moth, the Canker, the Thief, beside a thousand other casualties
that take them away from us. It is an holy and heavenly admonition given unto
us by Christ, Math, 6. Math, 6, 33.
First seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and then all other
things shall be ministered unto you. This checketh and controlleth the
preposterous order and bad practice of most men in their callinges, they set
the wrong end forward, they labor first of all to get wealth and welfare from
day to day, and from year to year, but never think of the root of welfare,
and from what Fountain all earthly blessings spring, to wit; from the grace of
God. Let us employ our pains to get Gods favor, and then transitory things,
Wealth, Peace, Honor, Liberty, and such like will follow, so far as they
shall be expedient for us: otherwise, all our abundance shall turn to be our
bane, woe, and destruction, all things shall be accursed unto us, our Table
shall be made a snare to take us and torment us. The grace of God in Christ is
sufficient to make a man blessed: and without it, all other things (though we
had them in the greatest measure) cannot free us from cursednes. Now it is
impossible that ever we should seek for these gracious gifts of God, except we
feel our own misery in the want of the^. It is the want of health which we
desire to have restored, and the feeling of our disease which we desire to have
removed, that drives us to the Physician. And we have no promise to obtain
earthly things, except we seek them as we ought to seek them, and follow the
right manner that God has left unto us to find them. Many seek after them,
and pray for them; but they do not obtain, because they ask amiss. It is our
duty, not only to pray for lawful things, but also in a lawful manner. A
man may do a good thing after an evil manner: it is in our actions, so it may
be in our prayers. An indirect and unsanctified order, may mar and corrupt a
good and godly prayer. To conclude therefore, let us know, that this grace and
favor of God so often remembered in Paul's Epistles, and so often craved and
prayed for, to be bestowed upon the Saints, is only able to give satisfaction
and contentment unto the soul to stay and rest upon, and therefore we ought
above all other things to labor earnestly to feel it in our hearts. Indeed,
it seems nothing and base in his eyes that has it not: but when a man once
knows the worth and value of it, and tastes the sweet comforts of it within
him, he is ready to sell all that he has to enjoy it and retain it, he is
content to renounce and forsake all Dignity and Honor, all Glory and Praise,
all Health and Beauty, all Friends and Favor, all Wealth and Treasure, all Joy
and Delight, all Mirth and Melody, yea; Brethren and Sisters, and Lands, and
Wife, and Children, and all things that may be dear unto him, rather then
depart from this Jewel of grace, far in price above all the Jewels of this
World. It is with us in respect of spiritual things, as it fares with the
buyer, while he is in buying his commodity before he is possessed of it,
according to the description of Solomon, Prou. 20. Prou, 20, 14.
It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer: but when he is gone apart, he
boasts. He diminishes the goodness of it, he says it is to much, it is not
worth the money you ask for it, but when he has purchased and possesses it,
he praises his penniworths, and judges it better then his money. So is it
with all Heavenly graces, so long as we are destitute of them, we think them
not worth our labor and travel, and seeking, and enjoying, we esteem every
hour too much, that is spent in following the means appointed to obtain
them, and albeit God call unto us Esaias, 55, 1, 2.
to come, to buy and eat, to come I say, and buy Wine and Milk without Silver
and without money, yet we have no ears to hear, nor leisure to attend, nor
hearts to consider of his calling. But when once we have found the^, and know
the just price and value of them, we would not loose them for all the World,
nor for a thousand worlds if they were offered unto us: nay we are willing to
sell all we have, to have them continue and abide with us, according to the
counsel of the same Solomon, Prou. 23, 23. Prou, 23, 23.
Buy the truth, but sell it not, likewise wisdom, and instruction, and
understanding. Let us therefore grow in love with this grace of God, that we
may have our hearts established with it. Let us do that now which we would do
at the last gasp and breath. Then we are ready to renounce the World, and to
prefer one drop of grace and faith before a Kingdom. Let us now begin to
learn wisdom, let us prostrate our selves before the Throne of grace, let us
never give rest to our souls until we find it, and let us sue unto him that
is the Author and Fountain of all grace, to wit; Christ Jesus, to whom with
the Father and the Holy Ghost be all glory and praise for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal Contents of this Book.
A
ABraham received Angels. page 281. He and Lot reconciled. 252, 253 Absence of
the Pastor hurtful. 196 Absence of the people from the Pastor. 202. reasons
against it. 203 Abuse of the Ministers. 397 Abuse of Gods providence. 299
Accepting of persons, 189. not with God. 331 Acount of our faith must be
given. 91, 92 Action differs from evil in it. 307 Admonition. 207 Adoration of
Saints. 146 Adulterer penitent, is no adulterer. 318 Affect such as have most
grace. 186 Affection between Pastor and people, 189 Afflicted are not greatest
sinners. 13 Afflictions serve for confirmation of others. 12. common to godly
and ungodly. 19. they are profitable. 207 Agreement between Paul and James, in
matter of Justification. 191, 192 All things not to be done of al. 11 Alms
houses. 156 Alms must be cheerful. 285 Amen. 494 Anabaptists. 265, 367, 387
Apphia, Philemons wife. 8 Appear all must before God. 337 Apostataes. 486
Application. 76 Archippus. 8 Assurance of faith, no Doctrine of presumption.
180 Assemblies of the Church, 84. they are beasts that reject them. 85
Assurances lawful. 385 Ask no unlawful thing of others. 418 Atheists. 209
Attention required, 219. three benefits of it. ibid. Authority given to the
Ministers, 163. they must not abuse it. 170 Authority absolute no man has.
419
B
Backbiters, 427. the sorts of them, 427, 428 Back-sliders, 132, 150, 491. they
prove worse then others. 486 Bands, where the greatest are should be most love,
337. the more bands are broken, the greater sin. 341 Good Beginninges, help
not without proceeding. 132 Bellarmines doctrine of Princes. 267 Benefit of
others is to be sought, 135. Benefits that come by instruction. 40 Benefit
bestowed upon Saints, shall not be lost. 280 Better too forward, then backward.
75 Birthday. 424 Blessed that suffer for the truth, 14. not all that hear.
242 Blessed that live in Gods favor. 57 Blessings are to be craved from GOD in
Christ, 61. ascribe them not our selus. 63 Blemishes of body, no sins, 315.
to be patiently borne. 316 Blind zeal. See zeal. Blind devotion. 288 Blind
not to be discouraged. 311 Blindness of mind a sin, 310, 311, wherein it
differs from blindness of body. Ibid. Blood of the Martirs. 13 Body must bow
to God. 94 Bondage of the wicked. 115 Bond-Seruants, whether they may fly,
Epist. Dedicat. Brother, who is. 256 Borrowers often Thieves. 412 Brethren
faithful are 33^. They are bound to love each other. 342 Brownists. 177
C
Calling given of God. 336. Every minister has two callings. 268 Canker of the
Commonwealth. 381 Canonized Saints. 120 Cause makes a Martyr. 19 Care
twofold. 504. It must be had of every member. 189 Censurers of the Church. 168
Chaplains. 200 Chance. 299 Charity. 315, 256 Christ rejects none, how base
soever. 5 Christ and the faithful one body, 16. he accounts our sufferings
his, 16. He is the Object of our Faith. 106. Our salvation is wholly wrought by
him. Ibid He is true God. 107 Christ is harbored in his members. 145 446. he
is the anointed of the father. 463. Why he is called Lord. 493. The use of it.
496 Christians, who they be. 496. The true Christian has faith and love. 100.
He must have more then Faith. 103. He is only a free man. 114. Wherein it
stands, 115. Bound to serve the Church. 272 Christians are not enemies to
States and Commonwealths. 263. They are the only friends of Princes, 269 A
good Christian, a good Subject. 267 Chistian policy. 265 Cherish good things.
481 Cheerfulness. See Willingness. Children should not hear an evil word 45
Children of God never void of the fruits of faith, 122 Children deformed,
destroyed by the Heathen. 157 Children must obey parents. 343 Church meetings
to be frequented. 30 Church and Commonwealth compared to man. 36 Church of Rome
teaches that faith may be without charity. 104. It is a Tyrant. 177 Our Church
has many Saints. 120 Church is Christ's school, 128. it shall never perish. 487
Church accused of sedition. 264 Church of Rome, no true Church. 322 Civil
honest men. 97, 503 Circumcision. 392 Comparison between Idolatry old and
new. 63, 64 Compassion, 114. it is to be showed to the ignorant. 177 Company
of evil persons, 94. 123, 150. of the godly to be delighted in. 439 Communion
ought to be among al saints 113. It stands in two things, 114. We must
delight in it, 123. it takes not away private possessions. 365 A Communion
among the ungodly, 124 Communion is with Christ, and among our selves. 149
Communion one with another, what it teaches. 348, 357 Communion with Christ,
wherein it consists. 349 All things Common among friends. See friends.
Comfort to all that employ their gifts, 140, 141. Comfort to the Ministers,
167, 278. and to the people. 279 Comfort in losses, 307. not to be vexed
through impaciency. 310 The Colliers Faith. 77, 78 Confession of faith
necessary, 86. it has promise of reward. 87. It is a fruit of faith, ibid. it
is required of all, 89 Confession is, as our faith. 91 Confession of penitents
not to be reueiled. See Penitents confession. Confirmation in the truth
necessary, 131 Conjunction among the faithful in 3. things. 123 Contemners of
Gods ordinances, 130. and of the weak Brother. 479 Conscience of our company.
350 Contentation, 370. Rules serving to work it. ibid. Converted, must seek to
convert others 69 Course of the Gospel cannot be stopped. 1 Conversion of a
man, alters him quite. 227 Contempt of prayer. 454 Covetousness, 354, 372,
409, 504. the sorts of it. ibid. it is the root of all evil. ibid. Covenants in
writing. See Obligations. Cruelty toward Transgressors. 174 Cursed speaking.
475 Creditors not to be rigorous. 383, 410 Courteous speeches become the Saints,
471. against them that pinch courtesy who shall begin them 474. against such
as perform them only outwardly. ibid.
D
Dangerous to contemn preaching of the word. 214. Day-laborer. 410 Despise
not any, how vile soever. 5 Devils faith what it is. 78, 107. many com behind
them, 79, 108. they have no hope of mercy. ibid. they know they are reserved
to wrath. ibid. they teach the reprobate a lesson which the^selus could never
learn, 80. they do Gods will by constraint, 288. what are their baits. 489.
they corrupt Gods worship 499 Devil signifies a false accuser. 144 Degrees of
faith. 81 Defense of the godly we must undertake. 94 Desire the best gifts
149, 464 Description of the iniquity of our times 150, 151, 178 Deputies
cannot discharge us. 200 Departers out of the Church. 220 Delight must be in
Gods service. 287 Death of the godly sudden ofttimes. 308 Dead faith. 258, 259
Dear they must be to us that have gained us to the faith. 394 Deformed have
comfort. 311 Delight not in the ungodly. 318 Debts to be paid, 389. such as do
not, are thieves. ibid. they are not to be eagerly exacted from the poor, 407.
they are of two sorts. 246 Degrees in submitting our selves to the word. 401
Despair not of any man's salvation, 430 three Meditations about it. 431
Deserts. See Merits. Demas. 484 Disgrace it is not to be cast in prison for the
Gospels sake. 12 Difference between the godly and ungodly, 24. between Pastors
and hyrelings, 72. between Gods love of the elect, and of the reprobat, 86.
between believing God, and in God, 107. between Heathnish and christian
religion, 156. between that which penitent persons have bin, and are. 318.
between sinner and sinner, 480, between the godly and hipocrites. 486 Dislike
of our selves, is the first step to grace. 52 Discretion required in the
minister. 175 Division of parishes, has footing in the word. 198 Diligent
teaching required. 200 No Disgrace to do service to the Saints. 276 Disorder in
ye world ouerturns not gods providence, 298. God orders it. 299 Doubts must
be removed by the minister. 362 Doubtful things must be taken in the best
part. 429 Duties are better done by help of others then alone. 21 Duties to be
performed willingly. 285 Duties of godliness chiefly to be regarded. 503.
E
Earthly things must be set after heavenly. 500 Education of children in
godliness. 43 Elect shall in Gods good time be called. 7 Elect called Saints, and
why. 86 Envy not the proceeding of others, 75. 153. who are most given to it.
Ib. reason why we should not envy others. 76 Envy what it is, 133. most
hurtful to him that has it. ibid. Enemies to a good name. 98. Enemies of the
Church prosper not, 278 280 Enemies to the Ministers, are enemies to God. 398
Increase in good things is required, 226 324, 483. seeing we are in the way to
the kingdom. 127 Entising to evil. 152, 153 Enquire out such as want. 161
Enquire which way to do good. 281, 423 Entrance of sin into the world. 302
Epistle to Philemon when written. 466 Epicures. 299 Equality in christ among
believers, 331 Esteem of penitent persons as they are, 314. Evil cannot be
defended by Gods providence. 300 Execution for treason, not religion. 19, 20
Exhorting one another required, 39, 152, 260. Examine our selves whether
sanctified. 122 Examples corrupt not to be folowd 189 Exacting our own not
always warrantable. 412.
F
Faith is the hand of the soul, 53. it stands in particular application. 66,
76, 80. no comfort without this, 77. particular faith required of every one.
77 Faith of the Church of Rome what it is, 77. it is grounded upon ignorance.
78 No faith, where no knowledge. 78 Faith has sundry degrees, 8^, 110. it must
not be kept to our selves. 92 Faith and Love commend a man to god, 95. they
perfect a Christian. ibid. they are marks of election ibid. they go together,
99. they are as the tree and fruit ibid being seuerd they lose their names and
natures, 100. he is no true Christian that separates them. 100 Faith is proved
and tried by our love, and love by our Faith. 101. How it does justify. 103.
It is not built on men. 487 What true faith is. 106 Faith in the Saints, Popish
Doctrine. 208 Faith is wrought by the preaching of the word, ^09. It is joined
with repentance Ibid. It teaches to depend upon God, Ibid. Faith is mingled
with doubting. 110. Many think they have it who want it. 108, 259. Being weak
it is available. 285. Not to be had in respect of persons. 188 Faithful are
peaceable. 110. They are Saints, 117. They yield more then is requested of
them. 431. Therein they follow Gods example. 432 Faithful accused of sedition,
26^. Whether they can fall away. 491 Families of Christians, a particular
Church, 8. being reformed, they have in them persons unreformed, 237. How made
obedient. 234 Fathers must make their Children religious. 43. They are many
times murderers of them, 44 Famine of the word 214 Famine, some are glad of.
409 Familiarity with the Saints, who regard not. 355 Favor of God cause of all
blessings. 56. Seek it above all things, 57, 465. Wretched to be without it
^9 Fearful persons, 92 Feeling of Churches troubles, 275 Flattring men in
sin. 321 Forgiveness of offenses required, 6, 245, 249. How man forgiueth.
247 Fortune 299. Forefathers. 42 Forward, sometimes fall back. 484 Forwardness
in good things. 433 Friends are as our own Soul. 26. they will admonish. 27
Friendship counterfeit. 28 Friends to Princes who are, 269. of what sort we
must choose them, 326. They have all things common, 350. They must require no
more then God allows. 415, 416 Friendship among the Heathen what, 352. How it
differs from love. Ibid Freedom properly belongs to the godly. 115 Fruits of
love to be showed cheefely to the Saints, 67. And not to the ungodly. 325
Fruitfulness in good works. 101 Freedom in a Christian, wherein. 115
G
Gain of souls. 482 Gentiles Idolatry and Papists, like, 63 Gifts to be
communicated to the Saints, 114. they are of 2 sorts, Ibid. the faithful are
Gods Stewards to despense his gifts. 114 Gifts received, must be employed to
the good of others, 1, 134. Not to their hinderance, 138. They must not lie
still. Ibid. Gifts of God must be stirred up, 133, 483 Gifts are bestowed to
profit withal. 273 Gladness, See Joy. Glory of God to be sought in all things,
64, 147 God loves a cheerful giver. 282 God is not the Author of sin. 300
He works in sin three ways. Ibid. He moves none to sin, 301. He
disposes ever to good the sins of Men. 303. He punishes sin with sin 486
God hears our prayers two ways, 453 God recompenseth outward wants 310 He
accepts no man's person. 531. he forgiues the penitent 414 Gods love
reconciles all his Creatures, 5^. He loves all his Creatures, and how. 86,
323. He is not benefited by our well-doing. 112 Godly charged which rebellion
26^. they are friends to the Prince, and the reasons. 269 Godly must abound in
graces, 10^. They are most to be beloved. 112. they are never barren, 123. They
often dye quickly, the reasons of it. 303 Godliness sweetens the bitterness
of the Cross. 116 Goers backward. 130 Good name has many enemies, 417 Good
things must be carefully, and earnestly followed. 9. Reasons and uses, 10 The
goodness of God to us must be made known. 142. The benefits thereof. 142, 143
Gospel cannot be bound. 2. It is stronger then the Devil, 2, 3. It abolisheth
not civil ordinances, 202. Obedience to them adornes the Gospel. 263 Gospel
brings peace. 264 Government of the tongue. 476. Rules to observe to attain to
it. 477 Grace of two sorts. 492, It signifies sometimes the free favor of
God, and sometimes his gifts in us. 48. It is chiefly to be desired. Ibid. It
sanctifies all other good things. 51 The want of it is a curse. Ibid. It is
the foundation of all our happiness. 52, 53. Three steps leading us to find
grace, 52. It gives contentment to the soul. 54. Why called the grace of
Christ, ^92. the more it appears in any, the more to be loved. 322. 323. It is
given freely. 457 Graces of God are fruits of election. 70. Bestowed upon
other they must rejoice us, See Spiritual graces. We must grow in them. 482.
The seat of them is the Soul. 498 Grief to behold the unregenerate. 187
Grief to see any decay in grace. 435, 436 Grudge not at others good, 153
H
Hatred between Minister and people, hinders profiting. 193 Help of others to
be sought 22 Heathen and Christian Religion, how they differ. 156 Hearers must
perform three duties, 219. They must hear the word willingly. 287 Difference
of hearers, 338. It is no common Grace. 3^0 Against hearing false tales. 428
Where the Heart is, there is our delight. 288 Heart and word must go together,
457 Historical Faith. 78 Hindrances of Prayer. 460 And of hearing 484 An
honor to suffer for Christ. 18 Honoring of Saints. 145 Honor the Minister.
296 Houses of the godly what. 38, 45. And of the ungodly. 46 Householders must
teach their households 38. They must first reform themselves 4^. They must bring
their Families to the Church. 47 All their houses the Christians sold not, 367,
368 Hope the best of others, 426. It is a property of love. Ibid. Hospitality,
440. It consists not in feasting, 4. 2. It is cheefely required of Ministers.
444 Hospitals none among the Heathen, 157 Husband and Wife Yoke-fellowes. 30
Husbands. 328 Hunger after grace, one step to it. 53 Who are said to hunger.
483 Hypocrites. 486
I
Idol-Shepheards. 35 Idle persons have their gifts diminished, 13^. Idolatry of
Gentiles, and Papist, alike. 64. Jesting at sin. 72 Jesuits enemies to Princes.
266. They are Cormorants. 340 Jesus, what to be learned by it. 495 Ignorance,
78, 90 Ignorant people ready to receive any Religion. ^. Ignorant Ministers.
201 Imprisonment for the Gospel. 12, 13 Implicit Faith. 77. Imprecations, 175
Imputation of Christ's righteousness, 363 364 Instruction profitable. 40
Invocation of Saints: 66 Indulgence 1^6. See Lenity. Inferiors owe honor, 179.
34, they must be content with their places. 335 Injuries, See Revenge.
Infirmities object not. 315 Inferiors not bound to obey in evil, 420 Being
unbelievers, they yield but half obedience. 344 Joy to see the faithfall grow
in grace. 68 Israel oppressed. 330 Interest in his own good, every man has.
365 Judge not before the time. 430 Judgment of the wicked touching the Cross.
14 Justification by Faith condemned by the Papists. 102. How Faith justifies.
103. Paul and James reconciled. 104, 105. It is no doctrine of Liberty. 105
K
Keys of the kingdom of heaven, 166. How committed to the Minister. Ibid.
Kindred must be respected. 338, 340 Kings, Nurses to the Church. 273 Knowledge
necessary. 90. where it is not there is no faith. 78. Being abused it brings
judgment. 129 Knowledge of propriety in goods, increseth the care of them. 367
L
Lame persons comforted. 311 Law. 246 Lawyers, 389. Rules belonging unto them
360 Least measure of grace. 482 A Lesson for persecutors. 17 Libertines. 106,
^99 Lenity in winking at offenders, 176 Liberality. 160. How bestowed amiss.
116 Liberal maintenance to be allowed the Minister. 287 Life of the godly
often short. 308. How the promise is kept to them. 109 Love to be showed,
specially to the saints 67. Generally to be extended to all. 86 A fruit of love
to admonish. 27 We must love most, where God loves most, 112. Not the ungodly
most. 115 Love between Pastor and people, 192 193 Love those that have
converted us, 261 Love one another. 332, 355. It is a Christians badge, 356,
355 Love God above all. 340 Love to the Saints must be fervent. 254, 257. What
it is. 256. The manner how we must love. 257, 258 Long life a punishment to the
ungodly, 308 Losses, See comfort in losses. Lowest member in the Church must
be respected. 184, 329 The low estate comforted. 1^0 Lukewarm, 433
M
A Magistrate sustaines two persons. 247 Man by Nature sociable, 22 A Martyr,
who is. 19, 20 Marks of Christ what. 18 Marriage must be in the Lord. 32
English Martirs canonized by the Pope, were deuillish Traitors, 121 Mankind
stand in need one of another, 83 Mass. 93 Maintenance of the Minister. 400
Manner of doing, God accepts more then the deed. 284 Masters must pray for
their Families, 241. They have comfort in teaching them. 242. they are
Ministers in their own houses. 45 Meditations to move us to Prayer, 462
Necessary after hearing. 220. For Patrons. 222 A mean to be kept. 76 Means
must be used to bring us to faith, 108, 109. To further his gifts in us, 129
Members we are one of another, 173 Merciless men. 276 Merciful men. 280
Meritorious works, 458 Merits taught in the Church of Rome, 463 Ministers
calling painful, 33. they must not entangle themselves in worldly things, 37.
They must seek cheefely the profit of their people. 70. It is a grief to see
them go backward, 71 Ministers must preach willingly, 286. They are Gods
Instruments to convert Souls, 165. They must be maintained, 287. Given to
Hospitality, 444. Being idle their guiftes are diminished, 136, they have no
right to be maintained. 137 Ministers must love the people as Children, 194,
They must be faithful, 216 They shall give an account for souls, 216. They
have comfort in laboring 242 Ministry a worthy calling, 165 Ministers are Gods
Ambassadors, 171 How to be esteemed, 171. They must use mildness, and
gentleness, 172, 173 Mitigation of offenses required, 363, Three rules
belonging thereto. Ibid. Misshapen Children, See Children deformed. Monkish
life, See Solitary. Mocking the Ministers, 204 Multitude no rule to try truth,
90
N
Name that is good only the godly have 96, It has many enemies, 427. Evil
men have an evil Name, 96. Against such as take away the good Name of the
godly, 96, Ungodliness brings a blot to men's names, 97. civil men are ignorant
of a good Name, Ibid Seek aster a good name. 97. how many ways men are
deceived in it. Ibid Wherein a good name consists, 98, The enemies to it.
Ibid Natural condition, what. 299 Negligence in Religion, 11 Neglect of
Prayer, 456 Neighbor, who is. 256 Nicodemus, 481 Niggardliness, See
Covetousness. Non proficients. 128, 324 Non residency, what it is, 194 Notes
to prove men void of Faith, 108 Nouatians. 317
O
Objections answered, pretending that ministers live idely. 35. that they need
not hear, that have faith already. 130 Objections against instructing
families, 40. of them that say they spend nothing but their own, 115. Of
miserable men against liberality, 158, 190. of Non residents. 197 Objections
brought to prove preaching not the ordinary means of regeneration. 207
Objections of Anabaptists. 265. 367 Objections made against forgiving
offenders, 246. against using salutations. 247 Obligations lawful. 385
Occasions of doing good must be sought 31. of contention must be cut off, 251
Odious terms not to be used against the penitent. 311 Offenses of penitents
not to be aggrauated. 293. they are to be forgiven. 243 Offenses forgiven two
ways. 247. they will arise many ways. 487 Old age honorable. 178 Old men
instead of Fathers, 18. their Duties and sins, 181, 491. their long life is a
testimony of Gods mercy. 182 Oppression: 393 Opportunity. 444 Order in praying
for blessings. 505 Ouer-seers of the Church. 221 Outward blessings recompensed
with inward. 305
P
Painims religion, what. 156. they regard not the poor. Ibid Papists no
friends to Princes. 266. falsely called Catholics, 322. they sever faith and
love, 102, 104. they slander us about Good-workes. 105 Parents of deformed
children comforted, 311, 316. they must not reprove their children for good
things. 328. they must pray for their families. 241 Pardon open for penitents.
217 Pastors joy. 69 Pastors and people are as Father and son, 189. they are
tied to a particular charge 199. not to discourage people that are forward. 329
Pastors of mean gifts must be heard. 203 Patrons admonished. 221. whence
they had their names. Peace given to the faithful. 55, 58 The three Persons in
Trinity, work our salvation, 61. the distinction between them must be known.
62 Peace is brought by the Gospel. 264 Penitent persons not to be reproached.
317. their confession not to be reueiled. 321. abuse of the church of Rom
therein. Ibid. ^alse persuasion of Faith, set down by certain notes. 108.
Peter's being at Rome uncertain. 46^. disagreement of Popish writers about it.
471 Persecutions of Christians, are the persecutions of Christ. 15 Popish
Idolatry like the Gentiles. 63 Popish assertions touching the Scriptures. 78
Pope held to be the Saint-maker. 121. he is enemy to Princes. 266 Popish
devotion. 288. Martyrs. 10. Religion, which gives liberty to sin. 105 Church
what it is. 470. The Popes Supremacy. 470. his Saints. 120 Poor Saints to be
relieved. 154. What those poor are. 161. Poorest believer is rich. 189. the
godly are specially to be respected. 1^1. Pray for the free passage of the
gosp. 3^ Prayer necessary. 63. 437. it must be made to God for others. 82. it
is a part of spiritual armor. 83. the use of it. ibid. other men's to be
entreated. 84. We must pray for spiritual strength. 91. and for spiritual
things. 505 Prayer what it is. 447. it is a medicine against all diseases 83.
how made unprofitable. 461. what is required in it 449. why God defers to
hear. 453. Popish prayers Idolatrous. 452 Prayer heard two ways. 453 Prayer
contemned. 454 Prayer to Saints. 454. It robs God of his honor. 155. It
cannot merit. People must maintain their Ministers. 38. They must delight the
hearts of their Teachers. 73. They must not think it enough, not to hurt
them. 74. They come to entrap them. Ibid How many ways they grieve their
Pastors. 75 People must employ their gifts. 139. They must not despise the
Ministry of the word. 170. They must honor their Pastors. 202. They must attend
their own Pastors. 203. they are in the ministers debt. 402 Poor unthankful.
412 Preciseness not to be objected against Professors. 93 Presence of the
Pastor necessary. 190, 191. Preaching of the word, the means of regeneration.
205. A token of Gods love. 215 Preachers preach to themselves as well as to
others. 210 Preaching Ministry necessary to salvation. 213 Preparation before
hearing. 219 Privileges of the godly. 58 Profession of Faith, See Confession.
Profaners of the Sabbath. 124 Provision for the poor. 160 Providence of God
orders all things. 295. It exempts men from sin. 300. It comfort. 302. It
gives contentation. 303 Puritan how it arose. 93
Q.
Questions answered, whether the holy Ghost be excluded in Salutations. 4^. Why
Paul calls God his God. 66. Whether Faith respects the Saints. Ibid. Why
Faith is restrained to the Saints. 67 how Infants can be saved that want faith
8^. Whether all that cannot say God is their God, are Reprobates. 81. Whether
the Spirit may be lost. 133. Whether a Christian may not be angry. 174.
Whether it be sufficiently to have Faith inwardly in the heart, and so to
conceal our Religion. 88. Whether unlawful to respect persons. 189 Whether we
may hear none but our own Pastors. 202. Whether God be not able to save us
without the ministers 215 Whether al men would believe if they heard God
speak. 218 How the promise of long life is kept. 39 What they must do that
are not able to restore. 413 We must not ask the question why all believe not.
240 Question whether it be lawful to sue at the Law. 246 Whether the faithful
can fall away. 491.
R
Rash Judgment. 6 Reading is not Preaching. 208 Who hold reading to be
preaching. 209 Rejoice when we ought. 68 Repinining See Envy. Religion must be
professed. 86 Reproof of such as love only the ungodly. 115 Reproaches, See
Taunts. Repentance blots out the reproach of sin. 88, 317 Residents required
of Pastors. 19^, 196 Reason against Non residency. 196, 197. Regeneration
wrought by the word, See Preaching. Revenge not injuries. 304. Reasons to prove
we ought not. 305 Repentance not to be delayed 318 Repetitions. 406
Restitution. 413 Reward a means to move to godliness 226 Religion brings
profit with it. 230. The several sorts of profit. 231. It makes all the Family
dutiful. 234. It is no inheritance. 237 Reformed Families have often in them
unreformed persons. 237 Repentant offenders must be forgiven. 244 Rejoice at
our Brothers good. 421 Regeneration. 424 Reproof. 430 Reward proves not
merit. 463 Rich men want reproouers. 27 Rigor. 480. in punnishing to be
avoided. 176, 177 Riches abused, 275. Riots and Rowts condemned. 369
S.
Sabbath to be duly sanctified. 23 Saints are not to be prayed unto, 66. not to
be believed in, 103. why so called. 117. There are Saints upon earth. 118 Two
sorts of Saints, 118. No reproach to be a Saint. 119 Saints of the Popes
making. 121 Saints how they may be honored. 145 Wherein it consists. Ibid.
Salutations, 465. they beseem the Servants of God. 471 Sanctification a sign
of election. 122. necessary in all. Ibid. Servants we are to all. 134 Sermons
read. 212 Servants are of two sons. 365. how they must do their duty. 284.
Whatsoever they do heartily is accepted. 285. how they are made obedient. 235
Servants ^lly entreated. 329 Sacraments. 391. What they are. ibid. the causes
of them. 392 Satan hinders prayers. 462. how he poisoneth it. 461. he
persuades it will merit, ibid. how he is to be resisted. Ibid. Sins of the
penitent not to be increased. 311 Self-love. 258 Sinful men contemn the
Ministry. 296 Sharpness. See Rigor. Slanderers of the godly reproved. 96.
they are petty-Deuils. 144. we may be such by holding our peace. 429. Slander
to religion, to make it enemy to Princes. 263 Slander, that we make God the
author of sin. 301 Solitary life. 23 Soule-Labour is greatest. 36 Soule-Loue
the truest. 44 Societies of the ungodly must be shunned. See Company. Soul
more excellent then the body. 505 Spiritual blessing chiefly to be craved. 49
Sport not at sin. 72 Spirit compared to fire. 133 Spiritual graces to be
preferred before earthly. 500 Speech how to be ordered. 477 Standers at a stay
reproved. 131 Stir up the gifts of God. See Gifts. Strangers not to be
wronged 443. Infidels respected them. Ibid. Superiors to be reverenced. 177.
they beat Gods Image. 178. they must use mildness toward Inferiors. 333, 334.
they must instruct them. 344. Profitable Meditations for Superiors. 335
Suretyship lawful. 373. how it may be used lawfully. 377 Christ became our
Surety. 375 Sureties for evil persons. 379 Rash Suretiship the undoing of many.
381 Sureties must do three things. 383 Submission to the Gospel. 401
Subscription. 494 Suing at Law. 246. what to be observed in it. Ibid.
Suspicions. 427
T
Taunts must not discourage us. 120 Tale-bearers. 427 Testaments of the dead
allowed. 387. rules to be observed in them. ibid. Thanksgiving required 68.
425. 456. it is to be given to God alone, ibid. not only for our selves, ibid.
not to be severed from prayers. ibid Theft in borrowing. 4 3 Time-seruers. 486
Times and seasons of our conversion in Gods hands. 607 Titles given to the
Ministers. 34 Trial of our conversion how to be made 232 Translations of
Scripture. ^09 True Religion alters a man. ^27 Troubles of our Brethren must
touch us 422. we must seek to remedy them. 423 Tongue. 475. 476. How to order
it in speaking. 477. How it is abused. Ibid. English Traitors made Romish
Saints. 19 Turks Commonwealth. 376
V
No valor to revenge. 250 Vain to set our selves against the Gospel. 3
Vainglory. 146, 147 Vanity of this World. 505 Vexing of the Saints. 1^0 A
vexation to dwell among the ungodly 150 Unequal marriages. 32 Uncertainty of
humane things. 154, 155 Unblameable infirmities. See Infirmities Unrepentant
Sinners must be charged with their sin. 320 Ungodly hate the godly. 325, 326
Unthankfulness of the poor. 412 Universal vocation and election there is
not. 240 Discourteous speeches. 475 Unknown tongue in prayer. 498 Voice of God
cannot be endured. 218 Vpbraiders of penitent persons 314 Use makes men
prompt. 133 Use not gifts to the hindrance of others 138 Use of our goods
belongs to the Saints. 372 Vserers. 410
W
Want of outward blessings. See blessings Weak ones not to be despiced. 83.
they must be strengthened. 478 Weak Faith available. 285 Wives must be
helpers of their husband. 29 A Christian Wife is a great blessing, 30 Wives
must wait the fittest times. 31 Wife that is godly. 326, 328 Way to breed
obedience in all sorts. 234 Wicked men have nothing theirs. 60. Al things are
set against them. Ibid. they are Bondmen. 115 Wicked provoke Gods wrath
against Princes. 268. They are the greatest breakers of Princes Laws. ^63
Wicked are Usurpers 23^, 497. They are miserable in earthly things. 49^
Willingness in all duties 2^2. The minister must show it in Preaching. 286.
The people in hearing. 287 Worship must be performed with the whole body. 94
Works of mercy must be specially showed to the godly poor. 111. They are
accepted as done to Christ. Ibid. Works which are meritorious. See
Meritorious. Woeful the estate of Apostataes. 485 Wills of the dead, See
Testaments. Word, is seed and meat. 130 World a bait 488 Worldly men
reproved. ^01 Wretched estate of such as are without the preaching of the
Word. 213 Writings allowed for assurance. 386. They stay suits 388
Y
Year what best welcome to the covetous. 409 Young persons owe duties to old
Men, 180 They must suffer them to speak. Ibid. they must give them place. Ibid.
Z
Zeal commended. 10. Scoffers at it punished. 10, 11. It must be tempered with
knowledge. 11 True Zeal what it is, 11. It is commended in good things. 433
Zeal blind. 11
Faults escaped.
PAge 9. line 34. read knot of love. and l. 36. r. prisoner of Christ. page 5.
l. 55. dele of. p. 20. l. 41, 42. r. our. p. 36. l. 12. r. prison. page l. 46.
read if meat. page 54. l. 54 read to reside. page 77. li. 18. read but what.
pa. 123. l. 2. r. so old. page 150. l. 34. r. mire. p. 152. l. 18. r. leaves.
page 165, l. 18. read cooperation. p. 167. l. 1. r. ways. p. 174. l. 54. r.
persons. p. 178. l. 19. r. swarm. p. 183. l. 43. dele be. p. 197. l. 7. read
vigilant. p. 219. l. 38. r. distractions. p. 220. l. 18. r. and that. p. 227.
l. 15. r. the name. p. 248. l. 18. r. not to hate. l. 19. not to desire. p.
250. l. 1. r. Amnon. p. 254. l. 13. r. all such. p. 265. li. 19. r. the
inheritance. p. 287. l. 18. r. and no. p. 288. l. 14. r, unto our p. 301. l. 1.
r. could not. p. 302. l. 7. r. spur. p. 303. l. 30. r. strayeth. p. 319. l.
3. r. charge. p. 341. l. 5. r. burned. p. 350. l. 41. r. mutual. p. 352 l. 34.
r. consent. p. 360. l. 49. connecting. p. 369. l. 44. r. being. p. 370. l. 3.
r. Churles. p. 372. l. 13. read them not. p. 381. l. 31. or the. p. 401. l. 11,
r. guided. p. 415. l. 30. dele no. p. 11. l. 15. r. albeit they want and
ability to relieve them. p. 260. l. 22. r. make him. p. 433. l. 1. r. them
strive. p. 441. l. 31. r. to be the. p. 443. l. 11. r. no pity. p. 450. l. 50.
r. to overcome. p. 457. l. 31. without profit. p. 462. l. 24. r. of merriting.
p. 475. l. 52. unregenerate heart. p. 426. l. 12. r. not the. p. 427. l. 51.
dele with. p. 449. l. 42. read when he. p. 447. l. 2. if we. p. 267. l. 23. we
had. 227. in Margin. r. Sophoc. in Aiace. p. 489. l. 21. read they will. and l.
30. r. pace. p. 495. l. 38. r. not want.


