THE Art of Riding, set forth in a brief treatise, with a due interpretation
of certain places alleged out of Xenophon, and Gryson, very expert and
excellent Horssemen:

Wherein also the true use of the hand by the said Grysons rules and precepts
is specially touched: and how the Author of this present work has put the
same in practice, also what profit men may reap thereby: without the
knowledge whereof, all the residue of the order of Riding is but vain.

Lastly, is added a short discourse of the Chain or Cauezzan, the Trench, and
the Martingale: written by a Gentleman of great skill and long experience in
the said Art.

Jmprinted at London, by Henry Denham. 1584.

To the Right worshipful Gentlemen Pensioners, M. Henry Mackwilliam, and M.
William Fir^^^^ams.
WHen as it pleased the right worshipful M. Alley M. of the lewell house,
earnestly to desire me to satisfle you right worthy Gentlemen his very good
friends, as touching the right use of the Canezzan first moved unto him by you
Master Mackwilliam, as afterward for the like use also of the Bit, by you M.
Fitzwilliams, and that in writing; the which things both do specially rest in
the true use of the hand, wherein the chief substance of the whole Art of
Riding stands: I was in great doubt what answer to make. For as I was very
loath to deny the earnest request of such a person, to whom I thought my self
so greatly bound; so do I fear to fall into the just blame that they
deserve, which take upon them the thing that is above their power, or so
presume to put themselves in prease among so many, as have so well written of
the said Art already.

But hereunto, he (as one more desirous to satisfy you, than willing to
unburden me) answered and said; Though it be true in deed, that diverse have
so done, yet every one that is desirous to be a professor, or at least a
practiser of this Art (as the whole company of valorous young Gentlemen ought
to be) do not conceive the true meaning of the said Authors rules, or can
judge of the errors of ill teachers, by whom they be deceived otherwhiles
rather than taught, as by the daily practicing of them one may easily
perceive.

The true use of the which are not gotten at the first assaie, but by long
experience, and daily conference with such as have had long practice in the
said Art, as he supposes I have had: and here upon makes me believe I may do
somewhat to the great profit of such young beginners, though not by giving of
new, or altering the old, but by the way of interpreting, explaning or showing
the reasons of such rules, as specially in this point, which is cheeflie
purposed to be treated of at this time, that is, concerning the true use of the
hand: a thing not easy, but very hard to be understood, and fewest rules be
given thereof, and commonly most vnskilfullie used: so as thereby they may the
better understand the meanings of those Authors, and also judge of others
doings, and be more wary in their own practisings. And by this means also he
persuadeth me that I shall avoid the dangers which I before so greatly doubted
of, and thus has he coniured me (as it were) to take this matter upon me, as
he says you have done him M. Mackwilliam very oftentimes to have it done.

In this manner therefore thus moved thereunto, I shall be content to do my best
to satisfy you all, yet letting you understand therewith, that as the shame is
like to fall on me, if through mine unableness any fault be justly found; so
will the blame be common to us all, but most to him, that has been the
chiefest procurer thereof; and least to me (I hope) that was so loath to take
this enterprise upon me. Now then I have first to consider in what order I
shall proceed therein. For how shall one make another understand, to what
purpose the pomell of a sword serves, if he show him not first what a sword it
self is? even so how shall a man make another know what the true use of the
hand is in the Art of Riding, if first he does him not to understand in
general, what the very Art it self in nature is?

I therefore have thought good to proceed in this manner. First, to show what
this Art is, and out of that to draw the right use of the hand. The first part
I will pass over with a short discourse, and confirm the same with approved
authorities. The other, as touching the true use of the hand, I mean to show,
by telling in what sort I have practiced those Authors rules, and what profit I
have found thereby; and therein by the way to interpret and explane where
need shall so require, such places as may seem in them any thing hard or
uneasy to be understood.

And so I will leave it to your considerations, and require you both most
earnestly, before you make it common, that you will cause it to be perused
priuatlie, by some particular friends skillful in that Art, according to your
promise M. Mackwilliam, when you first motioned the matter unto the M. of the
Jewel house, as he has often told me: among the which I would most gladly,
that M. Th. Blundeuile specially should have a view thereof, who has already
gathered very diligently the whole substance of that book of the order of
Riding, which was written by that excellent M. in that Art Frederike Gryson a
noble Gentleman of the city of Naples, and has very skilfullie put it in
such order, as if men take good heed, and will be diligent, they cannot but
greatly profit thereby, to the great benefit of themselves, and the service of
their country. For the which, and many other his good abilities, if this time
were not too much unkind and forgetful, he could not lie thus hidden as he
does.

And this done, then my request is, that it may be returned to me again,
before you proceed any further: and thereupon I will not fail forthwith to
send it you again. And thus I leave it to your favorable interpretation, and
to your wise and freendly protection, wishing you both that you most defire.
The last of September, 1583.

By yours to command, G. B.

To our very loving Companions, and fellows in Arms, her Majesty's Gentlemen
Pensioners: and to the gentle Reader whosoever.
IT has been practiced by many excellent men in sundry professions, to
forbear the publishing of their own names with such works, as they have set
forth with singular skill for the benefit of their cuntrie. Their intent
wherein (as we conceive) has been only this, to profit and benefit others,
without regarding any way to purchase praise or commendation unto themselves.
Which frank and liberal kind of dealing, as it proceeds (doubtless) of a
noble disposition of mind, which seeks rather to do, than to be seen in
doing, and passes not for so mean a reward, as is commonly due for speech,
or for a man's tranell by his pen: so were it a kind of injury, to suffer the
names of such excellent persons (worthy to bear name abroad above others) to
rest in that sort drowned in silence and darkness, and not rather to endeavor
(though contrary to their likings in that behalf) to advance their doings,
and to make them openly known unto the world, thereby to receive part of that
honor which is due unto them. For praise and renown is unto none so justly
due, as unto those, which in any virtuous action do least affect it. In this
number, which is but rare, must we note unto you (though perchance not without
some offense unto him) the worthy Gentleman M. John Astley, master of her
Majesty's Jewel house, and Gentleman of her privy chamber, a man, besides his
reputation and countenance in Court, known to be of singular shill in the Art
of Riding: who (in truth) being the Author of this treatise, and yet either for
modesties sake, or otherwise careless, that the world should yield praise and
commendation unto him for his travel therein taken, has sought by all the
means he could (as may appear by the Epistle, under the Cipher of two
letters hereunto prefixed) to suppress, and in no wise to have his own name
seen in the same; rather contented that any other should carry the opinion
thereof, than he himself: where as (by his favor be it spoken) he ought rather
to have done the contrary, and to have entitled his name unto his own
work, whereby the same should have received both credit and reputation.
Howbeit, this matter being handled with such exquisite skill and judgment, as
by the perusing of this book you shall perceive it is, it was an easy matter,
thereby to have known M. Astley, though his name had been never so much
dissembled, or the same not otherwise notified unto you: for the matter it
self (no doubt) would soon have lead you to judge that to be his, which
(happily) few men else could have done but he. Therefore (for our parts)
being loath that so worthy a Gentleman, who has traveled so carefully, and
so kindly for the good of his country, and was the onelie-man, that persuaded
Master Blundeuill to take first in hand his work of Frederike Gryson (which
we all have received no small benefit by) should be defrauded of his due
commendation, though he himself do little regard it. And because the work it
self is such, as may boldly abide the censure of the most precise and
skillful in this profession, and withal beseem his own name very well: we
have adventured (as you see) not fearing any blame for our boldness herein,
(because in so doing, we mean nothing but all love and honor unto him) to
declare thus much unto you, concerning the very Author of this present work,
which comes now of his friendly liberality into your hands, to the end you
may reap both profit and pleasure thereof, for both are very largely
comprised in it. Use it, we pray you, with like kindness as it is offered
unto you, and take benefit of it without cavil, or ouer-curious reprehension;
wherein as you shall do the Author himself but justice, and also make us his
faithful true friends much beholding, so shall you happily encourage him
thereby, to endeavor himself again to your further and greater benefit
hereafter. From the Court, at White Hall, the last of March. 1584.

H. Mackwilliam. W. Fitzwilliams.


The Art of riding defined, with notes of courage in a Horse, the using and
abusing of an Horse, and what is justly called the hardness of a Horses
mouth, etc.
Cap. 1.
NOthing is reckoned more proper to man's nature, than the desire to know a
truth, nor any thing counted more foul, or gross, than to err and be
deceived. Seeing then that the thing purposed is for the knowledge of the true
use of the hand in this Art of Riding and Horsemanship, which belongs to the
war and feats of arms; and that in reason, the substance of a part of any
thing cannot well be understood without the knowledge of the very nature of
the thing it self whereof it is part (as the use of the hand is but a part of
the Art of Riding) I have thought good therefore First, to seek out what the
very substance of the Art it self is, that thereby we may the better
understand this part whereof we purpose to treat. And thus not meaning to hold
you long, I will say forthwith mine opinion thereof, the rather to save the
band, whereby I stand so far indebted unto you all, than that I think my
self able to satisfy your skillful expectations, and so under the correction
of diverse Noble and many other Gentlemen befides your self, with a great
number of others that at this day are grown to some excellency in this kind
of Horssemanship, The definition.
I say (for my part) that the said kind of Riding is an Art to make an
horse, for the service aforesaid, obedient to his Rider. In this short kind of
speech (as I take it) the very whole substance of the said Art is fully
contained, and therefore the words thereof are diligently to be weighed, but
especially these here following: The parts of the definition which stand upon
the essential causes.
as ART, an HORSE, a RIDER, and OBEDIENCE: which I mean for the better
explaning of my conceit, to pass over with a short discourse.

ART therefore is an observation of certain experiences tried and gathered
together, The art is the cause efficient.
to be put in order, and taught to some good end. Three things are chiefly to
be required in Art, that is: easines, readiness, and perfectnes. Art also is
said to imitate nature.

An HORSE is the matter and subject whereupon this Art works, The material
cause.
and is a creature sensible, and therefore so far as he is moved to do any
thing, he is thereunto moved by sense and feeling. Further, this is common to
all sensible creatures, to shun all such things as annoy them, and to like
all such things as do delight them.

The instrument whereby this Art is wrought, The cause formal is the manner of
teaching.
is the RIDER, a creature reasonable, and therefore ought to be able to render
a reason of every thing that he teaches, in making the horse obedient to his
will, the which if he cannot do, he is to be suspected as one unskillful of
the Art, and knows not what he does.

OBEDIENCE, The cause final is obedience.
is a ready willingness to do the will of him that does command. But now by
the way, though every Rider be a creature reasonable, yet every reasonable
creature is not a Rider, but he which only is skillful in that Art.

Finally, the pattern that Art should imitate, that excellent Philosopher and
valiant captain XENOPHON in his book De re equestri does very gallantly set
forth in these words: Note when you see a Horse (says he) make haste to meet
with other horses, Notes of courage in a horse upon occasion of what objects.
that be in his view, or mares rather, and then shall you see how nature
moves him to show himself in his best form and lustines of courage, yea,
both terrible and beautiful to behold: for then he will set up his crest, bow
in his head, prick up his ears, gather up his legs high and nimble, swell in
his nostrils, and start out his tail, etc. This is now the pattern that the
curious painter with all his skill does diligently endeavor to imitate, but
how much more should the skillful Rider do the same?

Of these horses thus to be made, as XENOPHON also writes, there be two
kinds: the one, for the service aforesaid, the other for pomp and triumph, the
which we call stirring horses, the use of which are very profitable for this
service, because they teach a man to sit surely, comely, and strongly in his
seat, which is no small help to him that must fight and serve on horssebacke:
but of this last I mean not now to speak.

Of service in the war or field on horssebacke, there be two kinds: the one
in troops and companies, and those be likewise of two sorts, either in the
maine battle, or skirmish: the other, when men being singled by chance or of
set purpose, meet and fight hand to hand, which is most proper to this Art.
Here you see now in this short discourse, how nature has ordered this matter.
First, that Art must imitate her: next, that the horse in teaching must be
maintained in lustines of courage, and freshnes of feeling, which is proper to
him by nature: finally the Rider to make him obedient by reasonable means,
which by nature is proper unto men: so as these two several bodies may seem
in all their actions and motions to be as it were but one only body. Thus if
nature be obeyed, and her order preciselie kept, it cannot be but the end will
have such success as we do desire.

Contrary to these things herein thus shortly passed over, as namely Nature,
Art, The three contraries to nature, Art, and reason, with their contrary
effects.
and Reason: is violence, which nature abhors; error, which Art rejects;
unruly passion of mind, which reason always withstandeth: and as they be
contrary in nature, so be they also in working, and therefore must needs bring
forth contrary effects, as we may see by those horses, that both without
courage and comlines are ridden, with raw noses, bloody mouths and sides,
with their curbed places galled, turning their bodies one way, and their heads
another way, which things are brought to pass by the violent and unskillful
use of the hand upon the chain, Cauezzan, musroll, and such like, which were
first devised to save their mouths; and not to mar their noses and muzzels.

For where the true order of riding is not rightly understood, Wherein the
chief part of horssemanship consists.
and the true use or temper of the hand (wherein the chief part of this Art
consists) is unknown, or else by overmuch impatience banished for the time,
there the effects before rehearsed must needs follow. So that, when by those
violent means they be brought to such pass, as they care neither for hand nor
spur, for bit nor Cauezzan, then are there new devises of bits and musrolls,
hard and sharp, for the amendment of these defaults, and so from one degree of
violence unto another. And yet when all is done, and that they find by proof
all their labor lost, then they complain of the horse, that he hangs on
the hand and craves the spur, as though it were the horses fault by nature,
and not the riders ignorance by violence: which by those means has so dulled
and deaded the senses and feeling, as he feels little of pain, of pleasure
nothing at all, and of a sensible creature is made a sensles block.

Let not men be deceived (as for the most part they be) in taking one thing for
an other, A paralogysme to make that the cause of a thing which is not the
cause.
and that to be the cause of a thing, which is not the cause. As some take wine
to be the cause of drunkenness, whereas (in deed) it is the intemperate desire
of the drinker, and not the wine: and so is it the intemperate hand of the
rider, who governs with the raines the bit in the horses mouth, that breeds
the dulnes and hardness (as it is commonly called) and not the bit or the mouth
of the horse. For (I pray you) tell me in reason, is not iron harder than
the mouth of any horse in the world? I grant that there should be certain
forms of bits devised for the remedy or correction of certain faults that may
chance in a horses mouth. The use and abuse of certain bits for riding.
But if they be devised for continual correction, then be they violent, and
the horse will never take pleasure in them. But if they be made to remedy a
default, or to ease any grief, then is there Art and Reason used, and the
effect of pleasure will follow thereof. But to conclude, to what end soever they
be devised, the hand must guide them, which if it want the due measure in
pressing or slacking, then will follow some evil effect, as in too slack
bearing, the casting up and down of the head, and the vnstaiednes thereof, and
in ouerpressing, the thrusting out of the tongue, with gaping and wrieng of his
nether iaw, What is justly called the hardness of the mouth.
and breeding of hardness in the gummes, whereby such hard knobs do grow, as
commonly are in the innerside of laboring men's hands, which in deed may
justly be called the hardness of the mouth. But as these things happen by
unskillful riders, and violent means by them used, so they seek to remedy
their own defaults by more violent ways (as is before mentioned) until they
ascend unto the highest degree of violence most horrible to nature, as by
cutting those knobbes, and their toongs out of their mouths, and also the
grissels out of their nostrils, and thereby deserve the name of Butchers rather
than of Riders.

Now that I have in this short discourse comprehended the whole substance of
the Art in general, there is next to be showed, how an horse may be brought
to this perfection before mentioned by the true use of the hand, so far as
the Art in that point will suffer or allow: and further to require were more of
curiosity than of skill. For even the best Physicians do not always heal
the patient that is under their cure: neither is every patient of one
disposition, nor every scholar of like aptnes to learn.

A confirmation by other authors of this that has already been set down.
Cap. 2.
But yet before we enter into this part, let us see (as we have purposed) what
those excellent authors that write of this Art have said thereof. And for the
avoiding of tediousnes, seeing they all agree in substance, not excluding any,
yet make special choice of some, which I (for my part) would wish should not
exceed the number of two, whereof the one should be Xenophon, which wrote
thereof in ancient time about 300. years before the coming of Christ: and the
other Gryson, which of late days has done the like. Xenophon a great
Philosopher and an excelle^r Captain.
And that the rather, because this Xenophon was not only a great Philosopher,
but also an excellent Captain, specially over the horssemen, as it should
appear: so as no exception can be taken against such a one, as either for want
of learning or experience may be objected, which commonlike there is at this
day if any want either of them. And what that worthy Gentleman Frederike
Gryson was, every one knows, of nation an Italian (which nation has long
borne, and does bear at this day the only praise of this noble exercise)
and of the city of Naples most famous of all other in Jtalie in this respect.
What his judgment was in the said Art, may appear to all them that list to
look upon the rules and precepts so perfectly set forth by him in writing.
What his practice was in the said Art openly and daily in the said city, and
what his praise was there amongst the rest of excellent Riders, yea even at
that time when this Art was in his highest perfection, does appear in that
noble Carociolos writings, the Duke of Martinas brother, which he intituleth
Gloria de caualli, whereof he wrote ten books, wherein he reckons up wel-neere
a hundred as well Princes as Noblemen and Gentlemen: among the which Noblemen
of that city, that were descended of the Senators, thus he writes of Gryson,
and of one Giovanni Berardino de la Castella, in the latter end of the second
of his said books, Tracostoro fioriscono, etc. which may be englished thus:
Commendation of excellent horssemen.
Amongst these flourished Frederike Gryson, and Giovan Berardino de la Castella:
of the which two in this noble exercise it may be said as Petrarch said of
Tullie and Maro; These be the eyes of our tongue. For besides the true knowledge
of this Art, and the great practice they both had thereof, they with a most
perfect judgment had this special grace given them, that every horse at the
first riding seemed to obey unto them even at their beck, so as the standers
by were astonished thereat: whereupon all other studious of this exercise would
unto these two persons (as to the oracle of Apollo) very often resort, to be
resolved in all their doubts. Upon these two therefore that have written of
that Art, that is Xenophon and Gryson, I would wish all those that are desirous
to have the true order and exercise of this Art, specially to stay
themselves, and constantly to follow. Whose judgments in general (concerning
the same) I mind to pass over shortly, and after to touch particularly the
use of the hand.

The gods (says Xenophon) have granted this unto men, The means how to make an
horse conceive the riders meaning.
that one of them may instruct and teach another by speech; but no man can
instruct and teach an horse by his speech: but if you will cherrish and make
much of him, when he has done well and to your liking; and again, punish him
when he resists and will not be obedient to your will, he will soon and
easily learn to do those things which are required of him, according to your
mind and liking. And this is spoken (says he) in few words, but it ought
diligently to be observed throughout the whole Art of Riding. For a horse
will make the prouder auant and show of his doings, and better obey in all
other things, when he hops to be made much of, and to have rest after he has
done and ended his travel. The heart of a horse, and the cholerike humor in a
man compared.
For (says he again) the heart of a horse is like to the humor of choler in a
man: so then as men are not easily provoked or stirred to anger, unto whom
nothing is said or done that may vex them; so a horse will not lightly be
moved, unto whom a man does no harm or hurt.

Therefore it is to be provided, that the Rider do not trouble or vex the
horse (for we must know that all sudden things do move perturbation in
horses.) And further he says, We ought to abstain altogether from those
things, which the most part of men do use in opinion for the best kind of
riding, that is, to force them on the hand with the bit, and to torment them
with spurs, rod, or whip: for by those means all things shall happen
contrary to that which we desire, that is, to have him do all his things in
his best courage, shape, and form, which will not be brought to pass by
making him afraid with beating and spurring, driving him into great
perturbations: for all such things happen unto those horses, to whom the
riding is grievous and painful, and that to their great shame and lack, and
not to their praise and commendation. In another place he says: that the best
way to teach (as it seems unto me) is to observe and hold that which I have
often heretofore rehearsed, that is, The best way for a Rider to teach a horse.
that you remember to cherish your horse when he has done well. For whatsoever
a horse does by compulsion and force, he neither knows what he does, nor how
to do it, neither will it become him, no more truly than a Plaier that
should be driven with whipping to play his part bravely on the stage. For
as well the horse as the man deserves worthily dispraise, rather than any
praise or commendation, when they be driven thereunto by beating and strokes.

Therefore we must with certain quiet signs provoke him to show himself
lusty and comely in every part as much as he may: so as the profitablest way
of teaching the Art of Riding is, not to deal rigorously or hastily: for
anger foreseeth nothing, and is the companion of repentance.

But if your horse have been used to have been ridden quietly with a soft
and gentle bit, and has by such means learned all his lessons, and other
doings, and can carry therewith his head and neck comely and decently, it
shall be best that you trouble him with none other kind: for he will by this
most easily and willingly do and perform those things wherewith he him
self is cheeflie delighted, and wherein he pleases himself most. And that he
does take pleasure in those things aforesaid, let this be a good witness and
token thereof (says he:) Xenophons proof of the premises.
and thereupon he sets down that shape and form that Art should imitate,
as is before mentioned, and then concludes thus: that He therefore, who can by
this means and order of riding, bring an horse in all his doings and motions
to show this form and shape which he himself does express and represent,
when he would seem and appear most beautiful, shall bring to pass, that
both the horse shall take great pleasure of the riding, and also that he shall
appear to the beholders very noble, terrible, and beautiful. Thus far
Xenophon.

Gryson in the 9. Grysons judgment of the Art of riding.
page of his book and last edition, set forth Anno. 1571. upon the margin of
the which this note is set down, Disciplina de caualli, delivers his
judgment in general of this Art, wherein (amongst other things) he notes:
that Such are not moved altogether without reason, which hold that a horse,
being in Latin called Equus, took his name of the Latin word Aequu^, or
Aequalitas, which in English is Equal, or Just. For thus he writes: Et non in
tutto fuor di ragione si muouono coloro, che teng ono cheil Cauallo in lingua
Latina prendesse il nome dalla equalita. o guistezza: and so goes on and
says, that He ought to be just in pase, just in trot, in gallop, in carrier,
in stop, in manage, in bounding, and finally, just of head, and just when he
stands still, and to unite himself just with the will of his Rider that
sits upon him. And among al these things he commends the trot, and
concludes, that thereby all the other qualities may be best brought to
perfection, and the head and neck to great staiednes, the mouth to a sweet
and perfect good stay, the which (to end withal) he counts to be the very
foundation of the whole Art: in the true teaching whereof if one fail, he
marreth the horse utterly, and hides all the goodness that nature has given
him. Whereas on the other side, if he be truly taught, it will supply many
parts wherein nature may fail him. And in the 59. page the 7. line beginning
Et perch, etc. Disorders used in riding to be avoided.
he writes, that he is forced to note unto us that are desirous to fly the
disorders that many do use, which by changing of hard and sharp bits, think
they shall stay the head, or make the horse stop orderly, and do not see
how thereby they make a jade of vile courage, or overmuch exasperate him: by
the which grievous error it shall never be possible to bring him to any good
perfection, but by good Art and true discipline, and with a pleasant bit,
whereupon he may stay his mouth temperatlie with safety and assurednes, by
bearing the hand temperate or firm upon the trot or gallop, and in time to
cherrish him when he does well, and likewise to chastise him when he does
ill, he will be fully brought to all good, and conform himself to the will
of his Rider.

And in the 105. page, Ignorance the cause why none have attempted to write of
the Art of riding.
where he treats of these things more particularly, he affirms in the end,
that the ignorance of these things has been the cause, that none have ever
attempted to write of this Art, and that he is certain that many will blame
this that he has set down, because it appears unto them that this manner of
teaching should be false and untrue, being very strange and out of use, from
all other which were and be now in the world. But all they which hereafter
shall see what good effects do grow by this order of teaching, shall know the
great goodness of the infinite grace that the heaven does now yield them. And
in the very last lines of his whole work he thus ends, Questa e quelto art,
la qual si segne da molti ande tanta la difficolta, che un solo sara colui, che
al fui compitamente arriuera al suo vero segno. Thus far in general I have
not only set down mine own, but have also showed the judgment of these two
authors to confirm the same, as I hope they do, and as it will further
appear in their particular rules and precepts, which they give, in teaching
how this iustnes and perfectnes may be brought to pass: wherein we see
already this to be received for a sound conclusion and ground, A sound
principle or ground in the Art of riding.
that no forced or violent means are herein to be used: and also that this
manner of riding is not usual, neither easy to be followed or found out,
though it be set down in writing never so plain.

For do we not see that in all other arts there is a beginning, a proceeding,
and last of all the perfecting? Familiar examples for the better explaning of
the Authors purpose.
As for example, in the art of writing, first, there is the learning of the
letters, next the well ioining of them together, and last, the continual
exercise thereof to bring the hand easily and readily to write perfectly, as
fair and well as the perfect example that was first set down. And do we not
see also, that if there be a thousand Scholars, and all they have but one
example given them, and by one way of one master taught, which when they have
used to follow the same and none other, so long as it may be thought time for
them to leave the school, and be able to teach others, that yet all they shall
so differ in writing, as that their hands may easily be known one from the
other, yea, and from the first example too. For marks are not set up, because
that good markemen can always hit them (for that is not possible) but he is
counted the best Archer, that beats continually nearest about it, and does
(for the most part) hit it more than any other, and that is possible enough.

The true use of the hand upon the bit, and upon the Cauezzan, set down as it
has been found true by experience: and also of a fault in saddles which
hinder the riders hand in the directing of his horse.
Cap. 3.
ANd now seeing I am light upon this example, The true use of the hand upon the
bit, etc.
which, in the cheifest point that belongs thereunto, agrees with the
principal point of this exercise; that is, to the firm and stayed direction
of the hand (of the which my purpose is chiefly to treat) my mind is now to
consider of the particular rules and means the which have been given by these
Authors in that point, for the perfecting of this cause in hand, wherein the
true use as well of the hand upon the Cauezzan, as upon the bit, may be known,
considering they be both under the government of the hand.

And herein I mean to satisfy the special request of master Mackwilliam,
as touching the Cauezzan, as far as my ability will serve. But of the mind
of these authors I cannot say much thereto. Xenophon, though treating of the
Art of riding, yet says nothing of the Cauezzan.
For in Xenophon I find nothing at all written thereof: and in Gryson little or
nothing to the purpose, as in diverse places here alleged out of him one may
perceive: as in the last line (save one) of the ninth page before recited, he
first makes mention thereof, saying; Come egli ander a sicuro, et solo in
Cauezzana, senzache altro il tiri: and in the thirtenth page, whereas he
treats of making the horse to stop just: and also in the foureteenth,
where he shows what manner of bit he would have the horse wear first: and
likewise in the sixteenth, when he would have the Cauezzan taken from him: and
again in the 23. page the fourth line, wherein he warns the rider when he
mannageth the horse upon the half time, to take heed that he wrie not his
neck, but to help him skilfullie with the Cauezzan: and so again for the
said fault he makes mention thereof in the latter end of the 79. page: and
last of all in the 82. treating still of correction for the said fault, he
concludes thus; Caualiero fondato in buona dottrina senza di ciolo togliera
non solo di questo ma d'ogn' altro vitio, that is: that the Rider grounded in
the right order of teaching, without it shall take away not only this fault
from him, but every other whatsoever. Who is best grounded in the Art of riding.
And who is best grounded in this skill, he shows in the 106. page, at the
33. line, beginning thus, Et vi fo noto, etc. I do you to know, that every one
which shall know how to correct, to aid, and to cherrish a horse, according as
it behooves him in time, may be called the most grounded in this skill. And a
little after he says thus, Ma par arriuare a tal virtu and in oqui sua bonta,
dico, etc. But to come to such goodness and perfection, I say (says Gryson)
that even as the ship is guided by the steeres man, by mean of a stearne; so a
horse should be governed, according as his stearne is moved, which is the
bridle, and the reins thereof, and that he terms Il manico del timone, the
handle of the stearne, the which be holden in the left hand, and guided by
reason and discourse, so as it behooves that in all his motions and actions he
answer to that motion which the hand moves that holds the bridle. Now
seeing then the ground of all the Art (as he often affirms) rests wholly
upon the true use and just government of the hand, let us of this most chief
and necessary point therefore see, what these authors say thereunto. For in
treating hereof will appear not only the true use of the hand upon the bit,
but also upon the Cauezzan, and the whole secret also of this Art to them that
with reasonable discourse and heedfull diligence do consider thereof, and that
done, I (for my part) will show the experience, with the profit that I have
found by practicing of them.

And yet of one thing by the way, A fault in saddles hindering the right use
of the hand in riding.
I must put you in remembrance, most contrary to the right use of the hand,
and therefore in no wise to be used, and that is your new devised saddles of
late, that have their pomels too much bending forward, with a buttresse (as it
were) underneath it of an handful thick and more, so as no man can draw his
hand toward him low under the pomell to stop or govern the horse, as Gryson
teaches, Vicino al garrese, that is, near to the withers, but must of force
keep it forward, and when he should stop his horse to heave it upward for
to draw it to him, he cannot, unless he do it above the pomell, and in so
doing may chance to knock his knuckles thereupon, except he keep his hand
very much forward, which to do at the stop is against all reason: and
besides, it is cause of many disgraces, as well to the rider, as to the horse
himself: the which to show I mean not now to trouble you withal, and
therefore to the matter purposed.

The use of the hand upon the Cauezzan, more specially touched; and how
diversely it is misvsed for want of skill, a lesson for young beginners in the
Art of riding.
Cap. 4.
NOw to speak somewhat of the Cauezzan, The use of the hand upon the Cauezzan,
etc.
though Gryson for his own part seems to make no great matter thereof, yet he
allows that others should use it, when he makes mention of the same in diverse
places (as I have before remembered) and exhorts men to use it skilfullie, as
in the 23. page the third line, there treating of the manage with the half
rest, he uses these words; Adiuta^ndolo maestreuolmente conta Cauezzana, that
is; To aid him skilfullie with the Cauezzan. So as it appears in these words,
that there is a skill or cunning in the use thereof, leaving it even so to the
discretion of him that uses it, thinking peradventure, that those rules which
he has given for the use of the hand upon the bit, might serve also for the
Cauezzan, to him that has any reasonable discourse. So as (in mine opinion)
if we would but consider the general ground very diligently, that is, that
we do not so press the place whereon it lies, with over hard a hand, as
thereby the sense may be dulled, but so temperatelie used, as the feeling may
always be fresh (the which I fear is smallie considered of many that use it
at this day, as far as I can see) we should see better effect follow
thereof, than we see oftentimes there does.

I think therefore the best way to make men to understand the true use of the
same, How the Cauezzan by diverse is misvsed.
is first to let them know, how by diverse it is misvsed: and that it is
misvsed, whatgreater proof can there be more manifest, than to see how
miserably the silly horses be tormented and mangled therewith about their
noses, so as the skin and flesh is worn to the bones: and where it should
lie flat by nature Come un muttone (as Gryson says) like to the nose of a
sheep, they by their violence make it arise in the middestlike to the beak of
a hawke. How do we see their heads also set out of frame by reason of the
misuse thereof, when the horse is taught to turn therewith: and (as Gryson
notes) to their great scorn that so teach them, in the 82. page of his book,
whereas he speaks of some horse, that has been taught from the beginning
unto the end, to turn with his nose and neck awrie, saying thus; Per colpa
del' caualiero non vi fu may prouisto, tal che egli ha fatto il suo lacerto
inar cato da vna banda and dalto altra fermo and sano, and dimostrer a che vi
sia nato di quel garbo torto. And thus in english: Through the fault of the
rider not forseeing at any time, how he has made his horse his Lacert bowed
on the one side, and firm on the other, The nature of a vermin in Italy,
called Lacerto.
as though he had been foaled with that deformity. This word Lacerto is the
name of a vermin or creeping worm, like to a Newght, with four feet, which
in Jtalie be common, and have this property by nature, never to look
directly upon a man but always with his head awrie. And this happens (as he
affirms) for lack of taking heed of the use of the hand at the beginning,
that guides the Cauezzan. For even as by violent haling thereof, they mar
the natural form of their noses, so by unskillful using of it, in teaching
them the furrow turn (as some call it) they set their heads and necks awrie,
which is now commonly seen. For if a horse be turned on the one hand, you
shall see him carry his head on the contrary side. Of what error the fault in
a horse of holding his neck and head awrie does grow.
This vice grows of this error, that when the horse does not yield quickly
to the motion made with the reine of the Cauezzan, to turn on that side his
rider would have him, then he plucketh it harder and harder, and therewith
peradventure his head yealdeth, but his body stirs not at all. The Rider
then perceiving that disorder, lets that reine go, and because he shall not
wrie his head in that sort, he staieth the reine on the contrary side, so as
his head cannot follow his body, and by this use and custom of teaching, he
is brought to the said fault and vice aforesaid.

But the true use of the hand in this point is, How to handle a horse in
teaching him the furrow turn and how that turn is made.
that when the horse is brought to the place where he must be taught this
furrow turn (that is in a new deep ploughed ground, into a trodden path,
between two furrows) and therein stands strait and just with his body (as
Gryson appoints) move him gently to go forward, and in the very motion
turn him first on the right hand thus: Draw the right reine fair and softly
unto you, taking the same with your right hand low under the pomell of the
saddle, well near half a foot toward the middle of the reine, whereunto if
he yield never so little, then make much of him, and stay that hand with that
reine, so as you neither draw it any further, nor slack it any thing at all:
and with your left hand let the left reine slack, so far as his head may
turn, and have liberty to go and follow his body, and no further.

But if you perceive with that little yielding, What helps must be used in this
kind of training.
his body moves not with his head, then help him gently with your left
leg, but let not your hand stir. If this will not serve, let his keeper, or
some other that has skill, be with you, that may fair and quietly come on
his left side to his foreshoulder, and thrust him by little and little to cause
him move the fore part of his body. But if the horses resistance be much,
let him use his force, and thrust the horse from him as he sees cause. Then
in this mean time, let the rider also help him with the calfe of his leg (as
is before mentioned) striking him therewith as near the shoulder as he may,
and to make that sound of the mouth or voice, that Xenophon speaks of, which
he calls (...), and is made by putting the tip of ones tongue into the roof
of his mouth, and smartly to loose it by opening thereof. But in all this time
he must keep his hand firm and stayed, not slacking nor drawing the same by
any means. And as soon as he shall perceive that the horse moves the
forepart of his body (be it never so little) let him stay and make much of
him, but suffer him not to turn back again to the path, which peradventure
he will offer to do, and in that manner bring his forepart about, until he
come into the path again, so that his head stand where his hinder part stood,
and there setting all his four feet right in the said path, let him stand with
his head and body, as strait as you can devise, and so let him rest and make
much of him, and see that both the reins be of equal length, and stand with
him in that sort a pretty while, and that done, turn him on that hand still,
in such order as before, until he be come about into the path, and that his
head stand that way therein, as it stood at the first when he began to turn:
and always when you offer him the turn, you must first put him forward, and
in that very motion, draw the reine with your hand as before: thus as you
have done with your right hand, so must you order your left hand also, when
you turn him on the left side. Here I have touched diverse circumstances,
without the which I could not well show that which is specially purposed, that
was, the true use of the hand upon the Cauezzan, in teaching the horse to
turn.

But if you will have a perfect view of the misuse of the Cauezzan, A perfect
view of the misuse of the Cauezzan.
then mark when a horse is ridden with the bit and Cauezzan together, and you
shall see manifestly, and that specially when they be turned upon the left
hand, the misuse thereof. For then the rider, having both the reins of the
bridle, and the left reine of the Cauezzan, altogether in his left hand,
thinking to help the horsve to turn on the left side, drawing all the reins
toward the said side, with the which draught he draws also the right reine of
the bridle with the rest, supposing thereby to help the horse, and does not
perceive how therewith the cheek of the bit on the right side is so pulled up,
as thereby the mouth of the bit does so press the horse on that side, that
his head cannot follow his body toward the left side that he is offered to
turn upon, clean contrary to the order that he was taught, or ought to have
been taught, when he was ridden only with the Cauezzan: for then having the
right reine in the right hand, and the left reine in the left hand, they may be
drawn on either side in reasonable manner.

But I do not see how it is possible in reason to teach a horse to turn on
both hands, and keep that form and shape that nature has given him, holding
the reins of the bridle with the reins of the Cauezzan in one hand. Lessons
for young beginners in this Art or exercise.
And therefore I would wish that young beginners should not ride with the
Cauezzan and bit together, but rather with a watering bit made like to a
snaffle, and having the mouth of a cannon bit, so as he might hold the reins
of the same, one with the one hand, and the other with the other: as he does
the reins of the Cauezzan, whose just and due place is to be borne low even
with the point of the shoulders, and not above the mane of the horse, as one
must carry them, if he will use them in one hand with the reins of the
bridle. What must be done in riding a horse with bit and Cauezzan together.
But if they will needs ride with bit and Cauezzan together, then to avoid the
fault before remembered, I think this the best way (in mine opinion.) Let them
learn to change the reins of the bridle out of one hand into the other after
this manner: when they turn the horse on the right side, let them draw the
right reine of the Cauezzan low to the point of his shoulder, with the said
hand as before said, and then hold the reins of the bridle which you have in
the left hand with the reins of the Cauezzan, right over the crest and the
neck of the horse, so as you press his mouth nothing at all therewith. So
likewise, when you turn him on the left side, change the reins of the bridle
out of the left hand into the right, and then hold him with the right hand,
even as you did before with the left, and use the left reine with your left
hand, as you did also with your right. Admonishing you by the way, that in any
wise in all your horses lessons whatsoever, you shun making of overmuch
haste with him, for that is as great an error and oversight as a rider may
commit, and does as much hinder your horses profiting in that you would teach
him as any one thing. So must you be likewise heedfull to give your horse
breath in all his doings. And thus much for the Gauezzan.

The use of the hand upon the bit more specially declared; with diverse
circumstances incident to this discourse.
Cap. 5.
NOw to begin with Xenophon, The use of the hand upon the bit, etc.
as touching the right use of the hand upon the bit, after he has spoken of
diverse kinds of bits wherewith he would have horses ridden, he ends thus:
What kind of bit so ever it be (says he) with the same must he be made to
perform all those things that be requisite, to show himself comely, and in
such sort as we have prescribed. And therefore the horses mouth may not be so
pressed therewith, that thereby he be put to despair of liberty, neither so
easy or soft that he contemn or despise it. Now then, after you have somewhat
pressed him with the bridle, so as he carries his neck well, then must you by
and by ease your bridle hand, and make much of him, as soon as he shows
himself obedient unto you. Further he says, that when you shall perceive,
that the horse is delighted and has a certain pride in the raising up of his
neck, and that he is well pleased with the easing of the bridle, you must take
heed least any thing at that present be offered him, which beside may then vex
and grieve him, as though you would drive him to a perpetual pain. But then
you must win him with gentle and courteous dealing, whereby he may hope for
rest and quietness: for by that means he will be more ready and willing to
do whatsoever you will have him.

In another place he wills, How to stay a fierce and stubborn horse in
riding.
that if you will stay a fierce and stubborn horse, you may not pull him
with the bridle upon a sudden, but quietly and patiently pull it in by little
and little, whereby you may allure and entice him, and not compel him by force
to stay and stand still. Last of all he shows, that gentle (...)

This place therefore is diligently to be noted, and heedilie to be
considered, and warily to be practiced. But hitherto yet in these things,
there has been rather noted what should be done, than taught how they should
be done. And therefore in the 44. page, he does not only treat of the
matter again, but teaches also how it should be done, and says; How to make
an horse understand your meaning in actions incident to riding.
If you will know how to cause a horse not only to understand the bridle, or
to make him go back thereupon, but also that he may go in a due measure and
temper without bearing upon the hand, tenerete quest ordine, do you keep this
order: As Soon as you have stayed your horse, draw with a stayed hand the
bridle temperatlie, as his resistance, or he by defending his mouth shall
require, not giving him any liberty at all, and with the rod strike him upon
the bowing of his neck fair and gently, and so for a while provoke him with
the spur from time to time, one while with the one, and an other while with
the other: but most on that side where he most wrieth his buttocke, to the end
he may go just, with diverse other means, as in those places you may see,
until at least he draw back one of his forefeete, and doing but so much, by
and by take heed that therewith you make much of him (as I have often told you,
says Gryson) and then stay him quietly a little while, and after assaie
again to do the like, drawing only the bridle. For the horse, by reason of
the cherishing you gave him, shall understand you, and will go back both with
the one and with the other forelegge, and that very light upon the hand. How
to make an horse go as far as one would have him.
Also when you shall offer him that sign to touch him with half the rod upon
the neck, you shall with a loud voice say, Back: for he, as soon as
afterward he shall hear that manner of voice, and feel that sign of the rod,
or if you do but draw a little the bridle, he will go as far back as one
will have him, and ever when he shall be out of the due and true stay upon the
bridle, you shall still make him to do the like, that is, to go back in form
aforesaid. And to encourage all men to practice this rule, in the latter end
thereof he writes thus: Et non ^i disperate, se quando se gli insegna questo,
facesse qual che disordine, perch all vltimo tanto maggiormente si trouera in
meno spatio di un bora castigato, et vinto, et assai facile; which is to say
in English: Do you not despair, though when you teach him this, he make some
disorder; for by so much the more at the last, one shall find him in less
space than an hour, chastised and won very easily. These places thus
recited, because they be the principal places that I can find, that is, for
this purpose, to have a horse to have a perfect good mouth, by mean of the
true use of the hand: I mean, for the better keeping of them in remembrance,
breefelie to gather the whole effect of this that has been said.

Wherein first I would have one note the comparison of a bridle with the
stearne of a ship, What things the author would have noted touching the
praemisses appertaining to this Art.
which is placed in the horses mouth, and fastened to the reins that are
holden in the left hand, and likened also to the handle of the stearne, which
in his own tongue he calls Il manico del timone: and must be guided by reason
and discourse, and that all the horses motions and actions must be made to
answer thereunto. And then more particularly Gryson says, that we should make
him know the bit, with a temperate and firm hand, and that done, to bear it
upon a sweet stay, which he calls Dolce appoggio: for thereupon he will
wax very light upon the hand, and have a sweet mouth, champing the bit with
great pleasure, for that is the point wherein consists (says he) one of the
greatest matters, and greatest substance to stay the head of the horse, and
to settle it in his due place: and there in that manner, with all the
circumstances as is before mentioned, to maintain him without giving him any
liberty at all, as Gryson says, though it seem otherwise to Xenophon. And
then, how he may be taught to be brought to this, he has set down the order
very excellently and plainly.

But herein note (above all) how warily he speaks of the restraint of
liberty upon the horses, yielding to the hand. What is to be done touching
the restraint of liberty in an horse.
For there he puts in a cave at (as it were) that the staiednes or restraint
of liberty should not be such, as it should exceed the due temperature of the
hand: the true tokens of the which be; if the horse reine well; and bear his
head just, stayed, and light thereupon, and take pleasure of the bit. These
properties must join so together, as there may not want any one of them to
what action so ever the horse is put. For if there do, then is there some
imperfection, wheresoever it is. And therefore I say with Gryson again and
again, that you may not think slightlie thereof, that herein stands
cheeflie the whole substance of the Art. But now, though he has here plainly
set down how it may be obtained, yet in practicing the same, I fear we shall
be very often to seek. For it is not enough, as it seems by Gryson, that
when he does go back upon the hand lightly, and settleth his head in his due
place, and takes pleasure upon his bit, unless he do the same also upon
every other act when he shall be put thereunto. For commonly upon the stop,
or when they stand still, they will be in good order: but if you move him
forward, yea but upon the pace, he will perhaps leave plaieng with the bit, and
bear somewhat upon the hand, or thrust out his head, and so likewise upon the
trot, and more upon the gallop, but most of all upon the maine carrire. A fault
in riding, committed for want of knowledge how to maintain and continue the
hand just, firm, etc.
For how many shall you see, yea even at these days, that in passing of the
carrire holds his head in, and keeps himself in that form that is before
appointed? And this comes for want of the knowledge how to maintain and
continue the hand just and firm, with a sweet stay upon the horse (as is
before remembered) in all his actions whatsoever, so as he may take pleasure of
the bit. And therefore, how we shall maintain an horse, being once brought to
know the hand, and in this sort before mentioned, that he in all his doings,
whether they be done furiously or quietly, may keep himself in his due
form and comelines, and to take pleasure therein, is now to be considered, and
last of all of Gryson required, and has set down his opinion thereof (as you
have read.) And for my part, although I may be as far to seek as any other:
The authors long practice of certain rules appertaining to this art: as
follows.
yet for that I have preciselie practiced these rules these twenty years, I
dare be the bolder to set down, in what manner I have practiced the same, and
how much I have profited thereby, which may stand for the explanation or
interpretation of the places before promised, leaving the judgment and choice
of every one to do therein as he likes. For as I have no power to bind any
to like of mine, so I have good will to follow others, that will with reason in
like manner give me like occasion to follow them.

How these rules have been practiced by this Author.
Cap. 6.
SVch therefore as shall have desire to practice these rules, as I have done,
let them not forget this, that Xenophon and Gryson agree both, that as soon as
one is mounted on horseback, he must sit quietly there a while, especially
if he be to be taught. Xenophon shows the reason why: The inconveniences of
sudden motions procured in a horse by the rider.
for (says he) all sudden motions breed perturbations in the mind of an
horse, and whiles he is in that case, he cannot well learn. For he is not
assured of himself, nor of that which his rider would have him do, for (as we
say) he is not himself that is troubled in mind. And therefore he wills,
when the horse is first moved, that it should be done as softly and quietly
as one could devise, to what action so ever you mean to put him. And seeing
that Gryson would, that all his doings should be done upon a stayed hand, a
just, placed, and settled head, with a pleasant mouth upon the bit, which he
accompteth to be the chief point and whole substance of horssemanship.

Therefore I have been very precise in practicing the making of his mouth to
that effect, and to maintain him in the perfection thereof, the which if any
will follow, he must (after he has sitten quietly a while) first cause the
horse to go back according to the order appointed. For upon that motion he
will bring in his head, and settle himself (as is aforesaid) in every
respect: and in that order then stand still a while, and make much of him: and
in that mean while, if he continue not in the said order, then make him go a
little back again (as before.) But if he continue still in the said good
order and form, then move him fair and gently forward upon the pace, with
the calves of your legs, keeping your hand stayed, so as you neither draw it,
nor slack it, offering your body somewhat forward withal, and so go forth
right in a strait path, between two furrows, so far as Gryson does
appoint. Defaults of disorder in an horse, and howto be remedied by the rider.
If by the way he make any disorder, by thrusting out of his head, or wax
heavy upon the hand, or leave champing upon the bit, the which you must note
diligently, as soon as you perceive it, by and by stay fair and gently, and
make him go back as you did before. For in the going back he will bring
himself in his right form and order, wherein as soon as you find him, make
much of him, and move him forward forthwith fair and gently, and after this
manner use him still, till he come to the place of stop. And as he must be used
thus in going right forward, so likewise must he be used in treading of the
rings, first gently upon the pace, and so likewise upon the trot, and last of
all upon the gallop. And in the practicing hereof, you must very preciselie
note these kinds of speeches: that in making of a horse to go back, A
temperate, stayed, and firm hand required in making a horse retire or go
back: and that many professed riders miss the due use thereof.
it should be done with a temperate, a stayed, and a firm hand. But what the
temperate, stayed, and firm hand means, and how it is understood and used of
the most part that take upon them to profess this art, when they will at the
beginning make their horses go back, I know not. But you shall see them draw
the reins with a forced hand, rather than with a temperate hand, whereby they
so press the horses mouth, that they put it clean out of order, which may be
perceived either by gaping or thrusting his tongue upon the bit, to defend
himself from the same, or else over the bit, chopping his head out suddenly,
and plucking it in disdainefullie, seeking by moving his head this way and
that way, to be delivered of the said pressing: which be all signs of an
intemperate hand, inclining to violence, and contrary to nature, which to
content and please is the end of the whole art. And therefore one should
practice this rule in such sort, as the standers by should scarce perceive
whether he draws the reins therewith or no, and that in this manner.

First, A form of practicing the former rule, and what things are well to be
marked.
as soon as he is settled in the sadle (as aforesaid) let him not draw the
reins of the bridle unto him, before he have made them equal, so that one be
no longer than the other. And if it be a horse, that knows not well the bit,
then let the bit be as slack as he can, and let him settle his left hand,
wherein he holds the reins with his little finger between, under the pomell
of the saddle, as near the withers as he can, so as he touch them not, and
then with his right hand draw the reins fair and softly, and equally
together through his left hand, the which he may never remove, until he feel
that the horse begin to stay upon the bit: then let him hold the reins
there, neither slacking them, nor drawing them any further, until he do
look in what form his head stands, the which if it be not in such due form
as before is described, then let him give him his left hand again a little,
and standing so with him a pretty while, let him bring his left hand to his
former place again, whereas he found the horse to make his first stay upon
the bit, and there if he stand without making any motion either with his mouth
upon the bit, or with his head, which if you note well, you shall perceive that
he will stand therewith (as it were) doubting, or in a mammering, whether he
should put it out, or bring it in, as though he were troubled with the palsy,
which you shall scarce perceive by the motion: then draw the reins with your
right hand, through your left hand somewhat more, but let it be so little, and
in such gentle sort, as the standers by may scarce perceive it; for so must all
the motions of the hand be at that time, Motions of the riders hand, in ruling
the reins, etc.
if you will make the horse know the bit, and so keep it firm and stayed
there a pretty while: whereupon if he yield any thing (be it never so little)
unto your hand, keep your hand still at one stay, neither slacking it, nor
drawing it any further, that he may feel the ease gotten by that his
yielding, and upon his so yielding make much of him. And if with that yielding
the reins fall slack, remove not your left hand, but draw the reins with
your right hand through your left, as you did before, for they may not lie
slack until he stay again upon your hand, whereunto if he do yield by any
of those motions aforementioned, then make much of him, and so after this sort
solicit him, until you have brought his head into his due place, that is,
that his nose lie just under his forehead, neither too much out, nor too much
in, but so as he may see where he may set his feet. When you have brought him
to this, To make your horse offer to go back, with other actions.
if then he bear not light upon the hand, let his keeper or some other strike
him fair and gently upon the knees of his forelegs, for that will make him
offer to go back, and in that offering he will a little raise and bring in his
head, in the which motion the bit will move, so as both he and you shall feel
some ease thereof. But at that instant take great heed that you keep your hand
so firm, that you neither slack it, nor in any wise draw it unto you, to
the end that he may feel the ease that he found by the same motion, the which
he will not with his good will lose again, and thereupon he will take such
pleasure, as peradventure he will both stir the bit quietly in his mouth, and
go back withal likewise, either of the which motions ought diligently to be
noted, for they be tokens of the present winning of his mouth, the which once
won in this order, you shall by continuance thereof bring it to be perfect and
just.

A continuation of the matter discoursed upon in the former chapter.
Cap. 7.
But above all things you must take heed, What is to be avoided in teaching a
horse etc.
that in the present time of the teaching of him this, you vex not, nor
trouble him with any other thing, nor that in this daily exercising of him
hereunto, you suffer none other to ride him, until his mouth be made perfect,
least by feeling the diversity of hands before he be assured of any one, he
be so confused with the diversity, as he shall never be able to attain to a
certain and sure conceit of the riders meaning, and then shall he never
willingly obey unto the will and meaning of his rider, The end of the whole
art of riding is, that the horse do willingly obey his rider.
which is the end of the whole Art. And when by these means he is brought to
know the just stay of his head, and assured of the bit, then to maintain him
therein in all his doings, until he may come unto his full perfection, is
first to pace him in this form and order in rings that be large for one week
at the least: and always when you find him out of order, stay him, and make
him go back, as is before mentioned. And when he is in order, stay him not
long, but making much of him, keep your hand firm, and put him fair and
gently into his pace again; and then if he continue in his good order, with
making much of him, move him quietly to go faster upon the pace, with giving
him your body, and touching him softly with the calfes of your legs: but
neither slack nor draw your hand to you, for that is the firmnes that is
meant: and have him so, until he fall into a trot of himself, and that he
will do very light upon your hand, the which you must always keep in such
temper, as was last remembered, unless by bringing in his head, the reins fall
slack, for then they must be drawn with the right hand, as you have heard
before. What is to be done to the horse when he continues not light upon
your hand in trot.
But if he do not upon the trot continue light upon your hand, then stay him,
and cause him to go back, whereby you shall bring him in order, and that done,
put him gently into his pace again, and so bring him into his trot as before.
And though you find him in the beginning very untoward, yet within an hours
exercising of him in this gentle manner, you shall find him toward enough, as by
proof you shall perceive. Diverse ways to cherish your horse.
And then as soon as you shall find him so, cherish him with some little
tickling, or some scratching with the end of your rod, or with your fingers
upon the withers, or thereabouts in the neck, and travel him for that time
but very little more, and so leave him, and alight off from him even there,
and let him be lead home by some leading reine, rather than by the reins of
the bridle or headstall (as many use to do) and at your next riding you shall
find him better disposed; and by exercising of him thus but a fornight
together, you shall find (by experience) great good hope of your travel. And
when he will in this quiet sort pace and trot in good order, then may you put
him to trot with as much speed as you will have him, both the rings, or in any
kind of manage. When to put your horse to the gallop, and what is to be
observed in his speedy trot, and in his gallop.
But let him not gallop, until he be fully perfect upon the trot, and in his
speedy trot you must keep your seat and hand firm, so as he may not leese
his orderly and comely form before prescribed. But if you will put him to
gallop, you must do it out of the trot, as you be taught to put him into the
trot, out of the pace, and so to keep him in a quiet gallop in the large
rings, even to the stop, at the which you must not draw your hand hastily to
you, but even with a little swaie of your body back, and your hand together.
Stay your hand there till he come back a step or two, and there stay him,
and let him not go forward; and there withal if he do well, make much of him,
and let your hand with your body go to their place again. But if he offer to
go forward, then with the like swaie stay him, and so let him stand still a
pretty while, making much of him, and then alight there, and let him be lead
home, or else fair and softly pace him home from thence after you have stayed
there with him a good pretty while.

But now, if you will be assured, How to be assured whether you have the right
use and temper of the hand, and that the horse be well assured of the bit.
whether you have the right use and temper of the hand, and that the horse be
well assured of the bit, pace your horse overthwart the fallow of a new
ploughed land that is deep, and of a light mould, as fast as you can, so that
he trot not, half an hour together, and keep your hand in the firm and
temperate stay, as is before prescribed. If in this time, and in your so
doing, the horse keep his head in his due place, bear light upon your hand,
and take pleasure of the bit: you may assure your self that you have then
obtained the right knowledge of the use of the hand, wherein the chief
substance of this Art does consist. By this exercise also, To bring a horse
to a just trot is very hard.
you shall bring your horse to trot just, which Gryson thinks to be the
hardest thing to bring a horse unto, by the means of which (says he) the
horse shall come unto the perfection of all his other just doings.

But my purpose is not to treat of any other thing at this time, The Authors
purpose in this treatise.
but only of the right use of the hand, which hitherto has been treated of,
as concerning the teaching and making of a horse. And now we are to treat of
the use of the hand upon a horse already taught, and fit for the service,
wherein we have but the use of the left hand only: for the other must serve
us for our weapon whatsoever it be. But least that some may think that Gryson
and Xenophon for the use of the hand be of contrary minds (as it is somewhat
touched before) I think good before I proceed any further in this, to show
mine opinion of their difference. The contrary minds of Gryson and Xenophon
touching the use of the hand, etc.


Gryson affirms constantly, that upon the horses yielding unto the hand,
we should give him no liberty at all, and that in diverse places he affirms.
And Xenophon clean contrary says; that as soon as he brings in his head,
and boweth in the neck, you should by and by slack and ease your hand. His
words be these; The horses mouth may not be so pressed with the bit, that
thereby he be put in despair of liberty, nor yet so easily and soft that he
should contemn the same. Note well therefore the proportion of this measure:
and so he goes on and says; When you have somewhat pressed him with the
bridle, so as he carries his neck in good order, then must you by and by ease
your bridle, and make much of him as soon as he shows himself obedient unto
you. And a little after; If the horse seem to be well pleased with the easing
of your hand, and takes a pride (as it were) in raising of his neck and crest,
take heed then even at that present, least any thing do vex or grieve him;
but with gentle dealing he must be used as he may hope for rest. How the head
and neck of a horse should be placed.
In the beginning of his book he shows, how he would have the head and neck
should be placed, not rising out of the breast inclining downward, as it is in
a goat or hog; but rising upward toward the crown like a cock, somewhat
bending in the midst, so as the eye of the horse may see his own feet. This
is the sum of Xenophons opinion. Now let us see what Gryson says; to the end
we may know wherein they agree and disagree, and whether the same be in word or
meaning. For the placing of the head, and framing and fashioning of the neck
they agree, and both they would have his head so placed, as he may see where to
set his feet, and when he shows himself obedient, to be much made of. What
way is best to make a a horse understand when he does well: and how Xenophon
and Gryson differ in the manner thereof.
For the horse can no better way be made to understand when he does well,
than by ease and rest, and much making of, wherein he may take some pleasure.
But in the manner how he should be made to understand this ease and much making
of, stands the diversity. For the one would have him understand it by
slacking the hand, and the other (as it seems) would not have him have any
liberty at all. For (says he) when you have brought the head of the horse in
his due place with those signs before remembered, give him then no liberty at
all. But straitwaies he puts (as it were) a caveat: Let the staidness be
such, that it be not out of his due temperance. For thereupon he will take
great pleasure, champing the bit, and be marvelous light upon the hand, etc.
Now therefore if we consider Xenophons proportion in slacking of the hand with
Grysons restraint and caveat thereto added, we shall find that they differ
nothing in meaning, howsoever they differ in words. The opinion of Xenophon and
Gryson, seeming repugnant or different, reconciled.
For the slacking of the hand on the one side, and the straining thereof on the
other side, should be such as the horse might find ease, and take pleasure
thereof. For as there is no pleasure in ouerstraining, no more is there in
ouerslacking: and therefore he that can find the just mean betwixt these two
extremes, does happen upon the true meaning of these two excellent persons,
which (in mine opinion) differ not in meaning but in word. A reason drawn from
the art of music, for the better explaining of the authors purpose.
As we perceive in the Art of music, upon instruments with strings, if any
one string be strained or slacked more than his due measure, the pleasure of
the whole music is lost: even so, the untuned or intemperate hand does mar
the plesantnes of the horses mouth; neither can any with reason think, that
he which would have the string slacked when it is too much strained, neither
the other which would have it strained when it is too slack, that they be
contrary in meaning: seeing they both would, that the instrument should be so
tuned, as the music might yield the pleasant effect. But see (I pray you)
diligently, how nice and wary these two excellent persons be in this most
skillful point of Horssemanship, without the true knowledge of which, all the
reast in comparison is but vain.

You see, they devise no hard or sharp bits, no pricking musrolles, or
Cauezzans, or such other like instruments of violence, whereby the sense in
continuance is either made dull or dead; but rather how they may delight and
please them as nature and art requires. But this mine interpretation of this
place, and all the rest which I have used, by showing in what sort I have
practiced them, I leave to the judgment of others, and now go on with that
which was purposed, that is, to show the right use of the hand upon horses that
be already made perfect and just.

The right use of the hand upon a horse already made perfect and just.
Cap. 8.
NOw then, What is to be done when a horse is perfected according to the
Authors rules.
when a horse is thus taught and brought to perfection (as Gryson says in the
107. page) we shall not need to use the rod or any other help, but to keep
our body, hands, thighs, knees, and legs just in such sort as I have told you
before, that is which is set forth in his own book. Mutual consent of the
horse and the horsseman by what means procured.
For the horse with every little token by aid of the bridle, and of the
spur will understand your meaning: and in every act that you shall do, he
will accompany you, and you shall accompany him in time and measure, so as to
the beholders it shall appear, that he and you be one body, of one mind, and
of one will. In this point therefore, first there is to be considered, how in
the left hand the reins be placed, and how they are then to be used: for
therein most chiefly stands the whole government which Gryson likeneth to
the handle of the stearne that governs the ship: and these reins (as he
shows in the 109. page, which he wills to note, beginning at these words
Notateche) must always be placed in this manner, M. Blundeuiles rule for the
holding of the reins.
which Master Blundeuile has remembered in the tenth chapter of his first
book thus: As touching the reins, you must hold them in your left hand, so as
the little singer, and ring finger too (if you will) may always be placed
between the two reins, and the thombe close upon the reins, with the brawne
thereof turned toward the pomell of the saddle, and being thus closed together
in your fist, Gryson in the 39. page, beginning at Quando volterete, etc,
shows, how the fist must then be used, when you will turn your horse in
whatsoever kind of manage it be, after this manner: Do not (says he) remove
your arm or hand, but keep it firm and stayed right over the crest or mane
of the horse, and with a little sign or token given after a certain manner,
by turning your fist only, make him to know on whatside you would have him
turn, but yet so as your fist in any wise keep the appointed place right
over the mane, neither remoouing it of the one side, nor the other, to the end
he may go firm and just. Thus far Gryson.

Master Claudio Corte, What manner of motion of the fist M. Claudio Corte
requires of the rider, when he should turn his horse on any fide.
in the second book of his Cauallarizzo, as he intituleth it, for the placing
of the hand and the reins, agrees fully with Gryson, but is somewhat more
liberal in declaring the manner of the motion of the fist, when one should turn
him of any side. For (says he) if you will turn him on the right hand, then
bow your fist, so as your thombe may turn down toward the mane of the
horse, as thereby you may see the full back of your hand, with your little
finger uppermost. And when you will turn him on the left hand, then
contrariwise turn your fist so, as the thombe may go back from you toward the
head of the horse, and that you may see all your fingers in the inside of your
fist, so that your little finger and ring finger may appear more fully unto
you than your thombe, but yet no more nor less than need shall require; but so
as your hand remove very little from the appointed place, either of the one
side of the neck or the other, and that according to every man's skill that
uses it. But I know well (says he) that very few have the true use of it.
And here doubting (as it seems) whether his meaning should be understood in
this point, adds; M. Claudio Corte doubts that his meaning will be
understood but of a few.
And peradventure there be few that understand me (says he) though I have set
it down very plain. And so surely to doubt he had great reason. For truly
I fear that to the most part this which has hitherto been said of either of
them, will seem but a riddle, and therefore had need of further explanation.

There is no doubt, but that these excellent persons understood some grounded
reason of this precept, if it had pleased them as well to have set down the
reason as the rule: for that being known, the rule will easily be understood.
Let us endeavor our selves therefore to seek it out. The authors opinion
gathered out of the very form of Grysons and Claudios rule touching the
turning of the fist, etc.
What mine opinion is thereof, and upon the which I rest, until I have others
to persuade me otherwise, is this, which I gather out of the very form of the
said rule, and that is of the placing of the hand and reins, and of the motion
of the fist, as you have read before, as the hand not to remove from the crest
of the horse, the little finger and the ring finger (if your will) be placed
between the reins, etc. Gryson bids us turn our fist after a certain
manner, but shows not how. Claudio goes further, and shows how one should
turn his fist, but no cause why he should so turn it: and therefore (in
mine opinion) to make it plain, this I add unto it, and would have all men
note, that when I find the fingers thus placed between the reins, and find
also that the left reine lies close, and remains in the inside of the
fingers, and the right reine upon the outside of those fingers, this being well
noted, you shall straight see the reason, why or to what end that motion of
the fist that Claudio does show, tends unto. For (says he) when you will
turn the horse on the right hand, turn your fist so as your thombe may go
downward to the horses mane, that your little finger may rise up, on the
outside of the which the right reine lies, and by the reason of that motion is
raised up, and the left falls, By what accustomed signs the horse knows
when his rider would have him turn on the right side and when on the left.
and therewith the horse feels the right reine straighted, and the left
slacked, which he knows by custom to be the sign to have him turn on the
right side. And so likewise when you would have him turn on the left hand, he
turns his fist so, that his thombe goes back toward the neck of the
horse, as he may see all his fingers in the inside of his hand. By the which
motion he raises the left reine, which is in the inside of his hand, and the
right also falls, with the which the horse feeling himself never so little
streined on the left side, knows by that sign, that he should turn on the
left side.

Now whether that this be the form and manner of turning of the hand that
Gryson means, I know not, but in effect certeinelie they mean all one, as I
gather by Gryson in the 69. page, where he teaches how one should correct a
horse with the bit, that holds his neck awrie, beginning thus, Oude
similmente, etc. If (says Gryson) he hold it awrie on the left side, hold your
bridle in the woonted place, that is right over the crest, and take the right
reine up with the forefinger of the bridle hand, the which reine you shall hold
between the said finger and your thombe, and if you see cause, you may join
your middle finger therewith also. But if it be too plieng on the right side,
and stiff on the left, then hold not only the little finger in his due
place, between both the reins, but also the ring finger and middlemost too,
so as on what side soever his fault be, by this means you shall force him by
little and little, to yield unto that part of the neck that is stiff. What he
means by using the reins in this manner, for the correction of this fault,
every child may conceive the reason. And hereupon I gather, How to signify on
which side the rider would have his horse to turn.
that in what manner so ever he moves his hand, to signify on which side he
would have the horse to turn, it is by staieng the reine on that side, and
slacking it on the other, as I have showed before. And therefore (for mine own
part) I use in practicing thereof, to take part with them both, so far forth
as I find it most handsome for my hand, as thus. When I turn him on the left
hand, I use Claudio his motion, to bow my fist so as my thombe may go backward
toward the horses head, whereby I raise the left reine that lies in the
inside of my little finger, by raising that part of my hand wherein that reine
lies: and when I turn him on the right side, then I take up the right reine
with my forefinger (as Gryson teaches in the place before recited, though it
perteine not properly to this) and leave the turning of my fist as Claudio
teaches with my thombe down, and my little finger uppermost, on the outside
whereof the right reine lies, which I find oftentimes to slip from the place,
but so I am sure the other way, if I take it with my forefinger or middle
finger it cannot, and so unto me I find it more handsome. But yet I leave both
these or any other to every person to use, as he finds it most fittest for
him: so that they swerve not from these natural grounds, that the hand keep
his appointed place, and that the motion thereof be such, as when one does
turn a horse on any side, he should stay or strain him with the reine on
that side.

And the lack of the knowledge in this point is the cause that makes our
horses forsake the tilt oftentimes: The cause whi horses do oftentimes
forsake the tilt.
for it is well near a common thing, that when a horse does pass along the
tilt, to see him carry his head rather from, than toward the same. The reason
is, because he that passes him, draws his bridle hand toward the tilt,
thinking thereby to cause the horse to yield his head and body toward the
same, and does not perceive, how by that motion of the hand, he streineth the
right reine which is on the right side of the horse, that is from the tilt,
and slacketh the left reine next unto the tilt, so as the horse cannot for his
life keep his head toward the same. And thus have I made this matter as
plain as my skill or wit will serve, and as I have conceived it in mine
opinion, the which I leave to the judgment of others. And heerewithall yet one
may see now how plain it is, when the reason is added to the rule. What the
Author once purposed touching the books of Gryson and Xenophon treating of the
Art of riding.
And in this manner was I once minded to have gone through the whole book of
Gryson with very short notes, and to have added thereunto Xenophons book of
the Art of riding. But now I mean to stay, and expect what will be the
judgment of this my first labor, and how it will be allowed among the
skillful sort of them that profess this Art, to whose reasonable correction
and favorable interpretation this work does offer it self.

The commodities that may be found by the using of the hand in this manner, in
practicing of Gryson his rules and his order of teaching, be these.
Cap. 9.
FIrst, Particular commodities possible to be attained by practicing the rules
and order set down by Gryson.
you shall never put your horse in danger of wind and limme, or other
deformity of his body: in which if nature has made any default, it may
greatly be helped thereby.

Next, your horse shall never put your person in peril by rearing or running
away, if you have the said true use of the hand.

Again, he shall never grieve his rider with heavy bearing upon his hand: but
shall bear light, reine well, and keep his head steddie, and have a perfect
mouth, taking pleasure upon the bit, with a cheerful pace under him, unless
he be too too dull of nature.

Moreover, to bring these things to pass, you shall not need to bestow your
money upon Cauezzans, chains, musrolles, or martingales, or any such
instruments, but of a cannon bit only with false reins, until he come to
some towardnes, and then to bit him, as ye shall see cause.

For these things aforesaid were devised by men of art, To what end, Cauezzan^,
chains, musrolles, etc. were devised.
not for their own use, but for to train up young beginners, and to bring
them thereby to the knowledge of the hand, their seat, and when, and how they
should aid an horse, cherish and correct him before they would trust them to
ride him with the bit only. And so Gryson affirms, Che il caualiero fondato
in buona doctrina senza di cio lo togliera non solo di questo ma d'ogn' altro
vitio, that is, That the rider grounded in the right order of teaching without
it (meaning the Cauezzan, or such like instruments) shall take away not only
this fault (treating in that place of the fault which the horse commits
when he holds his head awrie) from him, but also every other whatsoever.

Finally, by this you shall know, to whom you may commit your horse safely
and assuredly to be taught, thereby to have him in all his assaies to serve
your turn, and of whom you may be assured to find the contrary. For he that
has an horse, which by nature bears heavy upon the hand (whereof there be
but few if there be any at all) or be brought thereto for lack of skill in
the rider (of which there be too many) and suffers such an horse to go out
of his hand vnrecouered of the said fault, so as the horse do not all his
actions upon a light and stayed hand, with pleasure and comelines, and that
with a cannon bit only (as is aforesaid) he is not to be trusted with a
horse of any value. Note without the knowledge of what point in the Art of
riding all the rest in comparison is but vain.
For without the knowledge of this point of riding, all the rest in comparison
is but vain. Neither shall any man ever be able without it to bring a horse
to that lustines of courage, and comeliness of shape, that Xenophon requires
in all his doings, which he himself does represent and express, when he
would appear most beautiful. But he that can (says he) bring that to pass,
shall cause not only the rider, but also the horse to take great pleasure in
the riding, so as therein he shall appear very noble, terrible, and
beautiful to behold; yea, and so delight the eyes of the beholders, with
maruelling thereat, that neither young nor old will be willing to depart so
long as he is a riding. Thus says Xenophon. The Author concludes this
treatise with Gryson.
Therefore with the last sentence of Grysons book, I conclude thus: Questa e
quell'arte laqual si segne da molti, and e tanta la difficolta, che un solo
sara colui che al fui compitamente arriuera al suo vero segno.

FINIS.
This discourse following of the Chain or Cauezzan, and likewise of the Trench
and Martingale, is not the Authors work, but the experience of another
Gentleman very skillful and long practiced in the same Art, which he has
briefly written at the request of his inward friend.
THe chain or Cauezzan, How the Cauezzan is to be carried in the riders hands.
when a horse is come to were a cannon, would be carried in both hands in such
sort, as the rider may always have power to command his horse. And therefore
you are to carry the chain (at the first) lower than the pomell of the saddle,
even, and somewhat short: for so shall you be ever ready to help your horse
upon any occasion. But beware, that you do not hale, or hang upon the chain
continually with a hard and cruel hand, for thereby you may make your horse
so dull thereof, as he will not care for it. Wherefore (in mine opinion) to
make a horse understand and know the chain, and to be light thereof, it were
not amiss, to trot him out in some fair piece of ground, where you may have
room enough to trot and stop at your will, and there trot your horse right
out, a good long carrires length, and in his trot, carry the reins of the
chain in your hands (as aforesaid) ever regarding your horses head, that he
carry the same just, and in a good place, not more of the oneside than of the
other, and high enough at the first, though he carry his nose out. But in any
wise do not suffer him to sink with his head, or carry it downwards: A foul
fault in the horse to sink with his head, etc: and no less in the rider to
suffer it.
for besides that it is a foul fault in the horse to do it, it is no less
in the rider to suffer it, if small and gentle helps and corrections may
reform it: for (at the first) extreme corrections are not (in any wise) to
be used, for they will do more harm than good.

Therefore, let your hand upon the reine of the chain be ever ready, as you
be trotting your horse to the place of stop, to give him a little nippe or
warning patiently, and at the same instant, put him forwards with your legs or
voice gently, shaking your rod withal, to the end he may go frankly under
you, keeping the reine of the chain still at one stay, unless you find in your
discretion, he deserve to have some liberty, and so suffer him alwai^es to go
forwards at his own ease: but take heed, that the gripes and pinches, which
you give your horse with the chain, make him not fearful to go forwards, or
to offer to stop, before you come to the place where you intend to have him
stop. Wherefore as you shall keep your chain in one place, and at one stay
for a convenient time (as aforesaid) until he wax humble thereof, that by his
yielding he may win his own ease, and keep his head where you would have
it: so must you carry it with so temperate a hand, as you may rather seem to
threaten with the chain, than to punish, that the horse be not made hard
thereof, neither so slack, as he may contemn, or not care for the same.

For avoiding whereof, A remedy for avoiding of the former fault.
you must ever take heed, to keep him sensible upon the chain, and light
withal, so as by your discreet using thereof, he may know and understand
your meaning, which through your diligence he will do in short time, if in
trotting him, you observe the manner aforesaid: and coming to the place of
stop, pull in the reins of the chain and bridle, but not cruelly, nor upon
the sudden, but by a little forewarning of him, and presently with a more
force, make his stop good, by pulling in your hands, and keeping them at one
stay, putting forwards your legs a little, and bearing your body somewhat
backward, until he has made his stop (which would not be short) and, after a
little pawse or stay, retired thereupon with obedience (if there be cause to
retire him) which when you perceive, keep your left hand upon the bridle
steddie, and make much of him with your right hand, wherein you carry the
chain, and so pace him after his stop, in a large compass at the first, once
or twice about, upon the right hand, and so back again gently, to the place
from whence you came, keeping your hand upon the chain steddie, and then trot
him to the place of stop, in the same manner as you did before (for it is good
to use him for a time to one place of stop) still having an eye to his head,
that he carry it in the same place that you would have him: which you shall
make him do, by keeping your hand short upon the chain, and yet light
withal, so as he look for smart, if he offer to carry his head otherwise than
you would have him.

Also, What is to be done if the horse in trotting carry not his body
straight.
if your horse carry not his body straight in his trotting, but more on the
one side, than on the other: then observe Grysons rule, set down in the fourth
chapter of his second book of the Art of riding, where he wills, that if
your horse stop wrong, you make him go two or three yardes further in the same
path, and there stop him, holding the reine of the chain streighter on that
side, whereon he most forces your hand, than on the other. What is to be
gathered upon Grysons words.
So we may gather by this, that Gryson would wish (at the first) we should
forbear to reform our horse, either with heel or rod, when he stops
awrie, and help him with the chain in this manner, as for example: If your
horse in his trotting, will not go straight, but carry his head toward the
left side, and his buttockes toward the right, then by pulling the reine of
the chain on the right side, you shall make him yield his buttockes the
contrary way, and go straight, if you carry such a temperate hand upon the
chain, as the horse may be made obedient thereto with a fresh and sensible
feeling thereof. And seeing that you must use the chain for the making of your
horse just both of head and body, you ought to have this consideration, that
your horse with great extremity be not (in any wise) made hard or dull
thereof, as is aforesaid.

Wherefore it were good sometimes to carry your horse upon the cannon only,
and ease him upon the chain, taking heed of giving him too much liberty
either of chain or cannon, other than by his humility and submission he shall
get of himself, for you shall seldom give a horse any liberty, but he will
seek more.

Therefore as you have consideration of the chain, The nature and disposition
of a horse is discreetlie to be considered of the rider: note the horses of
Sardinia and Corsica.
so must you be well advised of the nature and disposition of your horse. For
Gryson says, that the horses of Sardinia and Corsica are of a fierce and hot
chollerike complexion, and therefore those horses and such like, would be
discretlie and patiently ridden; as a horse of a dull and slow metal would
be frankly ridden with good life and spirit: and to such a horse (as is
fiery) there would be little correction used either with spur or rod. For I
hold it better, that the rider by his discreet and skillful foresight, should
keep his horse from error, than correct him when he has made a fault. For
all corrections are unpleasant to a horse, yet sometime to be used: but then
the rider must have a judgment to discern, whence the cause of his error
proceeds; whether it comes of the malice and evil disposition of the
horse, or for that he knows not the riders mind, or (at his first breaking)
has been evil taught and handled, with such other like.

And having respect to these things, you may the better use your discretion, so
you take time, with a moderate patience: Folly of ignorant riders in
correcting their horses.
I say a moderate patience, because I have seen some horses ridden without
all order, so long, and with such extremity of spurs and rod, and for want of
breath together, that they have committed foul faults; for which faults they
have (even at that present) by the rider been cruelly tormented. Which is none
other thing, than to ride a horse without discretion, and after beat him
without reason. So, he that finds faults in his horse, and thinks to
reform him at once by the violence of his correction, does none other, than
make one fault to be yet many: where, if he would use patience, take time, and
do it by little and little, he should perform more in one week, than
otherwise in a month.

So, mine opinion is, that our first care ought to be, that it be well, just,
and in good order that we do: and afterward to travel, that it be frankly,
nimbly, and with good spirit and courage, both in the man and horse,
whatsoever they shall do. And it shall not be amiss (by the way) to advise
you, Note, as touching a horse, before he carry light of the hand, and be just
and steddie of head and body, etc.
that before your horse carry light of the hand, and be just and steddie of
head and body, both in his trot and gallop, and in all his other doings, so as
he be both ready on the ground, and serviceable, you do not once put him to
any thing above the ground. For when he is made firm and just upon the
ground, you shall not so soon proffer him any thing above the ground, but he
will very aptly, and readily learn the fame; aduising you likewise, unless
you have many horses, and of them find some one (above the rest) that is
light and nimble, and apt for such exercise above the ground, that you should
never put your horse to any other doings than on the ground (as is before
mentioned) for many respects: which by experience you shall find very
profitable, and were here superfluous to trouble you withal: because (in
truth) in this discourse, I have but only sought to give you a taste of my own
experience therein, to satisfy his request, who may command me. Wishing, that
either time had served me, to have written more amply thereof, or that some
other, more able than my self, may take encouragement hereby, to set it forth
hereafter more exactlie.

The trench and martingale are not always to be used, nor yet with every
horse, When, how, in what cases, and with what horses the trench and
martingale are to be used.
but for reformation of some fault or vice, that either by nature, or otherwise
by evil custom is grown in him, as principally, if he be hard of the chain
and cannon, and humble not himself to your hand in his stop, as you would have
him. Then put on the trench and martingale, which (at the first) should not be
buckled too short in any wise, neither would the trench be used with any
extremity or cruelty, but at the first, for six or seven days your horse
used very courteously therewith, until he be well acquainted with the same:
and then according to your own discretion, and as your horses disobedience
shall move you, use the same more or less in his ordinary lessons. And when
those faults be reformed, for which you did use the trench and martingale, and
your horse brought to such perfection therewith, as you may think he is made
obedient, try him again with the chain and cannon temperatelie and
discreetlie. And then if you find him inclined or disposed to the same fault
still, for which you used the trench and martingale, leave off only the chain
again, and use this help: Put a musroll upon your horse, and buckle the same
as you see cause, not too straight, but so as the horse may have liberty to
play on the cannon, and put a pair of false reins to the cannon, and so ride
him, unless you do see your horse disposed to be vnsteddie with his head:
for which fault, you may then buckle a martingale to the musroll, to keep him
steddie, taking heed you buckle it not too short, and exercise him diligently
in his ordinary lessons in that sort; which by your good and discreet
handling will serve to as good purpose for a time, as if you did use any of
the other before mentioned, carieng the false reins in both your hands, to the
end you may let him take pleasure upon the cannon: and sometimes (as occasion
shall serve) carry him on the ordinary reins, and other sometimes on the
false reins: and all is but to the end to make him go light of your hand, and
take pleasure of the cannon. A chief and principal point of horssemanship.
For it is a chief and principal point of horssemanship to make your horse
always carry light on the hand.

Also on the other side, when you use the trench and martingale, if your horse
be made too humble or slack upon your hand (as sometimes horses will be with the
sharpness and cruelty of the trench and hardness of the musroll) so as you
cannot make him firm to your hand, you may put on a smooth trench, and more
gentle musroll, and embolden him therewith, making him go forwards with all
gentleness upon the trench: A caveat for the avoiding of extremity in
correcting a horse.
but beware that in your exercising of him you use no extremity with your rod
or spurs; for it will rather put fury into him than embolden him. Of which
fault though I often admonish you in this discourse, let it not seem strange:
for (in mine opinion) that Horsseman which neglects to use temperance, and to
minister his correction with judgment and patience, or omitteth likewise to
cherrish his horse upon his weldoing, shall mar more horses, than he shall
make ready or serviceable.

FINIS.

