English royal blazon
By the King.
A Proclamation to restrain the unlawful transportation of Hides and Leather.
THe Kings most Excellent MAJESTY, taking knowledge of the great scarcity and
extraordinary dearness of Leather, lately grown within this Realm, and
enquiring into the causes thereof, has discovered, that, although there has
been lately a greater number of raw Hides, by reason of the extraordinary
provisions for the Navy, then in former years; yet the Markets have not been
served with Hides, as they were wont to be, but the raw Hydes are secretly, and
by stealth, conveyed beyond the Seas. And His Majesty has also been
informed, That under color of a Liberty given heretofore, for conueying of
Hydes and Leather from the Port of London unto Hull, for service of the
Northern parts, there have been lately great quantities carried away, which
never arrived at the Port of Hull, but are conveyed into Scotland, or other
Foreign parts. And further, that there being no Prohibition already, for the
carrying of Hydes and Leather over Land into Scotland, great quantities are
conveyed that way, especially by the City of Carlisle. And also, that there are
many and great Ingrossers of Leather in the City of London; By which means the
prices are kept high, and much Leather is cut out for Boots and Shoes, and is
packed up closely, and so transported into France the Low Countries, and other
foreign places, under color of other Merchandise. And further, That under
color of Calue-skins, permitted to be transported by License, great number of
Skins of greater growth, are conveyed, which would be serviceable for making
of Boots and Shoes, and other uses. And that to color these great abuses,
(which are so generally prejudicial to all sorts of people) either the
offenders themselves, or some other ill disposed persons, do falsely publish,
that there have been Licenses given by His Majesty, contrary to the Laws, to
transport great quantities of Leather, and raw Hydes, where, in truth, no such
License has been granted to any, nor so much as thought upon to be granted.
All which, being made known to His Majesty, His Highness, out of His Princely
care and providence, for the general good of His people, has thought fit (by
the advice of His Privy Counsel) to publish and declare, And does hereby
publish and declare His Royal Pleasure and Commandment, concerning the
Premises, in manner following.

That from henceforth no person whatsoever, either natural borne Subject,
Denizen, or stranger, do presume to export out of this Kingdom, any raw
Hydes, or any Leather, either into any Foreign parts beyond the Seas, or into
Scotland, by color of carrying Calue-skins, or otherwise.

And for the better prevention of the like abuses hereafter, (which otherwise
cannot possibly be prevented) His Majesty does further straightly charge and
command, That no person, under color of carrying or conueying of Hydes or
Leather, from one part of this Kingdom to another, do carry the same by
Water, or put the same into any Ship, Barge, Boat, or other Vessel, to carry
the same by Water.

And further, that no Shoemaker, Currier, or other Artificer, do buy any
Leather, but such only as he shall convert into made Wares, and shall not be
in any sort a factor or agent, to buy any leather for any Merchant or other
person, who shall after transport the same into any parts beyond the Seas, or
into the Realm of Scotland. And that they, nor any of them, be any Ingrosser
of hides or leather, whereby, or by means or occasion whereof, the prices of
hides or leather may be enhaunced, or the Markets be unfurnished or vnstored.
All which his Majesty does straightly charge and Command, to be duly observed
by all sorts of people, in their several places and degrees, upon pain, not
only to incur the uttermost penalties and punishments, which by the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, may be inflicted upon the offenders, but also upon
further pain of his Majesty's high displeasure, and such further punishment as
by his Majesty's Prerogative Royal, or by the seuerest Censure of the Court of
Star Chamber can be imposed upon them, for so great a contempt.

And to the end, that all others may take heed how they do hereafter either
of malice or rashness, publish such false and fained rumoures, tending so much
to the slander of his Majesty's government, His Majesty does hereby straightly
admonish and Command, that no person presume to publish or report such false
rumors, in this or in any thing of the like kind. And to the intent, that
such as are willing to take pains to discover the offenders and offenses
aforesaid, either already committed, or hereafter to be committed in any kind
concerning the premises, for the general good of the Common wealth, may have
fit encouragement and recompense, His Majesty does hereby promise and
undertake, That whosoever shall first discover to the Lord Treasurer of
England, or Barons of the Exchequer, any of the said offenders or offenses,
either in conueying away of any hides or leather, or engrossing the same, or in
being the instruments or assistants thereunto, or in raising or publishing such
false rumors or reports, as aforesaid, whereby the offenders shall or may be
brought to receive due punishment for such their offenses, that every person
which shall so first discover the same (besides such part of the fines and
forfeitures as by Law shall belong unto him) shall have a liberal reward from
his Majesty, out of such part of the offenders fines or forfeitures which
shall accrue to his Majesty, at the good discretion of the Lord Treasurer of
England, or Barons of the Exchequer, for the time being.

Given at His Majesty's Court at White Hall, the 14. day of December, in the
second year of his Majesty's Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXVI.


