C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
An Abstract of his Majesty Letters Patents, Granted unto Thomas Symcocke.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been graciously pleased, by
his Highness Letters Patents, bearing date the 20. day of August, 1628. to
Craunt unto Thomas Symcocke, his Assigns and Deputies for the Term of One and
Thirty years, full and sole power and Privilege, to Imprint, Impresse, Role
stamp, work, publish, utter, sell, distribute and disperse, within his
Majesty's Realm of England, and the Dominion of Wales, all Briefes for
Collections. and other things whatsoever upon one side only, of one or more
sheet or sheets of paper, Skin or skins of parchment or any part thereof,
as by the said Letters Patent more at large may appear.

His Maiestic by the said Leters Patents has also prohibited all manner of
persons whomsoever (other then the said Thomas Symcocke his Executors,
Administrators. Deputses and Assigns) to Imprint, or Impresse, Role, stamp,
or work, or to utter, sell distribute, publish abroad or disperse within
England and Wales, any of the things granted, upon pain of Forfeiture of
allsuch matters and things, as they shall Imprint, Role, stamp or work, or
shall utter, sell, distribute, publish abroad, or disperse, contrary to the
said Inhibition: the same be seized upon and taken by the said Toom is
Symcocke, his Executors, Administrators, Deputies, Factors, or Assigns, to and
for their only use and v^^^ and upon other pains and penalties, in the said
Letters patents expressed.

And also has further inhibited all manner of persons during the said Term,
from bringing or importing into the said Realm of England, or Dominion of
Wales, or any other his Majesty's Dominions, or any other the parts beyond the
Seas any of the things granted, or to put the same or any part thereof so
Transported (as aforesaid) to sale, or to bevttered, published or dispersed
within the said Realm of England or Dominion of Wales, upon pain of
Forfeiture for every such offense, to the use of his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, the sum of Forty shillings, over and besides the said things
imported or put to sale (as aforesaid) contrary to the said Letters Patents.

And also his Majesty has farther by the said Letters Patents, charged and
commanded all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Bayliffes, Constables,
and all other Officers, Miarsters, and Subjects whatsoever. and also the
Master, Keepers, Wardens, and Commonaltie of the Art and mysteric of Stationers
of the City of London, that they and every of them shall at all times, during
the said Term (being thereunto required) be ayding and assisting unto the said
Thomas Symcocke, his Executors, Ad ninistrators, Deputies, Factors, and
Assigns, in the viewing, searching, finding out, seazing and taking away of
all such matters and things, as shall be Imprinted, roled, stamped, worought,
published or done, or be uttered, sold or imported, into any part of the said
Dominions (as aforesaid) contrary to the meaning of the said Letters Patents.

And also to be ayding and assisting as aforesaid, in the taking, seasing,
carrying away, Defacing and making unserviceable, of all such Printing-presses,
Roling presses, Stamps, and other Instruments or things whatsoener, which shall
be found to be v^ed in or about the Imprinting, Roling, stamping, working, or
doing of any the things granted, contrary to the true meaning of the said
Letters Patents and Decree in the Star chamber concerning Printing, by which
Decree all Persons are prohibited to Print contrary to any Letters Pattents,
granted or to be granted upon such penalties and forfeitures as in the said
Decree is expressed.

And has also inhibited, that no peason do presume to Imprint, Work, Role,
Stamp upon both sides of the Paper or Parchment, or utter, sell or dispose of
any of the things granted, which has not heretofore been usually Printed upon
both sides of Paper or Parchment, or to use any other fraud or sinister
practice whatsoever, tending to the hinderance or preindice of the said Thomas
Symcocke, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, concerning the things
granted, upon pain of Forfeiture of the same.

The things belonging to this Grant, viz.
All Briefes for Collections. All Publications, concerning any Letters Patents.
Indentures for Apprentises, Water-workes, Drayning of Lands, and other things.
All Bonds and Recognizances for Victualers, Alehouse-keepers and other.
Lycences to Collect or gather by. Lycences for Victuallers. Lycences for
selling of Wines. Lycences for Marriages, and all other Lycences. All Bonds,
Bills and Acquittances for payments, or Receites of Money. Articles concerning
the Visitatition of Bishops, Archdeacons, or their Officials. Bills for teaching
of Scholars. Bills concerning Physicians, Chyrurgions, or others. All Bills for
Plays, Challenges, Prises, Sports, or shows whatsoever All Epitaphes,
Inscriptions, or other Copies, either in Prose or verse. All Portratures and
Pictures whatsoever. Ballads. And all other Copies, Chartes, and things
whatsoever, viz. Bills of Lading. Mappes. Parriters Bills. Writs and Warranrs for
Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace. Sickness Bills. Bills for the Court of
Conscience. And all other Chartes, Copies and things, by what Name or Title
soever they are called or known, to be Imprinted, Roled, Stamped or done upon
the one side of Paper or Parchment, or any part thereof, in Secretary hand, or
otherwise.
And if any shall have occasion to use the premises, let them repair to the
House of Master Hardwicke, at the Sign of the Maiden Head, next unto the
Green-Dragon Tavern on the South side of S. Paul's, where they shall be
reasonably dealt with for the same.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Symcocke Cum Priuilegio. 1628.

God save the King.

