DIEV ET MON DROIT.
HONI (...) Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation touching the Sealing of Tobacco.
WHereas We (by the advice of Our Commissioners for Our Revenue) have resolved
to import a quantity of Spanish Tobacco (not exceeding fifty thousand weight in
any one year) and utterly to prohibit the importation of any other foreign
Tobacco, which is not of the growth of Our own Plantations, and to prohibit
also the planting of all Tobacco within these Our Realms of England and
Ireland, and Islands there to belonging or adjacent, As by Our Proclamation,
dated the seventeenth day of February last (for the reasons therein expressed)
it does at large appear: Now, because We are informed, that it will much
conduce to Our Service, and the settling of that business, for the preventing
of the stealing in of all foreign Tobacco, and discovery of the offenders,
and for the clearing of all others, who are not offenders, from future trouble,
that all the Tobacco of the growth of Our plantations already imported, shall be
sealed by Our Commissioners to that purpose appointed, as well as that which
shall be hereafter imported, in such sort as by our said Proclamation is already
directed, That so the Tobacco of Our Plantations may be distinguished from the
foreign Tobacco, and the Tobacco planted within these Our Realms, which are
prohibited: Our will and command therefore is, and we do hereby declare and
publish Our Royal pleasure to be, That Our said Commissioners appointed by Us
for this Service, shall with all convenient speed, Seal all the Tobacco of the
growth of Our said Plantations already imported in such sort, as they are
directed to Seal that which shall be hereafter imported.

And if any person whatsoever, having any such Tobacco, of the growth of Our
said Plantations, or any of them, which shall refuse to have the same Sealed,
or which shall not offer the same to be Sealed, as aforesaid, and the same
shall hereafter, at any time after one month, from the date hereof, be
discovered, that the same shall be taken and reputed for foreign Tobacco, or
for Tobacco of the growth of these Our Realms, which has been prohibited, and
which they durst not auow the keeping of, and as such Prohibited Tobacco shall
be taken, and seized as other prohibited Tobacco, according to the Tenor and
true meaning of Our said former Proclamation, whereof We will, that every
person, whom it may concern, do take notice at their peril.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the thirtieth day of March, in the third
year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent MAJESTY. M. DC. XXVII.


