THE COPY OF A DOUBLE LETTER SENT BY AN ENGLISH GENtilman from beyond the
seas, to his friend in London, containing the true aduises of the cause, and
manner of the death, of one Richard Atkins, executed by FIRE in Rome, the
second of August 1581.

THE COPY OF A DOUBLE LETTER SENT BY AN ENGLISH GENTILMAN from beyond the
seas, to his friend in London, co^taining the true aduises of the cause, and
manner of the death, of one Richard Atkins, executed by FIRE in Rome, the second
of August 1581.
GOOD SIR, I thank you heartily for the two printed papers of master Euerard
Hanses execution, both which, though penned by his adversaries, and in some
points not agreeing together, yet give sufficient testimony and knowledge to
the indifferent reader of the true causes, matter, and manner, of his death,
neither the simplicity of the former reporter, nor the suttletie of the
second, much darkening the light and truth thereof in any wisemans sense,
though they both, and specially the latter, as all such as had to do with the
party, either in judgment or other wise, unjustly seek, after their manner,
by crafty question and collection, and by racking his speeches against equity
and his own interpretation, to enforce the case to statute and treason, rather
then to matter of faith and religion, for which only, and not for any other
disloialtie to his prince, the world well wotteth, the innocent man suffered.
Therefore I marvel not that the faithful there among you should with so great
diligence and devotion as you write, gather up such pieces of his body, or
garments, as they could without danger come by, for that was the manner of the
first and best Christians toward the Martyrs of their time, which caused
their adversaries, to throw their bones, and ashes into the sea, or other wise
to desace them, Eusebius. hist. li. 4 ca. 14. Sozom. li. 5. cap. 7. For my part, I
thank you unfeignedly for his tooth which came safely to my hands about ten
days after the said books and your frind arrived. Much they make of the
matter in these parts I assure you, not English only, but strangers most of
all, being so enamoured of the thing, that I shall have inoughe a do to keep
it for your sake as you desire me: some, at the sight thereof, that were lately
his familiares and equals, with godly emulatio^ in a sort envying his
incomparable preferment before them, and wondering at his so speedy felicity,
many bewayling our contries calamity that so often makes Martyrs, other
glorifying god, that by his grace it breeds men fit to be Martyrs, one in
Religious mirth saying, that they which had destroyed the old memories would
now make us new: my self most admiring in the matter gods inscrutable choice
in the gifts of his graces to one rather then another, promoting almost in a
momente this poor, plain, humble man, knowing nothing but Christ and the
duties of his priesthod, to that dignity, which diverse greater Clerks of the
same faith there among you after all their disputes and some years travail,
can not yet attain unto. Into these cogitations your new relike induces us
now and then, of the leaping of his heart you talk of, whether it were natural
or miraculous: no great matter, for we need no miracles to try Martyrs. I
promise you I pray not for him, following the known rule of S. Augustine hat we
should not pray for such, but rather sesire them to pray for me. tract. 9. in
Joan. But now to requite your courtesy eue^ in the same kind (though in the
men and the matter there be great difference) I send you the copy of a letter
lately written hither from Rome, containing the true causes, circumstances, and
manner of the execution, of a certain frantike or (...) possessed person, done
in that City within two or three days, of Master Hanses suffering in London
by which you shall plainly be (...) into what desperate miseries and fantasies,
(...) may fall, that has forsaken the Catho^^^ Church: and therefore is
forsaken of Christ's spirit and protection, and given up to the Diuils drift and
all deception of error, and eftso^es see the great difference betwixt the
constant patience of true Confessors, and the peruers obstinacy of heretics
in all ages by Satan's subornatio^ falsely imitating the same. To omit therefore
other words of common courtesy in the beginning of my frindes letter, the
sooner to come to the narration, thus it is written by one that I know will not
for all the world wittingly report of the man an untruth, and was present at
the whole action, and if need be, can justify every word by the records and
publi^cke acts of the Courts in which the matter passed.

BUT now Sir (says he) for news I can A Copy of the letter from Rome.
not forbear to imparte unto you the pitiful story of the impious fact
lately committed here by a Contreiman of ours and the condign punishment that
he suffered for the same, and other his damnable purposes and opinions, the
which I will tell you more partieularly, for that the report thereof may come
unto you as it commonly happith by same and far carriage much altered and
corrupted, the matter being even here in the City diversely of diucts men told,
either of ignorance or ill meaning, and the rigor of the Justice toward the
fellow compted of some also of our Country that come hither of bone viages very
extreme, (...) dare say the like propositions of infidelit (...) England, where
heresies be otherewise much priuileged, should yet at this day be ^^nished by
fire, of late years certain Douchmen being burned in London for sarre less
matters and no Englishman in all this Popes time, not his predecessors ever
touched for the protestant vulgar errors only, though great number both of
Gentilmen, Marchantes and Mariners have been in the inquisitio^ for the same:
where they all found as them selves will confess, passing extraordinary
courtesy and so small rigor, that a good fellow of our nation not many
months sithence, lacking means to live, accused him self of heresy, and put
him self so into the inquisition, that there at lest for a season he might have
his finding, till God sent better fortune. Where, if the reports be true that
comes out of England hither, the imprisonned for the Catholic faith there,
are often in great danger of staruing, through the fear the protestants put
their charitable relieuers in, for their almeses bestowed upon them: but to the
matter.

ABOUT two months since, there came to this City, one Richard Atkins borne or
dwelling latly in a town named Rosse, four miles from Chepstow, one that
perchance you have heard of before, for he had been whipped openly and either
thrust into Bridewell or Bedlem in London for certain lewd speeches against
the Queen, and had suffered death as is thought, had he not been deemed a mad
man. He was of no great years, of a mean stature, an alborne buss he, and
readiss he bearde, by occupation a nailer, or a nailesmithe, wherewith his
hands were as hard and dried as might be, altogether unlettered, saving, that
he could write his own name, which it seemed he learned very lately, he did it
so slowly and so rudely, and read a little English, specially of the book
which he was acquainted withal. which was a little new testament turned out of
Beza his latin, into our tongue. For his religion he said that till he was xix
years old he was a Catholic or papist, for he used the terms indifferently,
after that xix years a protestant, after the English use, and now at last
three years, of this forther faith: some points whereof you shall hear
anon. The mad fellow made him self as a prophet, and partly for show thereof,
put himself into strange and figurative attire. Next his body he had a ragged
woollen garment, then a dublet and breeches of hard bourned rude lether, above
that a leuse wede of a calves skin like to a Cassock, or rather like a
scapuler of the religious, reaching no farther then his midback behynd, and his
nauill before, having the figure of a pair of gallows sowde fast upon the
same in read clothe both on the back and the breast, as well for signification
that he sought to be persecuted for the gospel, as for prophecy, that he
should die upon the gallows for his faith. Above all this furniture he had a
side beggars cloak of very course stuff as a man should see. So that for this
apparel only he was much gazed at in every corner. And in that sort he went
not long after his arrival, into S. Peter's Church, where among all the people
there assembled he did rave and rage with low exclamations they could not tell
against what or whom, and all in English, none understanding him, but every
one pitying him and conceiving him to be distract of his wit, some coniecturing
him to be an Englisheman, mads speedy relation thereof to the Cardinal. of S.
Sixtus who is the protector of our nation that by his order the miserable man
might be provided for (as in this City thereis the spediest relief, for all
sorts, that is in the world.) Immediately the Cardinal commanded he should be
brought to the English College, and so he was the same forenone, having at the
same time besides his other maladies of mind, a very fervent feuet. Where they
cherished him with meat and other things plentifully, some of the elder sort
also questioning with him of his meaning and the causes of his coming to Rome.
To whom he uttered for answer many blasphemies against God, and furiously
railed against the Pope and the Sacraments and other holy things of our
Christianity, professing that he came to that place purposely that he might be
killed for Christ, and that he would from thence into Turkey if he could not
attain the same in Rome. All which the students attributed to fury and
frenzy, and therefore made no matter of his execrable words, but made much of
the miser till the next day toward euenning, at which time order was given
that he should be removed for the better curing of his agew to the Hospital of
S. Spirit, as he was, where he was kept well for certain days, till his fever
was past. But being from thence dimissed and fully recovered of his disease, he
walked the streates and haunted public places of resort continually crying
out in his own language against the Catholic religion, the Pope, and he
City, affirming to Englismen that he sometimes met with all, and others that
understood our language, that he would tarry so long in Rome till he had
learned so much Italian, as to charge the Pope publicly with his sins, ash
said he had boldly reprehended the Queen of England also for her ill life, with
such and such, whom the seditious sclanderer named. The which things both
against God and his Ministers in earth being at sundry times heard of diverse,
and the wise fearing the event of the matter, and that it would be sclanderous
to the nation, if remedy were not had, came unto the College and namely to
Master william Good, the confessor of the house, a very grave godly father,
praying him and the Rector of the College, to consider for the honor of the
Country what way might best be taken with him, because the Italians began
already to mutter and murmur that he was not kept in order, or punished: saying
that the desperate villain might be suborned or easily induced by wicked men of
the new sect, to do some outrage or attempt some what against his holiness
person. The said fathers therefore thought best he should be put into the
Hospital of the patzi which is for the cure and keeping of mad me and fools,
but after the rulers of that house (who have great experience in such cases,)
had by good trial discerned him not to be distracted, they refused plainly to
take charge of him. Whereupon pregna^t suspicion more and more grew in all men's
minds, that all that fury of the fellow, was but the phrenesie of heresy,
driven by Satan into that extraordinary seruor of speech and behauior, to
procure, his distructio^, and so the case was referred at le^gthe to the holy
inquisition, which would not for all this take knowledge of the matter, but
still deemed it a distraction in the party, notwithstanding the officers
thereof were forewarned that some notorious scandale might very well ensew
thereof, if the man were not one way or other looked to, and restrained
betimes: this was the xviij. of July. They feared it not for all that, and the
fellow went abroad and played his parts as before, till sunday following,
being the xxiij. of the same Month, which day in the forenone he came into S.
Peter's Church again, and there approached near unto a priest that was at Mass,
a great number of gentilmen and other of all sorts assisting, and when the
time of consecration was come and after the elevation of the former kind, the
devil moved the wretches heart, and gave him courage, to enter soddenly before
them all within the rales or closure that the Altar was compassed with, and to
seize upon the holy Chalice and to hurl it among the people, which he did to
the great horror of all the assista^ts, so barbarous and sacrilegious a crime
not lightly read nor heard of, but to be done in the cheef Church of Rome,
among them that are so perfect Catholics, and zealous of Gods honor, it was
trewly deemed in manner inexpiable, though, otherwise then the damnable beast
intended, the Chalice was not then consecrated, because he took it immediately
after the elevation of the former part, before the second sacerd words were
said over it, not being so well acquainted with that divine action, as to
discern the times thereof. This desperate fact thus done, the priest standing
in great fear amazed, and much muttering through the whole Church, the common
people would have torn the man of perdition in pieces, if certain gentilmen of
the wiser sort had not stayed them, who gave counsel and took upon them rather
to deliver him out of hand to the Inquisition: and thither was he brought the
same hour, the house of the office and the commissaries lodging not far of.
Thither also was the foresaid Confessor of the English College with one other,
called to be interpretors to both parts in the examination of the Heretic:
where, as well for his said notorious Sacrilege committed, as for diverse
damnable speeches and opinions, which he avouched and in which he persisted
even before the sacred office, they proceeded against him according to the holy
Canons and had been straight committed to the secular power and executed (the
people instantly urging that the City might be delivered of that monster and
expiated of so impious an act by the death of the malefactor) had not the good
Cardinal of S. Seuerin of his charitable compassion humbly asked of his
holiness and obtained some days of delay for the poor Caitife, that all means
possible might be assaied for his repentance and salvation. He was convicted of
a number of heretical articles over and above all the heresies of the new
English Church: as, that the Pope was a devil: that there was no Sacraments:
that there ought to be no authority or superiority of one man over an other,
among the faithful: that a Christian man should not swear at all, neither in
judgment nor otherwise: that there should be no holy days at all: that none
should bear or use weape^: that his head being covered, he would not nor
ought not put of his cap to any man, because, honor was due to God alone: that
a man should not pray but in secret, not kneeling but prostrate or groueling:
that none could be saved but such as suffered persecution: that both the people
of the Este under the Turk, and the Catholics in England, not with standing
their errors, might be saved, because they suffer persecution: that (...)
persecution was a proof sufficient of the true Church and of the elect. For
all which sond absurdities, and other his fantasies, he alleged scriptures
continually as the Caluinists do, and applied them with like grace: that is, as
just as Germans lips, yet not lacking vulgar sleightes, shifts, euasions,
and winding of words, to avoid the Scriptures and reasons wherewith he was
pressed by the learned of the nation, that earuestly dealt with him for
conversion from such pernicious illusions of the devil. Mary within two
sentences, and ^rte^ with one breath, he would contradict him (...) affirm,
and deny, and start from one hole, to an other, for all the world, like the
protestants Fulk.
^oft horse in England, that will pass you such answers without a bait to any
Catholic book that comes in his way. When we asked him, how he knew that
book which he bare about with him to be gods word, or to be treuly
translated, or to have that meaning, for which he so often and so confidently
alleged it, seeing he was not learned to examine the translation or sense
thereof, but should yield to the learned in such matters, and give over his own
fantastical singularities. The more learned (quoth he) the more damnation that
you live not accordingly, but are of ill life as the protestants, and puritans
be: and that this book is gods word and well translated I am warra^ted by the
spirit. When we opposed to his particular spirit the general spirit promised
to the Catholic Church, he answered, that him self was the church: and often,
that he knew no man to be of his faith but him self, that the Church could not
be seen, nor known to any, saving to God alone, being the hid company of the
elect only. And some times, that he was not assured whether him self was of
the Church or no: other whiles, that the Church was in heaven only, ever since
Christ's Ascension, specially, since the kings of the earth be came
Christians, and endewed it with rich^^^ for which they should be damned every
(...) as all other rich men should likewise (...) That the sword was put into
their hands by God, as unto wicked persons, that so wickedness, according to
the scripture, might ha^^ the over hand (which sentence even so translated he
often used) and the elect be persocuted by them, and by that persecution be
faued: yet notwith standing, suddenly he would turn his talk and allege out
of the old testament, that princes should use their sword against malefactors:
and contrary, straight out of the new, that no man should strike with the
sword. When we cited S. Paul against him. he answered by the authority of S.
Peter, that in Paul's writings many things were hard which the ignorant abused:
cite him Peter, I am (quoth he) Christ's disciple, not Peter's. Being demanded
of the number and force of the Sacraments: some time he affirmed there was
none, no count to be made of baptism or the supper, Christ's passion only to be
a Sacrament: otherwhiles, he said all the works of the Just were Sacraments:
and that it was a small matter what faith a man were of, so that he lived well:
and that every Just man was a priest, and might minister all Sacraments, pray,
and do what else he list to salvation: that him self sometimes as a sinner could
not pray, at Other times, that he could pray, fast, and tame his fles he. He
affirmed that most part of the world (specially the learned) should be damned,
for that they did not reproache and charge openly, he kings with their faults,
as he had done the Queen of England: and that he was ordained of God to do it,
as John Baptist and the prophets were, and that he would speak to the three
tirants specially, the Turk, the Pope, and he Queen, whom he lightly named
together: where unto, when some replied, that he should shortly see, it was not
the spirit of true prophecy, but the suggestion of the ennemie that drove him
to these folies, for that he was not to be hanged as by the figure of the
galowes on his coat, and by his words he prophetically professed, but should
be bourned for an Heretic, to which he said nothing, neither was any whit
moved by the reasons, prayers, persuasions, or tears of the godly priests and
fathers that dealt with him continually for seven days together, during his
imprisonment in the inquisition, nor showed all that while any sign of
distraction otherewise then by that frenzy, which is incident to heresy, and
pitiful execation and obduration of heart, whereat, not only for the compassion
of the wretches damnable misery, but also for the dishonor of our country, we
all excedingly sorowed, seeing the strangers measure the common condition of our
state in England, by the brutishe calamity of this one savage man, of whose
opinions just (say they) though al there be not, because heretics never agree,
yet being all a like out of the Church of God, they are neither less sure of
damnation, nor less subject to fantasy, nor more led by reason and
religion, then this forlorn fellow. Yea some of the vulgar, did talk brood
against the college and nation, not letting to say, that such fellows might be
bolstered or covered by them, and that they marueled his holiness would sustain
so many of that country in the City: but others more discrete, that we were to
be pitied rather then reprehended, that had to wrestle in our country with such
intractable spirits, as this, who brought to Rome as they said, a pattern of
our domestical miseries, not well conceived of before. But now the Magistrate of
the inquisition after sufficient respite and trial of the prisoners
disposition, the 29. of July called for certain English men of special known
conscience and credit, and put them to a book oath, what they thought of this
man's state of mind, and, whether they had any hope of his repentance either of
the execrable Sacrilege committed in the Church, or of his damnable opinons:
whereunto when they had answered according to their conscience, then the man
was brought forth, and his said fact and heretical assertions were publikly
red, and to him in English interpreted, where, by an interpreter likewise, he
was demanded whether he would repent and reca^t: he answered, that he would
seal the^ with his death: wherevpo^ he was delivered immediately to the secular
officer, who was the^ pourposely present also, and he caused his sergea^ts to
seize upon his body, as they did, and straight put upon him a black cassock
with fla^mes of fire pain ted upon it: and carried him so from the house of the
inquisitio^ through the high streat, inn^merable people following him to Corta
Sauella, which is a prison hard by the College, which they did, that such as
were of the nation might more conveniently deal with him, the remnant of his
little time remaining for his repentance, he remained there till we^sday following
the godly Confessor and others of the nation, and strangers also, not ceasing
night nor day to pray and do all duties toward him, but what could man do
with him, whom God had for his horrible factes and incredulity forsaken? The
day of his execution therefore came, being the second of August. And the
malefactor was set upon an ass, his body being naked to the girdel steed, so
carried toward the place where he did the sacrilege: bourning torches often
thrust to his back and breast all the way as he went: whereathe showed much more
impacience and pucillanimitie, then was agreeable to his former desperate
pretended stoutnes and spirit, roaring and crying out, kill me at a stroke:
whereunto the forsaid good father on the one hand, and an other that went of
the other side him, ceased not to call upon him, O Richard! for our Saviors
sake that bought the with his blood, have pity upon thy self, remember God his
judgments into which thou shall by and by enter, and from which to recover the
to God, these torments are used toward the, which yet are no more comparable
to hell fire, then the sparkles of thy smythie forge are to this, thou now and
anon shall feel in thy body: repent for JESUS sake, repent in this last
moment of hope and life. And sometimes he cried the Lord have mercy upon me:
then the father, O man, there is no mercy out of the Church, return to
Christ's spouse and family, from whence thou art fallen, and there thou shall
find grace in this thy extremity, have desire only to be united to the
Catholic Church and to confess thy self of thy offenses to Christ's Ministers,
and thou shall yet be saved, and become of an example of God his justice, a
pattern of his mercy, and a saved soul in heaven. But the forsaken creature
would not hear nor by any means, lift up his eyes toward a great crucifix
which the devout fraternity, by order, for the comfort of such men, carries
before the condemned. At leinth they came to S. Peter's streate, where he was to
be bourned. and first they cut of his right hand, with which he did the impious
fact, then tied him to a stake and put fire about him, the zealous priest
continually crying upon him to call yet for mercy: but he feeling the torment
to be long and vehement by reason the fire was slow, would have strangled him
self in the chain wherewith he was leusely tied about the stake, at the sight
whereof the good Father cried, Atkins, Atkins, take heed for the passion of
our Savior, prevent not gods judgment by violence and murder of thy self,
thou have yet time enough to call for grace and pardon for thy offenses, ask
with thy heart only and our merciful Lord will give it the, and if thou so do,
cease that violent wresting of thy throat with the chain, and give us a sign
with thy hand that thou repentest, whereat suddenly he quieted him self in the
chain, and lift up, not only his hand, but his stumpe arm also, above his
head, and so settled him self to quietness till he was dead. All we that
stood near and saw him make that evident sign at the Confessors motion,
conceived great hope of his salvation, pro hoc tamen non dico vt roget quis,
though I doubt not but at the day of our Lord, we shall see many such examples
of his mercy to men as nere the door of damnation as this seemed to be, for
his life and death most desperate.

THE sight of this thing makes me now less marvel at the Circumcellians,
Anabaptists, and other heretics deuilish obstinacy, and desire of their own
deaths, whereof S. Bernard writing of the like heretics in his time, has
godly words which (though I be to long) I will set down for some ease of my
mind, that has been somewhat toiled in this poor man's lamentable case these
days past. These heretics ( says he) can not be vanquished by reason,
because In Ca^tic. ser. 66.
they understand not, nor are corrigible by authority, which they accept not,
nor by any persuasion; for that they be subverted, they make choice of death
rather then conversion, and many wonder to see them go to death not only
patiently, but also as it seamed iocantly, but such marueled that marked not
what great power the Devil has, not only of the bodies, but of the hearts of
them, that he has by God his permission once possessed. Is it not a greater
matter, that one should kill him self, then offer him self, to be killed by an
other? but that we have seen the Devil drive diverse to have hanged or drowned
the^ selves. To be short, Judas hanged him self by the Devils instigation no
question whereat I marvel not so much, as that, he could driu him to deny his
Master: therefore the constancy of Martyrs is nothing like the pertinacitie of
heretics, piety in the former: obduration of heart in these, causing the
contempt of death. So says he, meaning, that the enemy once having wone so
much of a man, as to make him forsake Christ and his holy Church, it shall be
then no maistrie for him to drive him to desperation and desire of death: of
which kind, that forsake the Catholic Church and hate Gods priest. S. Cyprian
says Though they give them selves to be bourned with De unit. Eccles.
flammes of fire, or to be devoured of beasts, all that shall not be the
crown of faith, but a just punishment for their faithlesnes, nor a glorious
end of religious fortitude, but the iss hew of damnable desperation: such may
suffer death, but such crowned can never be, he can not be a Martyr, that is
not in holy Church, be can not come to heaven, that forsakes her (the Church)
whith shall reign in beauen. But my good dear frind I fear now Iwaxe tedious
to you in so long a lamentable tale, but love has no measure, and needful it
is that you should know the whole truth of the matter: this my letter I give
vou leave to impart at your pleasure, as I often communicate yours.

AND now being ready to close up, fresh aduises are come by this last post of
Paris, of the betraying and apprehension of Master Campion and others through
the filthy treason of one Eliot, who they say after certain other Eliot.
infamous treacheries toward his best Masters and friends, played Judas part
herein egregioussy. Quid vultis mihi dare and ego tradam vobis eum, God grant
we hear not shortly that he hang him self after his wages be paid. Judas we
shall not lack so long as Christ has any disciples, and that the protestants
are forced to use such infamous fellows it is their policy and necessity,
because they can not find honest men for that service, of Master Campions
discrete usage all the way that he was carried vpword, his joyful tolleration
of the co^tumelies done him by the papers pinned to his hat, which one day
shall be the garlant of his glory, of his humble behavior before some of the
cheifest, and his sweet moderation in all his actions, we were here all
edified: and the fathers of his order, rejoice in God thereat excedingly,
esteeming it a glorious ornament to their society that he being but a punie
among them, for age and learning under thousands, should so mightily by his
life, doctrine, and demeanure, confound the adversaries of the truth, not
doubting but his imprisonment and farther suffering as God shall appoint, will
be much more glorious to Christ and his Church, the his service at liberty
could ever have been. But of the sequel of these things, as of his racking and
other dura^ce, whereof there is already likewise an uncertain rumor, I trust
you will advertise us from time to time, and so I pray you heartily do. Christ
lesus be with you my good loving friend,

At Rome this 8. of September 1581. By your own wholly, whose hand and heart you
know.

THESE news lo Rome yeldeth at this present, if I had from thense or any
other place better, with good will and good cheap (for recompense of yours)
should you have them, relics would I send you also to be answerable in all
points to your courtesies, but such martyrs as these, leave no grateful
memories behind them, as yours there do, but, as the Cimes, bitte when they
are alive, and stincke when they are dead. But if you communicate the case to
M. Fox, perhaps he can make something of it, as he has done of the martyr in
Portugal, and of other as stinking stuff as this, co^me^d me to him I pray you
as unacquainted. Of your disputes in the tower welooke daily to hear from you,
of the first altercation we have a copy, and at Master B. childishe Grecum
est non potest legi, many laughed heartily in their sleues I dare say: and he
bloushed I trow, if he be not very black, when he hard him read Basile
rowndly. Farewell my most loving faithful friend

from hence this 20. of Octobre 1581. Your own all wellassured, whose hand you
know, as I do yours, that neither of us need hereafter to subscribe our names.


