S. Martins in the fields, 15. Augusti 1626.
WHereas, upon hearing the cause in controversy between Matthew de Quester,
Esquire, Postmaster of England for Foreign Services, and Henry Billingsley,
who pretended to be admitted by the Lord Stanhop, His Majesty's Postmaster
general, at the suit of the Merchants Adventurers, for the transporting and
importing of Letters into and from Foreign parts, from and into the City of
London, it was formerly ordered, That the said Henry Billingsley should not
meddle in any sort with the transporting or importing any more Letters to or
from any Foreign parts without His Majesty's Dominions, as being directly
against a Grant and Proclamation of the late King, until the Cause should be
clearly determined in Law, and brought to a Judgment: And whereas it now
appears, partly by the confession of the said Henry Billingsley, and partly
by the attestation of Thomas Albertus, and partly by Letters sent from
Foreign parts, that the Office for such Letters to be sent and received, is
still kept in the dwelling house of the said Billingsley, where he personally
resideth; And that the sending and receiving of the said Letters, is still
governed by those who were his hired servants, and to whom he pays wages;
and that all Moneys for postage of the Letters are taxed in that Office, and
being received by Thomas Albertus, are by him from time to time paid over
wholly to the said Billingsley, and that special Packets directed to Matthew
de Quester, and containing dispatches to some Counselors of State, and namely
to a Principal Secretary for His Majesty's service, have been received and
detained in the said Office, and there taxed at extraordinary Rates, and
payment exacted for the same to be accounted to the said Billingsley; against
which real Evidence, nothing being alleged but colorable words of excuse,
that these things were not done in the name of Billingsley and that the former
Order extended no further then to his person. Now therefore to take away all
such vain pretenses, and for further explanation of the said Order, not only
the said Henry Billingsley, but Thomas Albertus, George Robins, William Ellam,
William Scapes, the late servants and Agents of the said Billingsley, and all
others are required to forbear directly or indirectly, upon any color or
pretense, contrary to His late Majesty's Grant and Proclamation, to meddle in
any sort with the transporting or importing, or with the rating or postage of
any Letters to or from any Foreign parts, until the Cause be clearly
adjudged, as they will answer the contrary at their uttermost peril, wherein
those that have the charge and commandment in the said Proclamation to
repress offenders, will not fail to do their duties, if after so many
admonitions any presume to disobey.

E. Conway. J. Coke.

Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXVI.


