royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
By the King.
A Proclamation for the better ordering of those who repair to the Court, for
their cure of the disease called the Kings Evil.
WHereas by the grace and blessing of God, the Kings and Queens of this
Realm, by many ages past, have had the happiness, by their sacred touch and
invocation of the Name of God, to cure those, who are afficted with the disease
called the Kings Evil; And his now most Excellent Majesty, in no less
measure then any of his Royal predecessors, has had good success herein, and
in his most gracious and pious disposition is as ready and willing, as any King
or Queen of this Realm ever was, in any thing to relieve the distresses and
necessities of his good Subjects; Yet in his Princely wisdom foreseeing that
in this, (as in all other things) order is to be observed, and fit times are
necessarily to be appointed for the performing of this great work of charity:
His most excellent Majesty does hereby publish and declare his Royal will and
pleasure to be, That whereas heretofore, the usual times of presenting such
persons to his Majesty for this purpose, were Easter and Whitsuntide, That from
henceforth the times shall be Easter and Michaelmas, as times more convenient,
both for the temperature of the season, and in respect of any contagion, which
may happen in this near access to his Majesty's sacred Person. And his
Majesty does accordingly will and command. That from the time of publishing
this Proclamation, none presume to repair to his Majesty's Royal Court to be
healed of that disease, before the Feast of S. Michael now next coming. And
his Majesty does further will and command, That all such as hereafter shall
come or repair to the Court for this purpose, shall bring with them
Certificates under the hands of the Parson, Vicar, or Minister and
Churchwardens of those several parishes where they dwell, and from whence
they come, testifying according to the truth, that they have not any time
before been touched by the King, to the intent to be healed of that disease.
And his Majesty does straightly charge all Justices of the Peace, Constables and
other officers, That they do not suffer any to pass, but such as have such
Certificates, upon pain of his Majesty's displeasure. And to the end that all
his loving Subjects may the better take knowledge of this his Majesty's
pleasure and command, His will is, that this Proclamation be published, and
affixed in some open place in every Market Town of this Realm.

Given at His Majesty's Court at White Hall, the eighteenth day of June, in the
second year of His Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. God save the
King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. 1626.


