LOVE and VALOR OR The diverse Affections of Minerva.

Will Marshall sculpsit.

London Printed by Th: Harper and are sold by Tho: Stater* at his shop in Duck
lane 1638.



LOVE AND VALOVR: Celebrated in the person of the Author, by the name of
ADRASTE.

OR, The diverse affections of MINERVA.

One part of the unfeigned story of the true Lisander and Caliste.

Translated out of the French by W. B.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Slater, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Swan in Duck Lane, 1638.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY, AND MY Truly honored Favourer, Sir PETER TEMPLE, Knight
and Baronet.
Honored Sir,
HOwsoever I have received more encouragement from your self alone, then all
men living besides, had not my Author deemed his labor worthy the survey of so
great a Prince, I should not have entitled you to my worthless labors in the
conversion; since the difference between his original, drawn by a free and art
commanding hand, and my rough Copy being the first essay of my abilities in
this nature, may be more then the distance between your condition and a
Princes. In supplyance of which defect, being unable to add any thing but the
bare figure of my devotion to serve you, it were but ill rhetoric, and worse
arithmeticke in me through many words multiplying ciphers, by ciphers to blot
my paper with infinite nothings. Yet gracious Sir, I persuade me that I see,
though I have not delivered in the book, many lines and draughts resembling
the patheticke facility and gentleness of our best writers: which draughts
being but bare dissections, and curious anatomies of humane nature, it is
impossible to be over-tedious, if pertinent therein. But I flourish as if I
would say something, where I am in truth a sceptique ignorant, and doubting all
things, but my own weakness and the strength of those affections borne your
service,

Worthy Sir, by your virtues honourer, W. B.

To my Lord the MONSIEUR, Sole Brother to the King of FRANCE.
MY Lord, so much is to be said in your commendations, as to forbear in so
ample a subject of elocution, were rather an ingratitude then silence; and I
never sparing of my praises in all men's merits, seeming to have refused them
until now to yours, shall do much better here to confess, then to defend my
thanklesnesse. It is not my good Lord, but I have as much inclination to honor
you, as I have cause, which is to have it in the greatest perfection that can
be imagined; but the same instigation I have had to speak, has made me still
silent, and the greatness of the subject which had animated most, has yet
discouraged me. There is so far a distance from your highness to my
lowness, and twixt my own power and my will, as I deemed it a sin against my
knowledge, rashly to have undertaken a thing not possible to be performed, but
in great imperfection: and that my enterprise would much rather have discovered
my weakness then my intentions. Notwithstanding which my Lord, are they not
the most rare affections which men testify to their own prejudice? how can I
then more perfectly manifest mine, then at the dispense and disrepute of my
knowledge? How can I better make seen to you the passions that I undergo for
your service, and for your glory then by the exposing them amid my own
weaknesses, and my defaults? This consideration my Lord has changed my former
fears into rashness, and has made me so bold to undertake that, which I have
not had the daring to think of: believing that if the execution were
impossible, yet the enterprise was at least honorable, and by so much the
fitter to manifest my devotions bent to you wards, as it bears me hood-winked
beyond my knowledge and my power. But I am erred my good Lord even at the entry
of my discourse, which beginning with your commendations, as the greatest and
richest argument that could be chose, I know not how I have so suffered my
self to be carried away with my passions, as I have said without thinking that
which I would not, and have not yet spoke one word of what I would say. The
cause of my erring is the boundless extent of my subject. Hardly could it be
but I should lose me in a labyrinth, from out of which it is so difficult to
get; but the wonder is I have not entered it, and that in stead of loosing my
self in search of the issue, I have erred at the entry without once having
found the beginning. But indeed great Prince, where is there any beginning in
things infinite? If I should begin at the greatness of your birth, and weigh
you as Prince of the chiefest kingdom in the world, and Son and Brother to the
two greatest Kings the earth has ever bore; were I not diverted by the
excellence of your admirable nature, by the exquisite education wherewith it is
so happily propagate, and by the ample hopes you give both of the one and the
other? what multitudes of other things might here be added in your
commendations, did I not fear to do them wrong, and loved I not more to
honor them in silence, then to injure them by going about to speak their
greatness: but reducing me to these three only, and speaking but one word of
each; what more excellent nature was there ever found in Prince, or more
generous then yours? What Achilles fed with the marrow and pith of Lions one
day to subdue the force of Hector, does not give way to you as well in
noriture, as courageous heart? And what hopes may we not well conceive from
such and so magnanimous a Prince, as surpasses the greatness of his birth by
the excellence of his nature, and the excellence of his nature by the goodness
of his noriture. But rising up to the fount head, and scorse of your great
Ancestors, and so descending by the succession of so many Kings as have been
since S. Lewis, to Henry the great, I not observe you only as a green and
flourishing branch of thestock of Bourbon, or as a Sience of that of Anjou, but
as Son and Prince of France, that is to say, of the best house and most
illustrious Empire of the world. What can I hope less, or the enemy fear
more, then some still, and unexpected enterprise managed with no less silence
and privacie, even to the entire and general conquest of all such authority as
strangers do usurp from us? victories seeming as incident unto the house of
Bourbon, as crowns seem destinated unto that of Anjou. Charles the brother of
Lewis was the first of this family crowned King of Naples, Sicile, and
Jerusalem. Lewis, brother to Charles the wise, and first Duke of Anjou, went to
take possession of those kingdoms with 30000 horse. And in our times the last
Henry of the house of Valois, being then Duke of Anjou, and brother to Charles
the ninth, was crowned almost against his will King of Poland. But the most
honorable titles of all these Kings, were yet to be brothers to the Kings of
France. For this cause only was it that Henry rather chose the quality of Duke
of Anjon in France, then that of King of Poland. And for the same reason as
well he as Francis his brother, being but Princes of France, did precede the
dead King your father, when as he was but King of Navarre: which I speak but
by the way my Lord, to let you see how much this dignity of brother to the King
ought be esteemed by you before all the Scepters and the Crowns of the whole
earth. Be it then that you would regain you the ancient possession of your
inheritance in Italy; the remembrance of Charles the eighth, of Lewis the
ninth, and of Francis the great, causes the Alps as yet to tremble. Be it
that you would pass to Constantinople, the eastern Empire conquered, and
possessed by the French, does there (with all fear) still redoubt their very
name. If you would yet thrust further, and as far as Palestine, the same
French have conquered and possessed that also you may affright the Sultans of
Egypt, and the Mores in Afric, by the sole memory of S. Lewis. In what part
soever of the world fatecalleth you, thither may the renown of your
predecessors open you a passage; No mountain is so steep that will not stoop
below your feet, nor sea so enraged and impetuous, as not to be appeased and
humbled beneath your sails. Go on great Prince under the name and arms of
that great King, to whom only you ought rest a subject. Go and happily
re-enter on the possession of so many Realms. Eface by your immortal acts,
and those in the end worthy a Gaston of France, the glorious memory and
illustrious name of Gaston of Foix. Make seen there is as much difference
between your valor and your renown and his, as there is between his condition
and his house and yours. It Is said, Alexander intending to pass into Asia,
there was one of the statues of Orpheus, whose forehead stood with sweat, from
whence the Augures drew a presage that he should there bring so great things to
pass, as should produce sweat on the brows of such Poets and Musicians, as
should desire to relate them. May you great Prince, bear Arms more far then
Alexander, and do those deeds as the admiration and astonishment thereof may
render men mute, and statues speaking, that after I have been often covered
with sweat in the pursuit of the thunder of your Arms in battle, I may again
sweat within their triumphs, singing the hymns of your so glorious victories.
So as I may from out those large extended wings whereon Renown it self ought
bear your glory, draw a quill best capable of their description, and which
supplying the imperfections of this book, (that I purpose to the eternity of
your memory) may leave to posterity, works more worthy your name, and the
desire I have to signallize me.

My Lord, (...) Your most humble, most obedient, and thrice affectionate
servant, D'AUDIGUIER.

A Table of the Arguments.
MInerva comes to solicit her suits in Paris, is beloved of Balamyr,
Crassus, Arnolphus, and Adraste, but loves only Arnolphus. The disfavour of
Adraste, causes that of Crassus, Adraste desirous to give a Serenade to
Minerva, accompanied with Periste and Oristene, runs a dangerous Misfortune.
Page 1 Adraste reconcileth himself to Minerva, and not being able to vanquish
the inclination she has for Arnolphe, of a Lover he becomes a Friend. Tatius
renders himself necessary to Minerva, and so engages her estate, and marries
her person, after the death of Arnolphe, and the vain predictions of Adraste.
which were found so true, as they produced a second separation of Marriage
between them. 16 Minerva comes back to Paris. The second loves of Adraste
with her, are ruined by the practices and confederacy of Brasidas, and of
Gracchus her kinsmen and Lovers. 32 Adraste closes again with Minerva,
comfort her on the death of Arnolphe. Commotions in France and diverse
adventures upon that subject. 56 The reprisall of Minerva in affection with
Adraste: a dangerous adventure of his, going to see Minerva. A walk of
Adrastes with Minerva, and some others in company with her at Ruel. 78 The
diverse pursuits of Crassus and Adraste. The departure of Minerva, her return,
and confidence in Adraste. The sudden disfavour of Adraste on the Eve of his
parting, and the Letter he wrote to Minerva. As also the reconciliation of
Adraste with Minerva, and his departure for the Army. 101 That neither his
Love, nor the perfections of his Mistress could be possibly spoken of, but
imperfectly. 123 Upon his Mistress forbidding him to Love. 125 He says that he
loves as well by election, as destinate thereto, and entreats his Mistress to
examine the cause for which she doomes his death. 127 He complains of the
indifference of his Mistress. 129 The Answer. 130 The Reply. 131 He amorously
seems angry with his Mistress. 133 He comfort his Mistress, on the death of
his Rival, and manifests the excellence of his Love, above all other
affections. 135 He complains of his Mistress that she had failed him in a
meeting appointed by her to walk. 141 The Answer. 142 He justifies his
fancies. ibid. Why his Mistress should not be moved at his Martyrdom, upon his
departure. 143 He entreats his Mistress to torment him, to the end such pleasure
as she takes therein, be increased proportionably to the increase of his
torments. 145 He excuses himself for putting his Mistress in collar, by
preferring a just complaint unto her, and protests that he will never more
complain since he sees he cannot complain, without giving her offense. 146
The Answer. 148 He endeavors to maintain a wager he had propounded to have
laid, that he would write no more to her, and begs pardon, that he does not
ask her pardon for it. ibid. After his Mistress departure, he comfort her
in her afflictions, by the example of his own adversities. 150 An Epistle of a
Lady, to a faithless Lover. 151 He justifies his silence. 153 He dares not
see his Mistress. 154 He complains of his Mistress absence, and of those would
hinder him from seeing her. 155 He comfort a Lady upon some displeasures
she had received. ibid. He answers to a Letter of Minerva's. 157 A Ladies
answer to her Lover. 158 He makes answer to a complaint she had made of him,
for his silence, and not writing. 159 Upon some discontent a little before his
departure. 160 The Answer, 161 The Reply, 162 Being returned to Paris, he found
that his Mistress had harkened to some ill reports of him, whereof he
complains, and for that she had taken from him such hours of visitation, as
he had hardly acquired to give them to another. The first occasion of breach
between them, 164 Upon that she had answered to his former Letter, how she
was enforced to her grief, to suffer unpleasing company, and that she was
sorry she could not admit of his entertainment, as she would. He returns that
the party whom she fained her to be unable to be rid of, was rather commanded
to stay, purposely to keep him off. And that be needed not his assistance in
such case, knowing well that she might absolutely command, and forbid him what
she pleased, in full assurance to be obeyed. 166 He complains of the
languishing he suffers in her absence, and entreats her presence of her, as the
only thing sufficiently able, to chase her image from his thoughts. 168 He
begs of God, he will inspire him with words of force to make her more
favorable. And he complains, that he had been made to attend all the day for
an Answer. 169 She answers to his precedent Letter, that she knows not what
to say or send word of, and complains much of the importunity of those that
visit her, 170 He replies, that if she knows not what to say or send him word
of, he knows less what to do. 171 He prays her not to loose her peace of
mind in the affairs, wherein she is busied. And so falls in discourse of his
passions, and sufferings for her love. ibid. She answers, that if he knew how
much she partakes in his sufferings, he would rather lament her then himself,
and that no one should ever esteem better of his merits, nor so cherish his
affections, as herself. 173 He says that it is impossible he should undo
him from the thoughts, that have undone him Represents to himself the time he
has lost, in serving her* what she has taken from him, and what she has yet
left him. And concludes, that it is high time that he retire all naked as he
is, to some desert, whither her image shall not be able to pursue him further.
But that all this discourse vanishes on her presence. 176 He complains that
they would debar his visits on the passion week, and that it was not a
general rule: but his greatest grief was, to leave her in the hands of her
enemies, whose drifts he discovers to her, and offers himself to undertake
them. 178 Having fought this morning upon the occasion spoken of in the former
Letter, and having astonished his Mistress, by the recital of so unlooked for
an action, he writes to her that her astonishment caused him to judge that she
hoped some better end, or feared a worse. And shows that neither the one, nor
the other, could be. 179 He complains that she had judged amiss of a good
action. Says that he believed that she had seen the man of whom he spoke,
and got from him the confession she desired. How conformable which was to his
words, he should find when she should fulfill hers. And that he nere should
rest, till he had made him avow the truth. 181 He says that he has something
to say to her which he had not yet said, for that whatsoever he premeditateth
to tell her in absence, flies his memory when she is present. Represents to her
his languishings and the put offs, wherewith she had from time to time
protracted him, yet without complaint, for that loving her with an
extraordinary affection, he was well pleased to testify it by respects in
common. 183 He persisteth still in the discourse of his languishings, and some
others which he framed in walking alone a long the Seine. At last he
concludes absence, for absence, it were more supportable, far off then near,
and that the more he deferreth, the more he draws out in length the
violence of his torments and vexations. 185 He conjures her take some pity on
his languishings, and not still to detain him in the solitude she had the day
before. Complains that he having so little time to spend with her, should
waste it so ill, that he abides here but only for the sight of her, and yet
he sees her not, but amongst such company as do deprive him of her sight. 188
Upon a quarrel which he had had on her occasion, of which she had endeavored
an accord, upon some terms. He entreats her to pardon him if so be he would
not endure that it should be conceived in that manner. 189 Being pressed to an
honorable agreement, and threatened with her disfavour, in case he should
refuse, he says that she urged him to a thing that she would upbraid him with
so soon as he had done it. Notwithstanding which, he would consent to
whatsoever she should do, to testify his obedience to her. 190 Upon some
coldness in his Mistress, he says that he dares not so much as send to her
house to know when she will be pleased he may come thither. Nor yet can he but
do it, having so little time to live near her, 191 Upon a promise she had
made him to afford him her company and entertain, at 5 of the clock, he sent
to see if her watch were not stayed or put back, or if she had not yet again
some other demurre, to put him off to another time. 192 He excuses himself of
an action to which the violence and indiscretion of a bad woman, had born him,
in the lodging and presence both, of his Mistress, for which he humbly
entreats her, either to pardon, or punish him. So taking again a discourse
in hand that he had left, he humbly entreats her to weigh the importance of it,
and to afford him one hour upon that subject. 193 The Answer. 195 The Reply on
the same occasion. ibid He says that he will write to her continually, since
she has commanded it, and will never lament him, for that she has forbade it.
Confesses that he wants the good parts might oblige her to wish him well, and
that he has but too many ill ones, to merit her bad usage, says that all
things work according to their properties, and that he having a heart of
flesh, and she one of stone, it must be that she should be as insensible of his
affections, as he is quickly sensible of hers. 196 She answers that the cause
why she prayed him to write, was, that her deserts could not be commended, but
by the judgment he gave thereof. That she sorrowed that a passion so worthily
entertained, should be for a subject so incapable of the acknowledgment. 198 He
replies that if she knew the greatness of his passions, she would not say that
he did worthily entertain them, but that he injures them. And entreats her to
give him leave to come and learn at hers, the subject for which she desired
he should become passionate, according to her promise to him. 199 He says
that if he did not by obedience, what he also does through affection, he
knows not why he should write to one that is as little moved by his letters,
as the posts and corners of the walls, to which our Bills be usually fixed.
That instead of animating an image, and rendering it sensible of his passions,
he has rendered her senseless, by the virtue of his sighs. And of a heart of
flesh he has made one of impenetrable stone. 200 Having forborne three days
without writing back one word to him, (whatsoever may be said in her answer)
for missing this morning, she seems astonished at his silence, and commands
him to ask her pardon for it. 202 After so many complaints and delays
thereon, upon which he had resolved to speak no more, then in one Letter, he
intended to send her on his departure he yet gives her answer, and bids her
farewell. ibid. Meeting him yet by chance, and being made friends, she fails
again of her promise to him, which obliges him to break with her once for
all, and send her this his last farewell. 206 The Answer, 210 His Mistress being
informed he was in blacks, took occasion to write word unto him; by which she
condoled with him the new affliction she believed had been befallen him. ibid.
After having a long while dispated with himself whether he should answer her
Letters, or not, he tells her that besides the afflictions he under goes for
her, he slighted all such as could happen to him. That he could not believe
that she condoled theills, she daily augmented. And wherefore he believed so.
211 She replies, that she is more amarvailed then offended at his Letter, and
wishes that all his vanities were in that paper, to the end they obliged no
other one to answer them. 213 He answers her threats, and to the vanities she
accuses him of, in a style altogether estranged from the respect he had wont
to render her, though not from his discretion. 214 He answers to certain
complaints that Minerva had made some while after, as well to his friends, as
himself of his indifference, and shows that it was founded on the necessity
of obeying her, and upon good reason. 222
Faults escaped in some Copies.
PAge 10. line 30. for that, read it, p. 11. l. 19. for others, r. ours, p.
21. l. 7. for revenger, r. revenge, l. 14. for and who shall then, r. who shall
then, l. 17. for such as, r. those that, l. 19. for inconstant, r. constant, l.
20. for misery, r. mischief, p. 39 l. 29. for these, r. those, p. 42. l. 7.
for or what, r. what, p. 46. l. 15. for esteemed, r. seemed, p. 50. l. 15. for
to obey, r. to obey you, p. 55. l. 2. for most provoked him, r. most troubled
him she was it that most provoked him, p. 60. l. 15. for on yours. Adraste r.
on yours Adraste, l. 27. for book, r. broake, p. 74. l. 7 for penthouse or a
long, r. penthouse a long, p. 81. l. 3. for passion, r. possession, l. 22. for
agreed, r. angered, l. 31. for forgot to, r. forgot not to, p. 82. l. 15. for
after in death, r. after death, p. 83. l. 6. for to quite me of, r. to quit me
of, p. 85. l. 10. for discourse, that it, r. discourse for that it, line 18.
for or least, r. or at least, l. 30. for Adraste has purged, r. Adraste having
purged, p. 95. l. 16. for could tender, r. would render, p. 100. l. 8. for and
to went set, r. and so went and set, p. 106. l. 26. for compassionate, r.
compatiate, p. 110. l. 11. for that would, r. that she would, p. 113. l. 31.
for desire, r. design, p. 116. l. 11. for nor to be to, r. nor be to, l. 17.
for render me, r. render it me, p. 117. l. ult. for satisfaction to, r.
satisfaction then to, p. 118. l. 23. for light does rejoice, r. light, thou
that do rejoice, p. 119. l. 7. for state, r. fate, l. 13. for less, r. left,
l. 27. for once as yet, r. once more as yet, and some others, which in
courtesy may be borne withal.

Love and Valor: OR: The diverse affections of MINERVA.
The Argument.
Minerva comes to solicit her suits in Paris, is beloved of Balamyr,
Crassus, Arnolphus, and Adraste, but loves only Arnolphus. The dissavour of
Adraste, causes that of Crassus, Adraste desirous to give a Serenade to
Minerva, accompanied with Periste and Oristene, runs a dangerous misfortune.

CHAP. I.
DId I desire to frame the foundations of a true story upon a tale, I might say
the earth never produced the equal of Minerva, and deriving her original from
heaven, it were not only a lie, but blasphemy to bring her back again to
earth. So then let us not speak untruths for fear of lying, nor let us
blaspheme for fear of blasphemy; fable has no part in this discourse, the
Star by which I mean to steer my course, being truth it self. This here is
not that Minerva the Goddess, but a woman whose clear mind and brave spirit
has acquired her the name of that Pallas president of Art and Arms; her birth
was not of the head of Jupiter, but of an illustrious family, the worth whereof
has been ere whiles graced with the most honorable charges of this Realm,
her father having left her very young, she was married at 9 years old to a
husband but of eleven; and as the one nor the other were then capable of love,
they produced no other but hate. Her desire to be divorced from one she loved
not, caused her come to solicit her affairs at Paris, where her beauty did
acquire her rather servants then Judges; and where her youth more proper to the
exercises of love, then business of law, rendered her apter to hearken to the
suits of her servants, then to give ear to, or prosecute her necessary suits.
I know not whether she were cruel or favorable on their behalf, but certain
am I that the Sejan horse was never more unhappy to his Masters, then she to
some of her servants. Whilst she followed her affairs, Balamyr was the first
of whose service she admitted. I have heard him say, she esteemed more of his
valor, then she loved his person, and that her vanity to captivate so great a
courage, caused her suffer the importunity of his pursuit, their love became
hatred: Balamyr, were it through judgment or inconstancy, with, or without
cause, quit her for another Mistress, and was unlamented of Minerva sometime
after slain. But she continued not without a servant, for she won on all she
would, and she would win on all she could: and for all that she complained here
sometimes of the miserable conquests she made against her will. She made no
acquisition but to her profit, and wherewith she served not her self in some
design or other. See here the cause why she contemned not the affection of
Crassus, howsoever his ill shape, and worse favor, rendered him sufficiently
contemptible. But Arnolph was he that most feelingly touched her to heart, all
the rest were amorous of her, and she only of him. It was not that his services
or quality obliged her to love him more then ordinary: it was a certain
inclination proceeded of the sympathy in their wills, and I know not what
feminine humor more taken with a soothing observance, or handsome leg
making, then with all the fair qualities or good parts can be in a man, or the
faithfullest services that can be rendered them. Many others fell into the
snares of Minerva, whose vulgar affections merit not a particular history, but
she kept always a kind of order in the receipt of such as she intended to
inregister in number of her subjects: for when she began to favor Arnolph, she
was fallen off with Crassus, and never was reunited during the life of Arnolph.
Notwithstanding she accepted of Adraste, when she was yet engaged, and suffered
that he sighed for her, whilst she languished for another. But Adraste
accompanied his affection with so much respect, as sufficed to have begotten
pride even in humility it self, and besides was so sensible of offenses, and
so tenderly feeling the least coldness, that he would not have suffered them
from a Goddess, which was the cause that at some time or other he spoiled all
his Mistresses, and then that he undid himself too: for that seeming not so
much to love as to adore them, he so raised their haughty humor and natural
vanity above the condition of their sex, and gave them so absolute an Empire,
as himself was not able to live under, so as he lost often by impatience, what
he had acquired by much passion: he threw well, but he played his game ill. The
first occasion of breach between him and Minerva, was but slight, and more
capritious then reasonable: as for the most part there appears in the process
of love, more rage then reason, but it was followed by a mistake that is very
pleasant. Adraste being at Minerva's, with one Thymon a fine companion, and of
a good wit, whom Minerva not disliked of: after having entertained them some
time in a low room, she entreated them up the stairs, which were at the going
out of the room, of sufficient breadth for two, but too narrow for three. When
Minerva being about to ascend, observed them both, looking one or the other of
them would take her by the hand, and seeing both to recoile and step back, she
goes up her self foremost, as to show them the way. Adraste forbore to take her
hand, for that it seemed to him she had first looked on Thymon, and Thymon
abstained to assist her, out of respect to Adraste, who turning about, got him
out of doors, saying nothing to one or other, but went his way. There was
nothing but love, and that in choler could cause him commit so great a
discourtesie: Minerva marvelled not a little, and Thymon was more astonished at
it. But Adraste went not alone, for the vexation hebore along with him, made
the greater part of himself. After a profound consideration of the fury of his
disease, accusing yet his Mistress of his own fault, he resolved with himself
to complain, and found not a better means to mittigate his grief, then (if
it might be,) to disburthen himself of it upon paper, he wrote to Minerva,
That since for honoring her without any obligation, she had slighted him
without cause, making him undergo such punishments as he was unworthy of* in
place of the recompense he merited; he was resolved to keep his services for
other favors, since she kept her favors for other Lovers. I know well said
he, that this will add to your cantentment, and still more aggravate my
discontents: but the more violent they shall be, the less lasting you had not
been so ill to me, had you not found me still so good, but however it be the
effect of a low spirit, to take occasion from the goodness of any one to use
them ill, I never yet shall alter mine, to revenge me ought of your bad usage.
I do confess that I thus break with you* in the most extremity of grief I
ever suffered yet, or ever can and which I never shall recover whilst I live,
and that if the wounds of the mind endure after death, eternity it self must
only be the term of their continuance. But I shall choose to breath my
afflictions elsewhere, or smother them in my own breast, or that they smother
me, then to increase them daily with new indignities. And if you wonder that I
have taken so small an occasion, having heretofore passed by so great ones,
remember that they are not the greatest sicknesses, but they are the last that
do bring death: and that it is no marvel that so slight a disfavour
succeeding so many other insupportable ones, should now conclude the less of
what you have so many times neglected. He gave this Letter to a servant that
Minerva knew not to belong to him, with his commands, that so soon as he had
delivered it to her own hands, he should not stay for her answer. It was done
just as he willed, this man went his ways to Minerva, to whom presenting the
Letter, he told her, that his Master most humbly kissed her hands; Who is he?
said she. Madam answered he, that you shall find in his Letters. Have a little
patience then answered Minerva, which saying, she stepped into her Cabinet, as
well to peruse as to write an answer to her Letter, when she saw it was not
signed, the desire and impatience she formerly had to know the Author of it,
was now by the difficulty redoubled. She staid upon it some time to bethink
her if she could divine thereof by the character. At last, being able to gather
nothing from thence, she commanded that they made the messenger come in, but
they found that he was already gone, and with such haste, as all sight of him
was lost. As yet, had Adraste never wrote unto her before this time, and
Minerva not thinking that she had given him any cause of dislike, no way
suspected him for this Letter. But Crassus being discontented at her, and she
yet much more offended at Crassus, she imagined it an effect of his ill will.
And thereupon writing back to him in the heat of her choler, and despite, and
in the rage and violence of her first motions, she returned him the most
bloody and injurious Letter, that a furious and revengfull woman could bethink
her of against a man. So as Monsieur Crassus that had been before offended by
her, and expected rather to be satisfied, far from what he looked for,
received an amends much worse then the offense. In the mean while, was Adraste
unable to suffer the absence of his Mistress, and yet was unhappily banished her
presence, he desired with all impatience to see her, yet obstinately shunned
he all occasions of seeing her, seeking and fearing in one and the same time to
meet her, a troublesome passion that brings us to will, and not to will in the
same time one and the same thing. In matter of love a diverting on some other
object, is no little help; Adraste endeavored what he could to divert
himself, and thinking to lose the remembrance of his malady, found it even in
the same divertisement. He went to see a friend of his called Periste, that
took him a long to supper with him in the Suburbs of Saint Germans, with a
certain Gentlewoman named Oristene, to oblige him by a double pleasure he
added to the daintiness of their fare, the delight of Music joining with 4
or 5 Lutes, as many excellent voices, of which Oristenas was the most
excellent. All which did but more ripen the griefs of Adraste, and by the
object of such felicity, but represent the more to him his unhappiness. It was
that time of the year when the longest days make the evenings most
delightful, and dispose lovers still to give or receive your serenades or
evening musickes, which awakened a mavelous desire in the heart of Adraste,
to present Minerva with one. All the company agreed to it, Oristena her self
would make one of the party, which that she might do with the more
convenience, she changed the attire of her sex, and put on man's apparel. They
set her on a foot cloth nag, and all the rest beating along on the hoof, they
left her lodging, just as the day left our horizon. Oristene lodged in the most
remote quarters of the suburbs, and Minerva in the midst of the City, so as
to go from the one to the other, the directest way was through S. Germans
street: when they were come so far as the Well in that street, some 50 paces
from the Abbey, Oristena calling to her Page, which indeed was but a Laquay, was
by her voice known of some 4 or 5 that would needs lay hands on her horse
bridle. The Musicians who were they that were nearest to her, having drunk too
much, and not understanding things aright, began to draw their swords, and
charge upon them. These Roysters defended themselves, and but for Adraste that
opposed himself unto their weapons, and making some by good words, others by
threats retire, appeased the first tumult, there had been some extraordinary
hurt done. They sheathed all their swords but one only, that looked as if he
would have eat them all at a bit. Adrastes choler rose then above his wisdom,
to curb; and do you only Sir said he, forbear notwithstanding the wary
example of your fellows, and therwithall passed 5 or 6 thrusts just at the
throat of him, and with so ready and able a pursuit, as the other warding and
giving back, without having leisure to strike one stroke, or speak a word,
found himself retired so far as the Sergeants bars, which is at the end of
that street: and then Sir said he, what injury have I done you? you have not
put up your sword for love said Adraste, which I by force will now make you
sheath: that needs not Sir, I will put it up upon your word Sir, replied he: do
so then answered Adraste, or you are but dead: he sheaths his weapon, and
thereupon Adraste returned toward his friends, and the other followed him, who
desired likewise to find his. So soon as they came near the Well where they
had left them, Adraste found not any of his company, but in place, two men
bearing a third under the arms, who as bemoaning himself, cried with a faint
and dying voice, I am slain: he that followed Adraste, knowing they were his
fry nds, one of which was run through the body, drew his sword on Adraste, and
tilting at his back, cried out, the murderer, the murderer, this is he that
did it: whereupon all the others at once fell upon him, and the hurt man not
able to do more, fell a crying, kill, kill, kill. Adraste had much better have
returned toward the Abbey, then have gone forwards, for he had not found any
other to encounter, then he that followed him, who would nere have stood him,
but desiring to overtake his company, and believing that they were got into the
City by S. Germans gate, in pursuit of their first intentions, he flew amongst
the thickest of them before him, who made him way, on the violence of his fury,
and having let him pass, followed him full close along the butchery, did he
not find think you, his legs more useful to him then his arms? Adraste had
a little English footboy, who was by when the man was run through, and having
seen part taking on all sides but his Masters, stood him close up at a Butchers
door, with a bottle of wine in his hand, which he set down so soon as he see
his Master so pursued, and suddenly running from his place, cried out, courage
Sir, here be all your friends; which words so replaced the heart of Adraste in
his body, and put such afright in his enemies, as they all turned their backs
so soon as he turned head upon them. For they all thought it true Adraste, for
that he desired it, and they because they feared that Adraste having caused
them to flee that had pursued him, and liking better of their rooms then
companies, demanded of his boy what was become of Periste, Oristena, and the
rest that he left there. In good faith Master, said he, I know not, but seeing
you so hardly put to it, I thought it best to say they were all here. It was
not ill done, said Adraste, but let us go see if they be not gone into the
City. As they went, the whole suburbs were in tumult, for these villains in
flying, had given the alaram every where, crying out, that they massacred
Monsieur, the Princes officers, so as all was in rout, in hubbub, and affray,
which made Adraste make more haste to the gate of the City, hoping that his
company were already entered, and that himself should find with them more
assurance there, then without in the suburbs. But he found the gates already
shut, and one of his Chanters on the bridge, like another Orpheus at the gates
of hell, but that he entreated Pluto to let out to him Euridice, and others
here begged leave of the Porter to let him into the City. Adraste asked him
what he made there, what was become of the company, and wherefore they had all
left him so. I know nothing as concerning your two last demands said he, but to
the first I stay here to have them open me the gate, for me thinks the whole
suburbs are raised upon us, and would to God I were gone with the loss of my
Lute. As he yet talked, they perceived a company of some 30 or 40 persons that
came toward them, by the light of ten or a dozen torches that were carried
before them. So soon as Adraste saw them, he conceived that they were people
assembled together to take him, and fearing to be so surprised against a gate
that was shut against him, not having elsewhere passage then amongst them, he
resolved to make himself way by his sword, as he had done a little before, but
with as much more appearance of danger, as here were many more people: he
expected to be slain, but he chose rather to dye, then to be taken. Wherefore
looking amongst them, and making a flourish with his sword naked in his hand,
he rushed through the midst of this multitude; as it had been a mad man.
Never in his life was Adraste so happy* all this heard of people fled, some
here, and some there, and gave him no less room then the whole street; he
passed them like thunder, and fled much marvelled at so admirable a success:
he need not fear following, for the others fled as fast on the other side. But
there were so great a number of them, that (not seeing any offense near them
when he was gone) they took heart at grass, as we say, and finding the Musician
and Laquay that had not the heart to fly, they laid hands on them. Note that
it was a band of Comedians going to act before Monsieur the Prince, accompanied
with many others, as well women as men, who thinking of nothing less then of
the adventure of Adraste, were put in greater afright then he. The Musician
thought himself already hanged, and the footboy at least flead alive; but
seeing themselves not accused for having killed or hurt any one, and that they
were only demanded, who this mad man was that had so furiously routed them,
they escaped by denial, and were quit by saying they knew nothing of the
matter. Adraste in the mean time went his way back all alone to the house of
Oristene, where he found that Periste had brought her back again, yet shaking
with the fear this accident had caused in her. Well said Periste, so soon as
he saw Adraste enter, much moved with fortunes he had run; I believe it will
be this two days before you desire again to give your Serenades or your
Aubades more to Minerva. I am now ready as ever to return, answered Adraste,
but I assure you it shall be alone, for either I will engage me in no quarrels,
or I will not leave my friends engaged in them after I have my self begun them,
which I speak not concerning you, for besides that as I know well that you
began not this, so had you enough to do to disingage Oristine; But was it
possible that four or five rascals should so easily rout so many honest good
fellows? As you betook you to your sword against that angry blade that would
by no means sheath up his, said Periste, his companions likewise took them to
theirs, I seeing them to run after you, threw the foremost of them to the
earth with a thrust I made, which stayed and took them all short up. Indeed we
were the greater number, but the most of us had no other weapons then their
Lutes, which they threw away the better to fly. Whilst they made away, and
the others took up their hurt man, I had the opportunity to bring back
Oristene. You have done what you ought, and I what I could said Adraste,
assuring you that I believe there was never Knight errant that in one evening
had two such adventures or so strange as I have had since supper; nor know I
well if I may dare to tell them, since I can hardly believe them my self. Then
discoursed he to them what had happened to him, and they knew not, lessening
yet the number of those through whom he had forcibly passed, for fear they
should think it but a tale. But the Musician and footman which he believed
dead, or at the least prisoners, upon the conclusion of his story arriving, no
little renewed his wonder, for he could not imagine how they had escaped. But
how went you to work said he, for I left yon environed by fifteen or twenty
people, from whom I scarce hoped that ever you or my self should have gotten
free. Indeed Sir said the boy, they were 30 of them or more, but they dreamt
not of you, and they had more fear in them then they could put you in. And
then the Musician told them that they were certain Comedians followed by many
Lawyers and other gowned people, the most part of whom took their wives along
with them to the play, which was to be acted at Monsieur the Princes Court. I
wondered indeed how I came so valiant, answered Adraste, but now the marvel is
over since I find with what manner of people I had to do. To all this
discourse poor Oristine said never a word, though she thought nere the less,
doubting much that she should pay dear for this piece of folly, as indeed she
did: for the next day Adraste and Periste having taken leave of her, the Kings
Officer in those cases, failed not to visit her house, letting her understand,
he would inform against the riot committed the evening before, and to garnish
his Majesty's pockets, as the French has it, began with the seizure of her
goods. But not to make a Star Chamber suit of this in place of a love story,
we will leave Oristine to her suits, and follow the affections of Minerva.

The Argument.
Adraste reconcileth himself to Minerva, and not being able to vanquish the
inclination she has for Arnolphe, of a Lover he becomes a Friend. Tatius
renders himself necessary to Minerva, and so engages her estate and marries
her person, after the death of Arnolphe, and the vain predictions of Adraste,
which were found so true, as they produced a second separation of Marriage
between them.

CHAP. II.
NO misfortune but may bring good to some, the disparagement of Oristene, was
cause of the reconciliation of Adraste with Minerva. She for Adrastes sake,
took some pains on the behalf of Oristene, and then could Adraste do no less
then go home to her, and thank her for it, where a peace was no sooner treated
then concluded. He craved pardon for his Letter, which, was indeed to excuse
him of a fault that none knew that he had done; so Minerva recounted to him the
mistake that it had caused her to make. Though she loved not Adraste, yet she
liked well to retain him for a friend, or at least not to have him as an enemy,
so as for sometime he governed her very peaceably, by day he walked with her to
the Gardens of Ruel, and those of Saint Germans, and by night he accompanied
her to the accustomed places of bathing by moonshine at the Tournelles, and
afterward having carrried her back to her house, and passed the most of the
night with her, he usually retired all alone, without light from the one end of
the City to the other. Of 1000 men scarce shall ye find one that would for
1000 women, do what he did for this one. Notwithstanding one conge, one salute
of Arnolphe wayed more in the estimation of Minerva, than all the services of
Adraste. After some time, debating the matter with him, she confessed to him,
what indeeed she could not deny. The same passion you have for me, said she, I
have for him, and sigheth as often for his love, as you for mine. But I tell
you a secret, I should be loath he should discover; and I swear to you by the
love I bear him, that he has never received the satisfaction therein which you
have had, nor once has he pretended to it, however you have received but what
I might with, mine honor, grant. Arnolphe was a stranger, without name,
quality, or estate, that entertained Minerva with discourses of his own
lightness, inconstancy, and the Trophes he reared thereby to his vanity, ye,
even to the prejudice of that discretion, ought to be used in like cases. But
she, as if she had had power to render him as well faithful, as loving,
believed that he would become better to her, than God himself had made him,
lived encharmed within the circle of a faith much more amorous then reasonable.
Adraste told her all these things, and that he much marvelled that already
having bin deceived by one inconstant man she could yet again set her
affections, on an other more to be doubted then the first. But said she, this
is bad Rhetoric in you, to speak ill, with intention to cause me wish you
well. I cannot be so perfect as you go about to make me believe of my self,
if so I have not judgment sufficient to make an election worthy me. And grant
that he wants all those qualites you speak of, yet ought not my affection to
be the less, that is not tied at all unto the qualities and fortunes of a man,
but merely to his virtues and his demerits. Then did Adraste take the course
is seldom used amongst Rivals; Since it is so said he, that your will and
pleasure bears you to this, I will by no means stand in opposition: It being
altogether reasonlesse, that you having the power you have upon my liberty,
should not have the like upon your own. In my example you shall see allover,
that does for the love of his Mistress, love his rival. I will for your love
serve him, to the end that you even for his sake shall bear me some good will.
But yet remember you, that there shall be no justice left in heaven, it for the
faithful love of a slave that does adore you, you endure not the shameful
tyrannies of a faithless and impetuous Master, and in place of that eternity
of divine honors, and everlasting faithfulness which I vow to you, you drown
not your life in endless sorrows, and soil not your name with as many
infamous scandals (An unfortunate presage, that yet did prove more true).
Howsoever Minerva loved Arnolph dearly, yet could she not help it, but this
extreme submission of Adraste did overcome her. And though Adraste grieved to
see Minerva loved another, yet could not he avoid it, but this great freedom
with which she trusted him in a secret concerned her so nearly must needs
oblige him much; so as notwithstanding they seemed to renounce each others
love, yet disavowed they not each others friendship. Adraste therefore in stead
of becoming Minerva's servant, became her friend, an exchange more necessary
then favorable, but which depended merely on her pleasure. Whilst Adraste and
Arnolphe thus pretended to Minerva, there was yet a third competitor that bore
away the prize they expected and labored for: but he enjoyed it not o're-long,
nor without much cost, for indeed he was Clericus in libro, as we say, and not
in this craft a Master. Minerva for want of good prosecution, and not of right,
was quite o'rethrowne in her suit. There was one of the common Council of the
City, an ancient man, and of the longest continuance in the Court of
Parliament, one powerful in means and authority, and one that was not
ignorant of all the quirks and quillets in the law, and in truth a most proper
instrument to re-edifie and gain again a lost cause, Minerva needed such a
man as this, and her fortune would in stead of seeking him out, she was her
self sought out by him. Tatius, so was this Councellor called, was of an
amorous complexion, and covered glowing fires beneath the embers of a gray
beard. He had no sooner seen Minerva, but he was taken with her, and she well
managing the occasion, made him so wed her cause, as in place of counsel* he
became Solicitor and party, and in a word gaind her the suit which she had
absolutely lost, and got her to be sequestered both body and goods from her
husband: and all this without Minerva's once troubling her self, which was the
thing indeed she required and best liked of. But this you may think could never
be without much charge, the which Tatius very freely had disbursed, furnishing
her with 5 or 600 crowns, that Minerva secured him out of her estate. For
though Tatius were a gallant Gentleman, yet knew he well that it sufficed not
to carry away this prize from so many others braver then himself, and he
clearly found that it behoved him render himself the more necessary, by so much
as he was the less pleasing, and that he should begin to engage her estate
somewhat to him, the better afterward to interest him in her self. The design
was profound and subtle, and succeeded well in the acquisition, howsoever it
fell out but ill to him in the possession. The first took notice hereof was
Adraste, who incontinently told as much to Minerva, letting her understand
besides, she would become as mean a slave, as those are commonly sold in
Barbary at market, if so she ever married this old Sire, that could not be so
soon married, as jealous of her. And if it chance, said he, as I have told you
otherwhiles, that for being too covetous of your favors to one, so capable of
the knowledge of their worth, the heavens shall after as a just revenger,
consent that you be liberal of them unto some ignorant, that no way shall
find cause to acknowledge them, or shall not be able to return their price;
but on the contrary, be satiate with your kindnesses, afflicted with his
happiness, and openly neglect even these your excellent beauties for some
slight regard. And who shall then assist you to lamentyour cause after so fair a
warning, as is this of your disgrace! Who will not think fit such a cruel one
as bathes her self still in the blood of such as love her best, and is not
pleased but in the murder of their inconstant loves, at last should fall into
the hands of such a sot, as should revenge by his contemptuous outrages, the
most injurious disdaines wherewith she has crucified so many faithful souls?
And to remember you that I have said it is a misery fatal unto such as you;
and by so much the more assured as it is little feared. Minerva did but laugh
at these his ominous predictions, and told him; then she could with ease render
them all wholly false. Aruolphe were that he deemed it for the good of
Minerva, or that he loved her rather for a Mistress then a wife, freely
advised her to marry Tatius: But she having drawn, and got from him what she
would, now thought not but of the readiest means to discard and cast him off.
Tatius was a Churchman, and upon that she told him, that her friends took it
amiss, that one of his coat should so frequent her company: he sent to Rome,
and having obtained a dispensation for marriage, he sought her openly. Minerva
excused her then upon the difference betwixt their conditions, qualities, and
manner of life. Tatius being a gown man, used to the City. She being born in
the Country, and bred up amongst the Nobility. To every of her objections
Tatius found an answer. I will sell my goods, the places and offices that stay
me in the City, said he, and will alter my manner of living, to the end you
change not yours. Minerva seeing her self so encompassed on all sides, had
recourse to the lest remedy of Maids that would put off a suitor, they like
not, which is to say, that they will never marry. Added further, that she would
become a votary, and that the better to apt and fit her to the forms and
customs of a religious and solitary life; she entreated, not only him, but
likewise all such as did her the honor of visitation, to abstain from those
favors. Pay back the moneys that are owing me, said Tatius, then, since I must
lose the fruit of all my services; when you shall owe me nothing, nor we have
more to do with other, I am content since you will have it so, then not to see
you any more; but till we are even, I pray forbear to take from me the honor
of seeing you. Though Minerva were descended of a right good family, yet could
she not suddenly lay down the 6000 crowns she ought him, without selling away
part of her estate, nor could she find the man would do it for her: And
Tatius proceeding in law, had got a decree for the whole sum: she was drawn
dry by her suits, and her expenses caused thereby at Paris; Moreover she being
as yet in pupillage, her estate managed by overseers, brought her not in the
moiety of the true value. Arnolphe was a stranger, and without estate, as has
been said, and it he had abounded, yet had Minerva much rather have given to
him, then to have taken from him; and by misfortune he had got a wound on the
arm, in the time of Tatius his hottest pursuit, by one that he desired not to
kill, though he dyed himself within three days after of that hurt, leaving
behind him a most violent grief and uncomfortable sorrow in the heart of
Minerva. There was none left her then but Adraste, who had from far foreseen
this storm; though when he said so, he was not believed. Should she now have
recourse to him, after so often making her self merry at his predictions, and
demand counsel of him, having before so often slighted his advise? It must
needs be, to whom indeed should one resort, but such of whom they have had so
oftentimes sufficient proof of their fidelity? she dispatched then a Gentleman
to him being at Paris, and she in the Country, to lament her misfortune, accuse
her incredulity, and demand his advise in a case of such importance. Adraste
had much rather have given her help then counsel, but he could not; his father
was yet living, and he managed but what he allowed him, which scarce sufficed
for his own entertainment. Queen Margaret gave him indeed some times a
quarterly pension, but it was casual, and not certain, had it been sufficient,
nor sufficient, had it been certain. He truly loved Minerva, and if she had
given him time to provice it, he had rather sold what ere he had in the world,
then have failed her, but she asked his counsel in a thing that was already
past and done: and though he knew not that it was concluded of, for all that he
doubted much it was exceeding forward. For Minerva pressed by the importunities
of Tatius, after all the shifts and doubles that the craft and subtilty of
women could invent, yet was at last constrained to marry him, but in
clandestine manner, and to the end to deceive and cast him off, as she had done
the other, getting a promise from him, that the marriage should not be
consummate until six months after, in which time she thought to take some
order in her affairs, and find means to pay him. But Adraste knew not of
this, he wrote unto her then in these very words:

Adrastes Letter.
WHat I have heretofore often said, proves now too true. It rests then in you to
make it appear in human things whether there be predestination, er free will;
since if you be forced through necessity to imbarce this your misfortune, I
shall henceforth believe it altogether bootlesse to foresee, or to forewarne
the event of things, since they are by no means to be avoided. If you be not, I
shall believe you Mistress of your will, and that it is not in the power of any
living man to force it. It is hard to constrain such as are yet in the
obedience which you have dispensed with, nor can such a thing be done but with
much grief, and more misfortune. You know it by the experience you have had;
and if others ought to weigh it well as once, you are to think upon it twice.
But why complain you of unhappiness, since you will needs be so? Is it not
well known that it can never be unless yon will, there being naught so free as
marriage is? Think not that these complaints again shall serve you for excuse,
they at the first indeed were not amiss, when you were but an Infant, and in
the power of those respected more themselves then you. And how be it that then
you were free from fault, yet know you well, what you your self didundergo
therein. The authority of friends no more can here constrain your infancy. If
you do well, the glory will be yours, if ill, lament you of it to your self,
for no man else will grieve for you, but I, that cannot choose but grive that
you the Mistress of perfection, should be destinate to things so disagreeable.
If so you be obliged by any man, twere fit you gave him satisfaction in it, but
not unless you will at price of your self, think but what must follow, what
you are to do, and of the pleasure you shall take in it, if so your discord
bring you once more, before the Judges. But I believe it is to little purpose
that I argue, and my reasons will not serve so much to profit you, as to my own
discharge; However, had I the honor to see you, I might perchance say that
unto you, might bring you about to another mind. And if it be not now too
late, and that the pleasures you do expect from this your Lover, not
precipitate your better counsels, I yet may have a word or two with you before
it be long. But if the ill be helpless, and you must drink of this medicine,
prepare you it so, that it be profitable to you yet. It Is all the counsel I can
give, in that of which I know not how to advise my self, that could have wished
this comfort in my loss, that at the least I had seen it profitable unto you.
Fairest Minerva adieu, I cannot keep me more from my lamenting, then I can from
loving you; well may you be unto another, but I can never be to any one but you;
and as for you I do believe that being unable to be what you ought to me, you
will at least be what you may. If you have wept the death of your Arnolphe, now
lament the life of your Adraste, that never can esteem it so as the honor to
have power to lose it once in serving you, and her to rest yours.

When Minerva had once received this Letter, she became afflicted with two
most sensible and violent griefs, one from the loss of a friend she loved
above her self; the other from possessing an Enemy she hated more then any
thing. In the one there was no remedy, nor in the other but a very little hope.
And is it not enough, said she, that I have lost the man more dear to me
then all the world besides, but that I must be forced to marry one, most
hateful unto me of all the earth? Oh Adraste, how justly now might thou
scoff at my vanity. Adraste mocked her not; but seeing Tatius Quartermaster in
her house, and watch so near all manner of resort thereto, as that there was no
approaching her but by his means, he did conceive he had no more to do, and that
it was fit he then should lose desire, when he had left to hope. Tatius slept
not the whilst, The six months agreed on passed, the marriage indeed was
consummated with all secrecy, but her great belly ere it were long made seen
the whole mystery, and constrained them to celebrate publicly the marriage
they had so privately made behind the curtain. So was Minerva almost as soon
brought a bed as married, and married to a jealous fellow that would not fail
to accomplish those unhappy presages of Adraste, that armed him with
resolution, and constancy, and knowing love best to be cured by some other
love, lost the sorrow for his first Mistress in the affections and service of a
second and new one, Minerva wrote to him yet some little time after her
marriage, but such a Letter as the extravagance showed well the ill seat of her
wit and judgment; she wrote him word, That she was much satisfied from the
contentment which she had purposed to have given to him, or at least to have
let him see the desire she had to content him. All the rest of the Letter was
but testimonies of good will, well wishes and offers of remembrance,
protestations, and oaths to esteem him above all the World, and desires of his
company, Adraste answered. That after much pondering the contentment she said
she had determined to give him, and the satisfaction which rested to her in
having made known to him such her desire; he by no means found that the one or
the other was come to him, without she thought she had contented him in saying
that she was well pleased at his contentment, that she might well have
afforded him other satisfactions which had more obliged him then such, and from
him might have rendered her self better, then those the people gave her* but
she seemed to show her good will when she had no longer power to manifest it,
and offered now her well wishes to render the loss of her affection the more
insupportable, that all these protestations, and these oaths made of her good
esteem of him, gratified him not, that it was oncly a dainty she whipped by his
mouth, mocking him that had so often entreated her to honor him less, and
love him more. That since there was no means for him to succeed and inherit
the affections of the dead, whose his had preceded, he prayed heaven that he
might be deceived in his predictions rather then she in her election, and that
she might enjoy as much contentment in what she did possess, as he had sorrow
for what he did loose. As for his company, that he wished it no less useful
unto her, then hers to him was dear; that he already had rendered her the
addues she sent him, with more weight and measure then she did receive them,
and if per adventure she doubted it, the greatest pleasure she could do him,
was to examine it. Minerva seeing Adraste thus in merriment, believed he was no
longer in love; and as we know not the price of things till after their loss,
she found the discretion and fidelity of this Lover, too late, and when she
had not means left her to gratify them. Moreover as things never appear so
much as when they are opposed unto their contraries, the harsh nature of Tatius
caused her now to taste the sweetness of that gentle one of Adraste: And she
by means of the tyranny was practiced upon her, bethought her of the Empire
erewhiles she had exercised on him. The servile condition to which she was now
reduced, made her not only lament the liberty she had taken to her self, but
the sovereignty also which she had held on others. And conferring her present
misery with her passed felicity, she esteemed her by so much the more wretched,
as she remembered her to have been most happy. Tatius used her honorably, yet
in all appearance, much rejoicing him in the good huswifery, and virtuous
qualities of his wife, but in effect, she was confined to a private corner,
where she had sufficient leisure to lament her follies. Her house heretofore
open to all comers, where she had wont be often visited by her friends, indeed
was not forbid them, but she shut from them, without leave so much as once to
see her kinsfolks. And in the mean time Tatius entertained his guests, in
which he was little skilled, for nere did Clown act well a Gentleman; and he
being born in the City, and brought up a Lawyer, knew better how to entertain a
Judge, with his Writs and Motions, then good company, with the civilities and
complements are practiced amongst Ladies and Cavaliers that live in the
Country. Besides, the condition of Tatius was mean, but for the eminenco of
his places, which having sold, he had nothing left him praiseworthy, without
it were a few goods that could not long continue. His friends they thought much
on it that he had put off all his Offices of credit and of profit, both which
had made him appear eminent and in authority in the prime Court of Parliament
in France, to live a private life in the Country, without any eminence at all,
and that he had prejudiced his fortunes for a wife, that kept hers entire to
her self: and the friends of Minerva seeing Tatius Jack out of office, as we
say, and without employment, were very sorry that she had taken a man that had
put off the authority, which indeed only made him worthy of her. So things
standing between the friends on both sides, it was yet much worse between
themselves, Minerva by so much the more sensible of the ill usage of Tatius, as
she little dared to complain, and Tatius by so much the more continuing to use
her still worse and worse, as she continued to suffer it. Minerva lived three
years in this bondage, which wereto her no less then three ages, perpetually
thinking of some means to redeem her. At last having resolved upon it, think
you not Sir said she, that the assembly of so many wrongs and injuries as you
do daily heap on me, will not one day break upon and strike you too* for me,
I should rather choose to dye, then once to give you cause to use me thus; But I
confess unto you truly, that indeed I had much rather dye, then longer to
endure them. Tatins not being used to be braved by a woman, much less by his
wife, answered sternely to her, that there was no mean between them, but that
she must resolve to endure the one or of the other. Minerva replied not to him,
but bethought her presently what she would do upon this. The mishap or
imprudence rather of Tatius would that he must to Paris, which ministered to
Minerva an opportunity to order her affairs, and to dispose them in such
manner, that upon the return of Tatius, she caused him to be told, that she
had reserved two chambers to her self, which she entreated him to afford her,
and content him with the rest of the house, which she left wholly to him.
Tatius that looked not for this, would needs to her to answer her in proper
person: but she would not suffer him speak to her, or by any means once see
her: and in stead of now playing the Master at home, he found that she was at
home in truth, and that he was become the weaker; So as neither prayers nor
threats being able to shake the resolutions taken by a determinate woman, he
was constrained to return back to Paris, whether she followed him soon
after, with purpose to sequester her estate from his; very sorry that two
children that she had had by him were the cause she could not be separated from
him in body as well as in goods.

The Argument.
Minerva comes back to Paris. The second loves of Adraste with her, are
ruined by the practices and confederacy of Brasidas, and of Gracchus her
Kinsmen and Lovers.

CHAP. III.
MInerva being disburthened of a charge, she thought her self very unfit to
bear, turned her whole Meditations to the means by which she need never
return under his charge; and to this effect having established some order in
the managing the affairs of her house according to the necessity of her new
Commonweal, she took her way presently to Paris, whither she was called not
only for the execution of her design; but likewise for the accomplishing of
her desires: For her usual residing in this incomparable City, where she had
tasted so many delights, was become more deer, and far more pleasing to her,
then that of the Country, where she had reaped no other then a bitter harvest.
Tatius not less feeble in adversity, then insolent in his better fortunes,
understood not so soon that she was there arrived, but he sent unto her to
entreat so much favor as to be admitted to seeher. It was too soon to descend
so low, as to beg leave of his wife to see her; in stead of the possession
which he wont, and ought yet to have had of her; and a wife which but three
days before he not suffered to see any man. He should have done like
Alcibiades that bore away his wife by force, through the public hall, and from
amidst the assembly of all the people, where she had summoned him to appear.
But he passed from one extreme to another, and fell from a most insupportable
tyranny, into a dejected and most insufferable servitude. Minerva admitted him
to come seeher, and this weak man thinking to mollify by prayers, her whom he
had not had power to overcome by threats, and recover by humility, what he had
lost by arroga^ce, not only made her all the offers due from a husband to a
wife; but rather all the submissions that a slave owes his Master. Minerva for
her part did render him all the honor of the world, but without the least
being moved by his prayers, or any way slacking her pursuit; most humbly
entreating him to pardon her, if she sought the assurance of her life in that
of herestate, of which she had not so much as thought, had not he himself
enforced her to it. So were their estates parted, and by consequence their
bodies; for Minerva said she had children enough for the fortunes she
possessed, and not being able to maintain any more, she would by no means make
any more: Poor Tatius, did thou for this remove the earth, Eye heaven it self
almost, to sequester this woman from her first husband, to the end to see her
now again sequestered even from thee? Must thou make merchandise of thy whole
fortunes and thy honors both, of whatsoever thou did possess in all the
World, to have a wife, which thou indeed have not? Minerva having rid her of
this thorn out of her foot, learned the news of Adraste, and having bin
informed of his lodging gave him presently to understand where hers was, and
Adraste went thither to see her soon after; at their first greeting, they staid
some while to view one another, both equally astonished; Minerva with a little
shame, and Adraste with some wonder. Well, Madam, said Adraste, (having
saluted) you have found at last that I am no less veritable then unhappy,
since my predictions have not only proved true: but unavoydable likewise.
Would I had never spoke them, since they have proved so inprofitable, and were
received as ill presages, which for the most part but foregoe mishaps. Indeed
Adraste, said Minerva, I avow it, that you have shown more judgment by
foretelling my misfortunes, then I have in myaddresses to avoid them; but you
are not ignorant it is more easy to foresee, then to prevent such things by
much. The cause why we sometimes wisely undertake the things, that do not
always well succeed; being clear that it rests but in our powers to
undertake, as wholly it belongs longs to God to give the event. You only said
Adraste, have the art to make those things show well that in themselves are
nothing so; which here I come not to subvert, much less yet to complain of
you whose fortunes I lament more then my own. So have you indeed more cause to
plain my miseries, then to complain of my actions, answered Minerva, no one
of them ere tending to your displeasure. But tell me now how rest I in your
memory, and how may I hope to be therein reserved henceforward. Assure you
Madame answered Adraste, you abide there better then ever, where I preserve you
with much more ease, and far lesle trouble then I was wont to do: And as for
what depends on time to come, you know we positively can say naught. And I have
been so much deceived in the event of things are past, that I dare promise
naught in future, else had I sworn to you ere this, that all the waters
fleeting in oblivions stream, are not of force to wash you clear from thence;
but by the incertainty of things have happened late to me, I judge that it may
be that I may bear you long in mind, and with more ardure and more passion
too, then ever yet: and likewise it may chance, the helps of reason, time, and
absence, may do me the grace to have power to loose your memory. The greatest
displeasure that a man can do a woman whom he has ever loved or honored, is
to let her see that he loves her no more: for it seems an outrage done to their
beauties. Minerva for all she was much moved, yet smiled at this answer, for
amongst other parts of dissimulation, or of prudence, she had that, never to
manifest the least feeling of a grudge, but on the instant of her revenge. She
said then to him, that she was very glad to see him cured of an affection which
her honor forbade her to remedy, provided that the cure were perfect, and not
rather a stupifying of the apprehension of it; for then said she, such as
complain the least, are they are most to be feared, for that their ill is by
so much the greater, as their sense of it is the less: Moreover as the cure
ought be entire, so should it be moderate, for that she had heard, that too
perfect a health was often the presage of a dangerous disease, and she feared a
servitude by so much the greater as his liberty now seemed the more boundless;
which she conceived altogether incompatible with his humor, that she thought
unable, not only to undergo the disease, but more to suffer the remedy.
Excuse me if you please, answered Adraste, I shall bear them both, so they come
together, but I love not the one without the other; for that the remedy without
the evil is to no purpose, and the evil without the remedy is insupportable.
Well then, said Minerva, you assure me to be without the disease, and I promise
you not to minister the remedy. We are then agreed, Madame, answered Adraste, I
demand nothing of you, and you grant me my request: which saying, they fell
both in laughter, and to discourse of such accidents as were befallen them
since their last intervenue. Minerva related to him the indignities Tatius had
done her, which caused her seek the assurance of her life, in that of her
estate, with as much sorrow yet as any virtuous wife could have in the
displeasure of her husband. I marvel not much said Adraste, at what is
happened unto you after having been so often forewarned, before it befell you.
I should have wondered if it had been otherwise. Since you merit it by your
incredulity, though not in your actions. I cannot render you so small good
will, but I wish you much better then him, though I grieve more for him, then I
do for you; since you have lost a man whose acquisition was your mishap, and
he has lost a wife whose possession was his whole fortune. Comfort you so your
friends said Minerva: yet more harshly, said Adraste, when they dare to
complain to me of ils they suffer for their pleasure, and for not believing
me. I am further then from daring to complain to you of the death of Arnolph
said she. For that answered Adraste, I shall compatiate with you in your
mishap; Arnolph being dead by an accident wherein you had no hand. There is
much difference in the misfortunes we suffer innocently, and those we undergo
by our own default. But if you be not receivable in demanding of my counsel or
resolution, on the divorce of a husband, how think you to be in demanding it on
the loss of a Rival; had I not as much cause to rejoice me for my own
interest, as to afflict me for yours? And you Madame, that have said you will
give me no help, how dare you demand of me my advice? I could do no less,
answered Minerva, then to promise my refusal of help, when you assure me not
to have any need. Well Madame, replied Adraste, but when I do assure you of
need, will you assure me of help? When, how when, said Minerva? It is
impossible to come ny fire without being heat; Adraste conversing daily with
Minerva, whatsoever liberty he had recovered by his absence, and her marriage,
became reingaged in the inevitable charms of her allurements, and stricken with
the same amorous infection, wherewith she wounds all the world. After long
arguing in favor of his reason, he concluded yet according to the swinge of
his passion, and judged it better for him to submit with all the world beneath
the Empire of this so excellent a beauty, then he to resist it only. If he
were troubled to resolve this, be sure he was more to confess it. He was much
ashamed that he had played the fool, and rendered himself so flexible. It seemed
strange unto him, to have slighted one he had adored, and again to adore the
woman he had slighted so: he called to mind the first shipwreck he had
undergone with her, and by that he apprehended the second, remembered him how
easily he had been engaged in his affections, and with what pain he was
retired. It seemed to him he did but break in two these chains were almost
now worn out, to carry new more strong, and that he freed himself but from an
easy hold, to re-enter in a prison far more merciless. That he should quit
a Master that he had more cause to praise, then to complain of, who amongst
the ils he had wished him, had not yet forborne to wish him well, and suffer
underneath a merciful resentment of his passions. But love, what can it not in
a gentle heart? At last, he confessed to her that more then her rigor, and his
absence, the many perfections which he saw in her, opposed to the many
defaults he felt in himself, had enforced him to practice a remedy more ill
then his disease, which having cost him much to find would cost him more to
lose. That her great beauties which wholly occupied his soul, being yet
ravished from him, as all hope of their possession was most injuriously torn
from him, it was no way to be deemed strange, if so despair had put to death
desire, that could not livewithout it were in hope, That to save him from the
tyranny of one Master only, he had bin constrained to make him many; and not
unprofitably to love one thanklesse object ever he had dispersed the stream of
his passions, and divided his affections into as many places, as he found
several sorts of objects. That erring like the Pilot that had lost his star,
and rendering him like to the trees on the highwayes, that do bear fruit, but
for the passers by, he was become infetterd in a chain so sweet in appearance
and fair in effect, that he had willingly himself thrust in his arms, and did
esteem him now more happy in the loss of his liberty, then he could be in
conquering the whole earth. But that as all things have a certain revolution
within the course of which, theyby a time return to their first heads, his
destiny constrained him now return into that honorable servitude, in which she
captivated the most beauteous souls. Minerva not less wondering at the love of
Adraste, then satisfied with her own beauties, of which she had here an
illustrious proof in this second conquest of this lover, answered him in these
terms. If any other then your self should talk to me thus, Adraste, either I
should not believe him at all, or at least should fain not to believe him. But
the knowledge I have of your goodness, makes me that as I esteem you
veritable, so will I answer you from my own heart, believing you speak to me
from the bottom of yours. And to observe the same method you hold with me in
confessing your thoughts, I shall discover mine to you, and acknowledge that if
I were in such condition as I could give me to any one, it should be you. But I
will not forbear to tell you many things that hinder me therein, though you do
know them near as well as I; to the end that if you do not receive the
satisfaction you have promised you, you may lay the fault on your own errors,
and not upon my will, that never shall be wanting in good wishes to you, nor to
perform like deeds on your behalf. Minerva discoursing afterward the causes
hindered her from loving of Adraste, missed not to put that of god, in the first
place, whom we ought to love and fear above all things; and you said she that
love and fear him above other men, would cause me render him my enemy for your
love. This divine reason is of such force, as there is no humane passion can or
convince it, or withstand the being overcome by it. But if you dis*esteeme of
god, which were so enormous an offense, where of the monstrous impiety could
never be sufficiently chastised, or what could persuade you to make me believe
that I could ever live, after being robbed of my honor in this World? And you
that hazard often so generously your life to save your honor, how dare you here
propose to me the loss of mine? Is not the honor of us Ladies pray, all out
as choice and delicate as that of men? And if you love me as you say, and as I
do believe, why do you desire to lose me so? can you love my person, and
neglect my honor? Madam, answered Adraste, my discretion may be shield unto
your honor, and this same innocent fear you have of doing ill by favoring
me, is void of likelihood. God is not the enemy but the author of nature, and
the offense without scandal is no offense. Believe you that the natural
affection, the author of nature imprinteth in our souls, is averse to the will
of him that gives it us? and that the first thing he ever commanded, he should
now forbid us? God wishes us no il, but for the ils we do to our selves, nor
takes amiss the offeces done to him, but those we do to our selves, for being
maker of the universe, his care is most to perserve his workmanship, and his
offense, at that, would hinder it, and not at that, which merely tends to the
conservation of it. Then, is he, the enemy of violence, injustice, cruelty, and
the ingratitude that tend to the subversion of love, and not of love it self,
and he is angered that we turn his sweets to bitterness, and do convert to our
damage that which he has given us for our benefits: For as love is the cause
of our greatest goods, so may it become of our greatest ils; but then it must
be by our own improvidence, and not by his. See then, who offends most the
divinity, Madame, or I that follow the laws of love, according to the end for
which they first were made, or you that do endeavor what you may to change and
to pervert his institutions; and choose rather to apply you to the counsel of a
thanklesse and unnatural rigor, then the true apprehension of a natural
inclination, that is not only permitted, but commanded. It is true, that God
has commanded love said Minerva, but that which is legitimate; all other
affections being forbid, not only by divine but humane laws. In which I Will
speak no more to him that teaches others. A good cause defends it self; and
one word is sufficient in a truth, whereas a lie needs the support of a large
discourse. Both of them spoke against their conscience, and contrary to their
own belief; for this discourse of Adraste was quite averse to what he thought,
and Minerva's answer was no less far from her meaning. Adraste desiring to
persuade a woman that would be persuaded, and whom he perceived to seek some
honest means that she might love him without blushing, endeavored by this
talk to take from her such shame as naturally retains all women. In which
nerethelesse he knew well that he did ill, but one so common amongst men whose
reasons are overcome by appetite, as it seems custom not only renders them
permitted, but authorized. Minerva speaking truly according to her belief,
stretched yet her thoughts unto such things as she might do, accompanying the
coldness of her words, with the quickening flames of her fair looks, drew by
the gentleness of her fweet charms, him that she yet repulsed by the force of
her strong reasons, to let him see the beauty of her mind, in the refusing him
that of her body, so as in yielding both one and the other to him, he should
owe the favor rather to her love then to her ignorance. And permitting him
some small privacies which did not much forbid the greater, as they seemed to
promise unto him, caused him hope that she would do like the good wives, that
often resuming what men ask of them, yet forbear not to do some part of
their demands, but saying still they will do naught. Whilst Adraste so
eagerly solicited Minerva, Brassidas and Gracchus both, came athwart his
designs. Brasidas was a little of kin to Minerva, but not so much, but he
could have wished to have been more near. A man discreet, wise, subtle, and a
boon companion, chiefly amongst women. Gracchus was a little more earthy, and
retained more of the Soldier, then of the Courtier, but nerethelesse both of
them brave Gentlemen, and both Lovers of Minerva, who seeing Adraste first in
time, and consequently in right, however such a consequence is not always
necessary in affairs of love, where the last comers are many times first
received, agreed both together to ruin him. The occasion was offered them by
the means of Asteria, one that Adraste saw some times, and Gracchus likewise,
however for divertisement only, and each single without the other;
notwithstanding which they often met there; Gracchus being then one day with
Asteria, she would needs know the news of Minerva, and he knowing that she
knew not her, but through the report of Adraste, asked her again what he said
of her? Asteria either to give him cause of jealousy, or to make her self
merry, said that Adraste did speak all the good in the world of her, but in his
particular he thought no longer of her. And that others might now with his free
good will visit her if they would, for he had taken his leave. Gracchus
whether he believed her, or that he was well pleased to have such an advantage
on Adraste, was so sottish, or malicious, as to report again to Minerva, for a
truth, what the other had spoken in jest. And the ill fortune was, that Adraste
not seeing her of 3 or 4 days, she was so weak to believe it. The next day
after Minerva having agreed to go take the air with Brassidas and Gracchus,
in the Tuilleries, and having given them notice of the time she would pass
over the new Bridge, she by chance met with Adraste alone near his lodging,
that it may well be, thought then of her, but not of the mischief she wished
him, nor of the charitable office was provided for him, from so far as she
could see him, she called to him, and having caused him come into her coach,
told him as they went, the cause she had, or she believed she had, to be
offended at his words. Adraste judged presently from whence it came, but he
would say nothing behind the back of those he seemed the Authors of this
imposture, which were as he believed, Brassidas and Gracchus, and by so much
the less he spoke, by so much the more he seemed guilty, and to confess it,
so as Minerva extremely offended at his words, took yet more offense at his
silence by which he esteemed to confirm them. Brassidas and Gracchus failed not
of the time, at the place appointed by Minerva, but were presently seen on
horseback at the lower end of the street Dauphine, near the new Bridge. Minerva
offered them room in her Coach, and they went both into one of the boots,
Adraste being with her in the other. They were scarce set, before Gracchus
turning him toward Adraste; so Sir said he, you have taken your leave, and
parted with this Lady, for all which me thinks you are here still: I stay Sir
answered Adraste, to tell you, that is a tale, and nothing so. In saying which
they being set back to back, one against the other, laid hand on their swords,
Adraste on that of Gracchus, and Gracchus on Adrastes, which they drew near
half out. Minerva (and her mother that sat at the end of the Coach) both
shrieked out extremely afrighted. Brassidas put himself between them, the
Coachman stayed, and both of them sat down again without a blow striking, out
of their respect to Minerva, who was yet irreconcileably offended at the-small
regard they had had of her. She complained of wrong to the one and the other,
and they both excused themselves to her, deferring their difference until a
fitter opportunity. But Brassidas could not forbear to tell Adraste that he
had done ill; Adraste hearing such words from him he esteemed, and who was
indeed partly author of the quarrel, told him very hotly that he was none of
his Judge, and that he should do well to stay the meddling in his causes, till
they were brought before him. Brassidas being before interessed in the
business for love of Gracchus, was now become engaged on his own behalf. Note
either of them had a sturdy Laquay, and each of them a sword, and that Adraste
had but a little boy who bore none with him neither; so as if they would have
took their advantage, the match had been ill made. The Coach drove along strait
to the Tuilleries, whilst Minerva forethinking they would strive who should
lead her at the going out of the Coach, and fearing some worse matter might
yet arise in the business, very privately charged and conjured Adraste to take
her mother, telling him that she had had promised this day to walk with them,
and that she met him but by chance. Adraste asked her, why if she had made
them such a promise, she called him along, and said that since he was first in
time, if any one led her, it must be he. She then entreated him he would let
her go alone, and promised that none of the other should lead her. Adraste
deeming it unfit to enforce her to suffer her self to be led against her will,
agreed to that. And as she came out of the Coach, every of them tendering his
hand, she beseecht them leave her at liberty, saying she was old enough to
walk without help of a leader. Notwithstanding, Adraste kept close on one side
of her, and Brassidas and Gracchus on the other, without any one once offering
to conduct Arlande, though she had more need of their help then Minerva, not
out of incivility, or want of courtesy, but through excess of pride, and
courage, fearing in leading the mother, they might seem to decline the
daughter. They walked in this posture so far as the grande alley of the
Tuilleries, and from thence as far as the Echo. Adraste and Gracchus
interchanging some braving looks, arose, observed one another, not speaking one
word till they came to the end of the alley, when, the King entered at the other
end; and Minerva that had shook all this while, took Adraste aside whom she
had not spoken to since their coming into the Park, more then to the rest.
And just the same fear a poor woman might have, (said she) to see two men of
her company fight, have I to this minute had, not, but I thought ve had both
sufficient discretion to forbear doing me such discourtesie, but that I
mistrusted my self of sufficient merit to retain the violence of your first
motions, till now the Kings coming frees me from the fear, and you from the
means to change blows; I conjure thee Adraste, by that great power which thou
have made me believe I have in thee, not to trouble the delights we expect in
this days walk with thy company. You have been sufficiently troublesome
already, though I think innocently, so as I could wish that true was told me of
you, and that I had not had the honor to meet you at all this day; not but
your company is dear to me, that being the cause I entreat you now indeed to
reserve it for some other time; for now I cannot entertain you for fear of
offending them, nor them for the same fear of offense to you. And this little
time I spend with you, makes me doubt I have distasted them, since I know well
you would be angry to seem talk so long to them. Adraste was no way agrieved
at this discourse, for having cleared himself to Minerva, and driven his
enemies to wind ward, he was soon weary of the company, had lost what ever
could be called pleasure in it, in the bitterness of this dispute, he desired
much to converse with Minerva, but he as much shunned all common
entertainments, as he sought particular. The coming of the King took from him
all cause of fear that he could be suspected to shun their worst of daring,
being sure they would do nothing in his presence to any man, much less to one
they had not undertaken when he was alone: he gave Minerva then this answer;
since I came not here without being called, it shall besit me I conceive not to
retire without your leave. Which since you have so freely given me, I may well
take, and in obedience of your commands, go hence, as by your summons I came
hither. And more then the contentment of obeying you, I too shall bear along
with me the satisfaction to have cleared your doubts: and to have let you see,
in my as freely parting, as address, that you have not less power to abandon
me, then to bring me to you. Yet I must here entreat you to acknowledge
privately, the wrongs you have done me now in company, and in the evening, yet
to honor me with that free entertainment of which I now deprive me willingly
to obey. This day said Minerva, I cannot, but to morrow will dispose so of my
affairs, as I will afford you two hours of the morning. Adraste kissing her
hands, made a low reverence to her mother, and went his way, hasting after the
King, without salute, or once looking on Brassidas or Gracchus. Having
o'retaken the Court, he entreated the first friend he met, to take a turn with
him, and leading him toward that side of the Park where he had left Minerva,
he told him; how he had been constrained to give some offenceto a couple of
Gentlemen that had no just apprehension of it, or perhaps dissembled their
grudge, in respect to the company, or it might be for that they scorned to be
two to one. That he had entreated him to walk this way with him, to the end
that the others seeing them together, might have occasion and means to make a
party of two to two. And is it for this you took me from my attendance on
the King, answered Oriste? so was he called, yes, said Adraste. There are such
fools indeed in the world, replied Oriste, amongst whom I did little think you
had had a place. And what in the Devils name have you to do with them, did you
not tell me even now that you had given them offense? It is true said Adraste,
and I love not to give offense, but presently I will give satisfaction. That is
not amiss, indeed, if you will ask them pardon, answered Oriste, or make them
some other submission to repair the wrong you have done them. But you have not
offended them as yet but in words, and you would wrong them now in deeds? you
have but hurt them, and you would, kill them right out? and call it
satisfaction, and reparation of honor? It belongs to them to repair the injury
you have done them, by doing you a greater wrong, words, by the lie, the lie by
a box on the ear, and a box of the ear by blood or death. But you have
wronged them, and would give satisfaction by increasing the offense, and repair
your fault by rendering it altogether irrepairable. As for me, it is a
philosophy of the times I understand not. Stay till they come to us, and we
will talk with them, but to go seek them, is to run to meet a man's mishap, and
for pleasure to throw ones self headlong down a precipice. True said
Adraste, but you know a common error makes a law, and we are now a days
governed more by the examples of fools, then by the reasons of the wise? In
saying which they passed and repassed acrosse the wood, into the same walk,
where Minerva was, between the hands of Brasidas and Gracchus, Adraste saluting
Arlande, and Minerva, not so much as looking on the others, and they resaluting
also without the others observing it. The next morn Adraste expected a
challenge very early, and having stayed till eight of the clock in his lodging
he came by that time she rose to Minerva's, where he was scarce entered, but
one told Minerva; that Brasidas and Gracchus were at the door. Tell them I am
not well, said Minerva, and that I desire them to hold me excused, that I
cannot accept the honor they do me. Let it not be so, answered Adraste, for my
boy attends me below, by whom they may know I am here. What shall we do then,
said Minerva? I would you were all at several ends of the World, far enough
from hence, and where my head might escape breaking in your quarrels. Madame,
answered Adraste, ye ought yet distinguish between the innocent, and the
faulty; It was not I caused the jarre, you know best what is now to be done,
you prayed me yesterday to retire for the love of them, you may to day pray
them to retire for the love of me. And if you should wish them never come
again, after the knowledge you now have of their malice, it were but justly
done. Sir, said Arlande, Brassidas is my kinsman, I, nor my daughter can well
forbid him the house, nor those he brings a long with him. But go tell them
said she to one of her servants, that my daughter is at mass, and that I am
busy here with Adraste. Arlande said this, well knowing they looked not for
her, and that the ready way to return them, was to say her daughter was not
within. There was three or four Churches thereabouts, to all which they went,
and Minerva thinking with her self they would not fail to go thither, and not
finding her, they would come back to her house, was much disquieted; for that
she would not refuse them entry, or deny her self to them twice together in
one day, and to turn off Adraste, it was out of all likelihood. When she was
once ready, he would have waited her to the Church, but she excused herself,
and stole privately from him to go thither alone, leaving him with Arlande, who
told Adraste what a shame it would be to her daughter, if her cosen should
find him with her in the street, in stead of being at Church, and the
misfortune might follow, if Graccus choler or his honor, should so o're-rule
him, as now in her company to take satisfaction of the injury done him, which
the day before he had for the love of her dissembled. Adraste did not trouble
himself to answer her, but taking his leave, followed Minerva from Church to
Church, and while he sought her in one* Brassidas and Gracchus found her in the
other; and she found no less pain to dismiss them, then she had had to rid
her of Adraste, for they importuned her no less to wait her back from Church,
then he had to bring her thither. But at last she escaped them, and returned as
she went, after having drawn a promise from Gracchus, that he should not call
Adraste to account for any thing that had past the day before. In the mean
time Adraste returned very discontented at Minerva, it seemed to him that she
having promised him an entertainment to day, should not have left him as she
had, to find out his enemies; and that she was not stolen away so much for any
devotion she had to Church, as for the desire she had to see them there. But
next day he was much more troubled, thinking to go make his complaint, when
they told him she was gone out to walk with them. Then presently conceived he
the plot was not combined against him, but with her counsel and assent, and
that she had not only approved, but designed it. And so returning back, his
breast fraught with more despite then love, and not so much reason as rage,
after having resolved now to break with her once for all, he wrote to her,

THat as he had pitied her weakness, seeing she suffered her self to be
rather persuaded by passion* on the part of his Enemies then by the truth of
his words; so he received no small contentment, to see that for his having
cheered himself before them, and for ever being too d screet and respectfull on
her behalf, and at her instance on theirs, he was now deprived of what they
possessed for having been the contrary. That the time had been when this
privation now so easy to undergo, had been most difficult for him to believe;
but considering that of all things that most provoked him, and the chiefest
cause of his vexation and worst tormenting passions, it was easy for him to
endure the loss of a good, the possession whereof was so extremly damageable.
Wherefore he would now as with a sponge wipe off the fair impressions which he
had formerly admitted in his memory, and he entreated her to favor him so
far, as not to oblige him ever by the replacing them. He avowed it the
mediate will of Heaven, without which he had been as unable 'to execute, as
rash in undertaking this design. For which he only was to thank her
ingratitude, that thinking to work him so much ill, had been the cause of so
great good to him. And that he did beseech her by this last, and by all other,
and so many vows, no less religious, then unprofitable, which he most
foolishly had rendered her, that henceforth she would never more call them to
mind; assuring her he should esteem him fully satisfied for all his services,
when he should find they were forgot, and that she held them so indifferent,
that he had never cause to joy in or complain of them.

The Argument.
Adraste closes again with Minerva, comfort her on the death of Arnolphe.
Commotions in France, and diverse adventures upon that subject.

CHAP. IIII.
WHat delight soever the company afforded, could not be so pleasant to Minerva,
as this Letter was bitter to her. But howsoever she took it extremely ill from
Adraste, she would not yet loose him so. No though she knew not to what purpose
to reserve him, for she had sufficiently manifested the little good will she
bore him. But there are some women that delight themselves to render all men
amorous of them, and they affecting none. Or it may be she held this maxim of
the wise, that say a man should not break with friends, no not for any cause
whatsoever, for that such as are unfit for one thing, may yet serve to another,
and it may be she intended to accommodate her self by Adraste to some other
purpose. Whatsoever it were, she forbore to answer his Letter till her choler
was past over, nor wrote she to him then; but passing some days after by his
lodging, she caused him to be told, that there was a Gentlewoman in the street
asked for him. Adraste came down, and Minerva made him come into her Coach,
where she was then accompanied only with one gentlewoman, and going to take
the air. She told him that she had not answered his Letters, for that she
could not bethink her of terms sufficiently powerful to make him senceable of
her anger. So then Madame, answered Adraste, if you have not given me offense,
I stand not obliged to you for it, but your ill memory, that had not means to
find words sufficiently capable, to express the offense you intended me; It Is
true said she, but you are a naughty man to write such Letters to me. And you
are then a naughty woman, answered Adraste, to enforce me to it by so many
just and rightful causes as you have. If I have given you such, replied she,
and have so little reason in my actions, why have you so little judgment in
your love; you have less reason then me to love one that has none at all,
and by the extravagance of your unfound mind, accuse me of your own defaults.
Madam, answered Adraste, I have caused you to see most clearly that you are in
the wrong, since you cannot find means to answer my Letters; But how should
you find reasons, that could not indeed find the offense. Whereby it follows
that being you have done the wrong, you cannot have reason on your side, since
wrong and reason cannot be united in one subject. And yet cry you that I am
reasonlesse, to love one that has none. I answer you that though I am
reasonlesse, it follows not but you are so likewise, as I have proved, without
denying but I was my self so; And on the contrary, I have always endeavored to
let you see that I had little reason in me, ever to show that I had so much love
for you. Since if I had, I could not have loved you, or at least but in such
sort as I had been loved again of you. And if you were reasonable, you would
love me as I love you. See then wherefore I love you in two sorts, (without
reason) first, for that you are reasonlesse, secondly, because I am so also. As
to the extravagances of my diseased mind, I apprehend them to my own
advantage. Remember you what I have ever said, that my weaknesses, and failings
were the things that I desired to cause you see. It Is well I am there arrived.
Minerva fell a laughing at these words, and as particular complaints do usually
succeed the general; Adraste complained of her, for that when he had left his
entertainment to his enemies, upon her promise to afford him one more private,
and favorable, she had not only turned him off to her mother Arlande, but her
self had stolen away from him to go to them, had deprived him of the honor of
her company, and conduct, to afford it unto them, and had wronged a man whose
goodness was so known to her, thereby to favor others whose malice was to her
no less manifest. Minerva excused her on the just fear she might have of the
bloody effects their quarrel might have produced; said that the same fear had
caused her not to suffer him to lead her; and that she had also denied it unto
them: And on the contrary having found Brasidas and Gracchus at Church, she
had prayed them, not only to forbear to lead her, but to see her.
Notwithstanding that Brasidas being since come to see Arlande as his Kinswoman,
and Gracchus accompanying him as his friend, she could not hinder the
Visitations, nor the Walks Arlande admitted of, it being very uncomly for the
daughter, to play the Mistress before her mother; not thinking also that it
would have becomm'd a woman of her quality, to testify the least animosity
against them, at all to show she affected him. In the end she knew so well to
plead her cause, as she gained her suite; Adraste asked pardon, and the wronged
party made the amends. This day consumed in complaints, and such like
satisfactions, took yet away all hate that the last falling out seemed to have
engendered in their hearts, how ever it placed not there the wo^ted love (not in
that of Minerva's for that she yet mourned for the dead, on whose behalf she
seemed even to despise her life. Nor in that of Adraste, for that seeking in
these disgraces to save him from the ambushes of Minerva, he was already fallen
in those of Cariclea, which he would have dissembled, but Minerva entreating
him to help her loose the remembrance of a man whom she had loved, he again
begged of her advise how to acquire the affection of a woman that he adored.
You have already so acquired her, answered Minerva, thinking he had spoke of
her self, as you need not care further but of means to preserve her. Would to
God that he you love were alive said Adraste, and that I were in possession of
her I desire, I believe I should have less trouble to preserve then I shall
have to acquire her. How can that be, said Minerva, that you should be in
possession of her you desire, during the life of him I lament, if you desire
not some other then me? And how think you also that it can be believed,
answered Adraste, that I have acquired the affections of one, that lives not
but in the death of an other? I have the wrong indeed on my side said Minerva,
and you the reason on yours. Adraste, to engage your thoughts upon such an
object, as has not engaged theirs; But since I discover thus my malady to you,
if so you cannot give me help, as there is none in death, I pray at least
refuse me not your comfort, and be it so that in losing you for a Lover, I may
enjoy you as a friend. Madam, answered Adraste, it has bin the greatest
unhappiness that has done me outrage, to see how unapt you have bin to think
the one or the other of me: But I shall never cease to be both, to you, so long
as God shall give me life, and you no cause to die by the ill use you daily do
me. The night book of their discourse, which else they had not known how to
leave. Minerva having prepared to retire to her house in the Country, and
apprehending in the solitude that place offered, the sorrows that Arnolphes
death did now make her so lively feel in the divertisements of this so
excellent City, again conjured Adraste, that did sometimes apply him to such
things, to write somewhat in way of consolation, and in verse, on the death of
Arnolphe, an importune request to pray a Lover, to busy himself in the
commendations of a Rival; and the more for that Adraste meddled but unwillingly
in making Verses, seeing so many as he did, come off with little credit in that
subject. But Arnolphe was dead, and he hoped in pray sing him, he should at
least flatteringly sooth his Mistress, and insensibly insinuate in her favors,
yet the more; unwilling to give the repulse to a Lady, to whom he had given
himself, without whom he could not rest, and with whom he could not live, he
endeavored to render him pleasing and agreeable so far as to celebrate for her
the affections of him that living had orethrown his own. So after having
brought Minerva home to her house, and being retired to his own lodging, he
made the same Evening the following Stanzaes, as you see, which the next
morning he sent to her at her uprising, to let her see with how much care and
readiness he did embrace all manner of occasion, did at all pertain unto her
service. The Verses were these.

Stanzaes On the death of Arnolphe to Minerva.
CEase fair one, cease your mournful plaints lay by,
Arnolphe is not dead, though absent hence,
More then the Sun removed from off our Sky,
In shady dark, has any residence.
No he is immortal, and amongst the Saints,
And vainly you importune Heaven too late,
That has no ear to lend to such complaints,
But must in all things too give way to fate.
Great Jove himself that with one thunder might,
Dissolve the earth, all things annihilate,
Saw maugre him, brave Hector fall in fight,
And Troy in dust, lament her ransackt state.
How often moved, eye pressed by 'his Favorite,
And his fair daughter, did he think, to hide,
But destiny withstood, and did deny it,
That goodly Empire, from the Grecian pride.
For in the Eternity of vengefull fate,
Before was Priam doomed his sentence past,
Else Pallas power, nor Juno obstinate,
Could have his land orerun, or laid so wast.
But your Arnolphe here a blessed man,
Though beaven should chance refuse him and deny you,
Is happy yet, that he did serve you when
He lived, and more to be lamented by you.
And is not one death then enough, but you,
Will with your tears, bring back his soul to breath,
And he must so die twice, and you would now,
Double your griefs, and twice mourn for his death.
In vain then fall those tears along your face,
Nor can they move the destinies decree,
And if they could obtain you any grace,
That grace were yet, more ill then death can be.
Minerva that the Heavens, caused to come down,
Here to be seen, perfections object still,
Ought she to afflict her, for the love of one,
That to acknowledge it, has power nor will.
You moan his body, or his soul lament,
If It befor's body you complain, it is gone,
And if for's soul, your grief has worse extent,
For you a good, in place of ill bemoane.
Leave to low minds, these bootlesse tears these moods.
Can so much heart, so sooth the sense of cross?
We should not drown our reasons, in those floods,
Nor lose our selves, in weeping others loss.
The room's too fair to be th'retirement still,
Of a guest so foul, as is perpetual moan,
And they without cause, use themselves but ill,
That pitying others cruel are to their own.
Do you then celebrate's immortal fame,
And with proud marble here, his corpse inshrine,
Then let some happy pen divulge his name,
Throughout the earth, where ere the Sun does shine.
This does accord with great Augustus mind,
And your brave heart, that wont not be so grieved.
But to feed your soul with sorrows so unkind,
And griev'e he is dead, is to lament he lived.
Quit then your sorrows, yet your grief make even,
And know when you lament that natural throw,
Common to all the World, ordained by Heaven,
Your plaint is most unjust, or that is so.
These Verses mortified not so many flames in the breast of Minerva, as they
produced tears in her fair eyes; and this cure was one of those that stir up
much more grief, then they appease. Yet marvelled she at the strength of
Adrastes affection, which had born him to a compliance so contrary to his
passion, and how soever she was extremly ingrate, she could not help it, but
she found her self extremly obliged to him in it. But her departure some few
days after, did quickly efface this small good will. Yet she saw Adraste once
before she went, thanked him of his pains in her comforts, and left him more
affection then she carried away with her. For she was then most steadfastly
allied to the first object of her love: And Adraste hung so even between the
affections of Minerva and Cariclea, that they called him the Knight of the
cloven heart. A little time after some Princes of France took arms, pretending
reformation of the State, and comfort of the people, whom the Soldiers much
solaced, by the discharging them of whatsoever they were able to carry away for
them, Tatius that had so well managed the affairs of his house, would now needs
meddle with the government of the Kingdom, and seeking so to readvance his
private fortunes upon the public, took part with them. The small number of
men that were of his condition, caused that they not only embraced him, but
renewed the luster of his ancient titles, by the glitter of a new dignity,
making him chief of the Council of that faction, and not putting him in lesser
hopes then of the Seals of France. He took this occasion to follow some means
of reconciliation with his wife, whom he disposed thereto very easily for the
part she pretended to in the hopes of her husbands fortunes: And Tatius sought
her the rather for the need he had of her assistance; for although he were not
settled in his new office, he needed money for his use in it, which he knew not
how to raise, but on the caution of Minerva, who freely became bound for him,
deceived in the hopes of this false prosperity* Fortune was not so favorable
to him as she promised: for that such as had armed for the State, and
Republique, coming to a Treaty, used not a word but of their own particular
interests; and left not the people only more miserable, more ruined then ever;
but also Tatius discharged of his Office, and his wife burdened with part of
his debts. This last affection of Minerva being founded on the hope of
advantage, could endure no longer then the foundation; so as that was no sooner
ruined, but this fell to the ground, and Tatius and Minerva to as ill
intelligence and accord as heretofore; which brought her back very suddenly to
Paris. Adraste failed not to go see her so soon as he knew she was come; But
in her absence the affections of Cariclea, had so occupied his heart, as it
seemed there was small room left for the reestablishing those of Minerva. And
besides dissension being as it were inseparable and ever fatal to the Realm of
France, where calmes do but presage the following storms, and where those
storms are never calmed but in the occasion of greater and more furious ones,
and chiefly in the youth and first years of their kings; This last emotion was
not so soon appeased, but there arose an other by so much the more to be
feared, as the pretext, and cause was more honorable in show and plausible to
most. Which obliging the king to make an excursion into Normandy to assure him
that Province, consequently obliged Adraste to follow him, who a more faithful
subject then a Lover, preferred his sense of honor, and courage to his
apprehension of his amorous delights. He let him proceed as far as Roane yet,
and then to Deep. But hearing he intended to put himself into Cain, where
the Castle declared it self against the City, and the City for his Majesty
against the Castle; he should have been exceeding sorry not to have been at
the first place, which the King had ever yet in his own person beleaguered. He
left then Minerva, and Caricha, at Paris, where his desires, and ease, would
still have detained him, and made all diligent haste to travailes, to pains,
and perils, where his devoire did call him. The history of this siege not
being our subject, it shall suffice to let you know that the good fortunes,
providence, counsel, and diligence of the King conquered him, this place, in
less then three days. And three days after all that great Province which gave
him means, and leisure to prevent his enemies, as we hope to make it appear
elsewhere more seriously. But Adraste seeing the war ended on this side,
before any man had once means to give notice of his abilities in the least
measure, and the King to take the way to Manns, took that to Paris, without
other cause then to see his two Mistresses, by whom he was variably agitated;
He loved them both not only through his inclination merely, but also with
design, to the end the one should hinder him to give himself wholly to the
other, that his sufferance should be by so much the less as it should be
divided; and by so much the better moderated as it should be the less. An
excellent remedy in affairs of love, had not his too perfect fidelity hindered
him to put it in practice, for that he served himself as then most happily with
it. And after having sometimes seen one, and sometimes the other, he quit them
both again to look out the king, that was as then at Manns with his army. The
departure of Adraste, the absence of Brassidas and Gracchus; the disgrace of
Tatius, and death of Arnolphe gave Crassus opportunity, who was then at Paris,
somewhat to renew his affection with Minerva, but so far only as the terms
of a common wel-wisher. Adraste having found a gentleman of his acquaintance
called Chabrias, a man of great abilities, and no small execution, who being
married some three or four days before; had left those lawful pleasures of a
bridegroom, to embrace the travailes of war, met near Manns an other
Cavalier, who told them he had found some Thirty Commanders about two or
three leagues from thence, which it was said were of the enemies party. Adraste
and Chabrias had over taken and left behind them a company of soldiers
belonging to the Queen, that were to join with the kings army. They then
entreated this Cavalier to advise them of their intentions, and pray their
Captains to follow them a gallope, whilst they went on before. The gentleman
failed not to give them the same advise, and the company having overtaken them
at a small Village where they stayed for guides, they put themselves in front,
and went forwards altogether to a great Town where these people lay
entrenched. But they found they belongd to the King, and that they had but
travailed themselves and their horses in vain, especially Adraste, who being
hurt sometime before in the leg, drew such store of gross humors to the part
diseased, by the violent motion of this post, as it became almost so big as
his head. There is a fine house near Manns, and I dare say the most
beautiful, and delightful of the Country, the owner whereof was brother in
law to Chabrias, a perfect gentleman. Adrastes hurt constrained him to stay
there, though in the absence of Chabrias, and his brother, who had both
followed the king to Flesche, but there was a Lady whose virtues obliged him no
less to celebrate her memory, then heaven which since took her in the prime
and flower of her youth, constrains all such as have seen her to lament her
death. She was a summary of wisdom with beauty. The abridgement of all humane
perfections in a woman, and the mirror of her sex. Adraste having rather
assuaged the sorenes of his wound, then perfectly heald it, by the rest and
good usage he found in this so sweet a retreat, parted from thence upon an
advise he received that the King would be gone with all speed from Flesche, and
came thither before the departure of his Majesty; But so ill disposed as he had
like to have dyed. He fell very happily yet into the hands of a Surgeon, not
a less sufficient, then an honest man, who always dressed him with singular
dexterity, but he could not be so soon healed, for that the accomplishment
depended not so much on the Chirurgions remedies, as the repose of his person.
And the King marching directly to Pont de Se, Adraste said as Pompey once, It
is necessary that I go, but not that I live; Lets away, no danger shall stay
me; And easing his leg in a scarf, he got on horseback the next day after
the Army dislodged, road in one day as far as that had marched in two, and
with so good hap as he was there time enough to loose his horse that was slain
under him, in the entrenchment the enemy had made before the bridge. This was
a mervailous glorious days work to the King, to whose name (after God) we may
impute the affright that seized the heart of his enemies; and honorable to all
such as endeavored to become remarkable therein: Amongst whom Nerestan was
none of the least, commanding that day as Marshall of the Field, who got a
musket breach through the thigh, whereof not long after he dyed. I refer
such to the history, as would see the particulars of the taking of that place;
but will say by the way, it being no part of my subject, that sixty Perdus,
backed with three Regiments, trod underfoot three Thousand men entrenched, and
gained the bridge which needed but to have been drawn to have stayed them. That
they were but thirteen which at the first entered the City, whereas there was at
the least thirty or forty Commanders of the Enemy which issued, without those
of our part so much as daring to speak to them because of their weakness,
nor they to ours, by reason of the affright they were in. That more then sixty
of their soldiers, shut themselves up in the Castle, and one of ours amognst
the^ that was not known till the next day. The Leaders of the Perdus were
Malissy, and dead Massott Leftenants of the Gards; the latter slain since at
Clayrac. The Volentiers found with them in the City were amongst others, the
Barons of St. John, and of Monrial, with three gallant Soldiers of Languedoc,
that Adraste met upon the way with Tauraut; and but for the hurt of his leg,
and loss of his horse, that took from him all means of being there, he had
been companion of their fortune. I have through the default of my memory, lost
the names of the two first, which has indeed caused me do the like by others:
The third was called Albanas a young gentleman of some Eighteen or twenty
years of age, who seeing a Sergeant of the Guards contest upon the command
Malissy had given him, to pass the bridge to get help from the King swame the
river of Loire by night, and went to Mounsieur Crequi, who sent Mounsieur
Miraumonts company thither. The king lost not in this day any gentleman of
quality but Marais, and two young gentlemen of the Guards, whose names have
escaped me, Of the enemy that were lost there, a man cannot well say the
number, for that the affright forced them headlong into the river, which
drowned the most of them. But the next day there were buried some hundred or
sixscore of the slain bodies. The Earl of Saintagnan was there taken
prisoner, the Marquess Focillere, and the Viscount of Betan-Court, honorably
wounded each of them in the arm with a pike. The fear and astonishment was so
great, that the King talking after to the Baron of Meilam in Brisas. Adraste
being by, told him that a poor fellow finding a horseman alive, and armed at
all parts in a ditch, took from him not only his Arms and horse, but his
clothes also, and left him there stark naked. A great many of people were ill
lodged there this night, and Adraste in particular, who having no less angered
his hurt by his labor in the fight, then by his travail on the way, had the
cold Air for his general entertainment, the heavens for a covering, and the
earth for a Couch, and all for want of knowing his friends quarter, and the
means to carry him thither had he known it, having lost in the disorder two
Laquays, and a couple of horses that he left behind him. But amid so many
wants, and incommodities he had water enough, of which he drank plentifully at
the expense of the river of Loire, on whose bank he passed the night of one of
the longest days of Summer, more cooly then he had the precedent day, but
amongst the dead and wounded bodies, or people gathered together on all sides,
in whom he had no knowledge, or trust. The next day he found his horses with
one of his footmen, who had looked every where for him, not less estrayed then
himself, having lost his companion that was never seen since: And the king
being gone to lodge in the Castle that had rendered the same day, and the
lodgings being all disposed off in the City, and Suburbs, though none to
Adraste, that had no body to send to demand it, and was too much busied to go
himself, for having passed the night without sleep, and the day before
without meat, he no sooner found his Laquay, but he sent him for Provision to
the first Cooks: and having assuaged his extreme hunger, passed the most part
of that day in the shade under a tree beneath which he had taken his repast,
the violence of the travail he had undergone, the want of sleep, and the
grief of his wound forced him to give to rest, such time as others employed to
lodge themselves, by the same means letting his horses take their rest, and
feed, that had no less need of it then himself. But when he saw it grew late,
and that the heavens covered with clouds (whose thundering and lightnings
threatened the earth with a sudden storm) caused him to fear another night
worse then that he had passed, he got on horseback to go to the Castle, well
hoping that if so be he could not find any officer to lodge him, it was
impossible but he should light on some friend with whom he might retire. But
it was already dark before he came there, each man toiled with the labor of
the day precedent, was retired betimes. The King himself was in bed, and the
Guard of the body had already accommodated their couches at his chamber door.
He could have wished to have lain amongst them, but his horses were abroad
with his Laquay, and the fear to be denied, the Scotch in France being none of
the most courteous of the world, though he had the honor to be the Kings
servant, caused him that he chose rather to suffer what ever ill might happen
to him, then the shame of being repulsed. Having stayed then till the Captain
of the Guard of the body, would shut in the Castle gates, he went out, it being
night; and one so dark as a man could not see but by the beams of the
lightning in it: and for his better comfort, it rained so fast as there was not
any man left in the streets; So as when Adraste was got out he found not his
man or horses where he left them. Was not this cripple finely overtaken? he
called, he hallowed, and made such a noise, as some Soldiers as were got to
covert under the pent-house or a long the streets, told him that there was a
boy a sleep between two horses, that neither wind, rain, nor thunder had
power to wake. He groped out his way thither, and having roused his youth, got
on horseback, not only despairing to find lodging, but without knowledge
where to look it. Notwithstanding being extremely a dry, and thinking these
Soldiers could likelyer show him a drinking place, then a lodging, he prayed
them to direct him to some Inn where he might drink a cup. They carried him
to the White-Crosse, where Mounsieur the Kings brother, his followers lay.
Adraste perceiving it was the Mounsieurs quarter, he conceived hope of finding
some courtesy there. There were many people before the gate, some desiring to
go in, and others calling for wine, who gave way to him. Adraste coming near
the gate which was shut, and desiring to speak with some of the Mounsieurs
gentlemen, he was so blessed that one of his friends that was within knew his
voice: but not so well but he asked him his name for better assurance.
Gentleman said Adraste, that knew not to whom he spak, you will know me better
by face then name, oblige me so much as to open the gate, and you will see I am
the Kings servant. At last he was forced to say it was Adraste, and at that
name they opened the door, caused him to enter, and they embraced him. Adraste
entered not as into an Inn, but a Paradise, ravished with a contentment by so
much the greater as he had little hoped it. Noblesse, so was this friend called
that let him in, caused a bed to be made for him, for though supper were ready,
they perceived well that he had more need of repose, then a repast. But there
could be spared but one Chamber only where Mounsieur de Vendosme, having made
it his kitchen but two days before, had left such an infection as a man could
scarce endure the ill smell. But it being a happiness to be within there, in
comparison of the ill weather abroad, and a greater to have a bed, where others
lay on benches, he laid him down. There is nothing like necessity to give a
value to things, nor do things so appear or are esteemed but by their
contraries. Prisoners deem nothing like liberty of which they are deprived, and
which they neglect when they may enjoy it. Adraste could not have believed
there had been such felicity to lodge in a stinking kitchen, which he would not
once have looked into at another time, if the misfortune, and necessity wherein
he was become had not caused him find the difference between rest and labor,
peril and surety. His horses and Laquay lay and supped in Fresco with diverse
others in a Garden that was on the backside of the Inn. On the morrow after
having thanked his hosts, he went to seek the Harbinger, that bilited him in
the Suburbs of Saint Martins right against Chabrias, and near the bridge, and
sufficiently commodious. Scarce had he entered his Lodging, but one habited
like a Soldier, having saluted him in the street, entreated harbor of him.
There is a certain kind of fate, that causes misfortunes often to encounter
their like. Adraste observed this man with compassion, seeing him in such a
case as himself was but lately; had he been hurt, dashed in the rain, or in
the dark of night, as he was. My friend, said he, it is not long since, that
if you had requested this of me, I could very hardly have done it you, but
having now means, and knowing the wants that you are in by that I have
suffered my self, I shall be very loath to put you off, though I know not who
you are. Sir, answered the other, I am such a one, who have seen you in Paris
with such a one*, and coming now out of Italy, I am very inconsiderately fallen
into this perplexity, endeavoring to follow the Court with a friend, until the
King should return to Paris. Adraste looking him more near in the face
remembered it was a Merchant whom he had seen married at Paris, to a fair
Gentlewoman, for whose love, and of a brothers she had of excellent wit, he
became yet more obliged to pleasure him; so as he not only afforded him the
accommodation he entreated, but he took him a long with him as far as
Bordeaux, where leaving him till their return from Bearne, he afterward
accompanied him so far as Saintis, But this adventure of Adraste nothing to
the subject of my Discourse, has made me stray a little from the affections of
Minerva, which now let me again resume.

The Argument.
The reprisall of Minerva in affection with Adraste: a dangerous adventure of
his, going to see Minerva. A walk of Adrastes with Minerva, and some others in
company with her at Ruel.

CHAP. V.
THe King having appeased this disorder on this side Loire, turned head toward
another, which arose about Garonne, after having made some small stay about the
Clain. And having settled peace in Guien, proceed as far a s Bearne, where he
put in execution the decree he had made four years before against the
Hugonauts, in favor of the Ecclesiastiques, and then returned in all glory to
his chief City. But that belongs to the History of France, and not at all to
ours. Nor have we spoke of it but to avoid a more tedious discourse which must
have been made to continue the adventures of Adraste, whose particular return
comprehending in the general, we have not now to say, but that having still
followed the Court, he came therewith to Paris, where from the morrow of his
arrival he was taken with a quoridian Fever which brought him so low, as it
was not hoped he could ever get up again. He had the help of an excellent
Physician in his art, a worthy man, his intimate and perfect friend, to whose
care and goodness, next under God, he stands obliged for his life. Amongst
his visitants Minerva was one, that came to see him, not only contrary to his
expectation, but his hope also, for the continuance of his absence, the travail
of the journey, and most of all the violence of his sickness, had so efaced
all impressions of his love, as there remained not so much as any line or
draught thereof in his memory. He was not in the height of his disease, but in
the greatest weakness of his person, so as when his Fever somewhat ceased on the
one side, it seems that this visit prepared for him a new cause to re-alight
his affection on the other. But yet being visited more by Chariclea, then by
Minerva, the assaults and batteries of the one, ruined and oreturned even to
the ground whatsoever the other erected. Reason and Civility willed that he
being well should see such as had visited him sick. Of which he acquit him very
religiously to all, but Minerva whom he saw not, in doubt that freeing him of
one malady, he might fall into an other, by so much the more to be feared, as
those of the mind are generally more dangerous than they of the body. Contempt
is the greatest vexation to a high mind, especially when it comes from such of
whom they have made esteem* or from whom they have been accustomed to receive
honor and respect. Minerva having been so perfectly honored of Adraste, could
not endure without despite, that he that had not lived but in her, and for
her, and of the life, and health of whom, she had testified so great a care,
should visit all such as had seen him but her self. And her indignation was by
so much the greater, for that she knew he faild not in this duty for want of
civility, nor of knowledge. He offends not, said she, of ignorance, but
contempt, and believed that it was of purpose. In the end Adraste must needs go
see her, for she had sent so often to his lodging as it had bin discourtesie,
and ingratitude to have done otherwise. She congratulated his recovery, she
civilly complained of his incivility, and prayed him not only to see her, but
also to write unto her. Adraste well saw that these were so many snares set by
Minerva for his liberty; but he had scarce power to refuse a thing which he
had first demanded of her, had he not bin prevented. And as love is an Enemy
not to be vanquished, but by the absence of the thing beloved, very hardly
could he avoid being overcome by such approaches as these were. Two strong
conceits wrought in his thoughts, like two contrary winds at Sea, with a
perishing vessel; the most violent which was yet most pleasing, counseled,
and almost constrained him against his will to love this woman, the other more
gentle, and yet more troublesome, did utterly forbid it. And as his
imaginations figured to him the matchless delights he might gather from the
passion of such beauties; his memory again presented to him the most
affrightfull torments he was sure to suffer but pretending thereunto; and the
diverse shipwracks he had undergone in the same Port, did counsel him in any
wise, not now to re-imbarke him there. But the means likewise for him to avoid
it, (he that loved not his own eyes without it were for seeing her, in whom he
had already harbored the chief felicities of his life) was away. In this
conflict of difficulties he addressed him unto her self, as sole and
sovereigne Arbiter of his thoughts, begged of her to restore them back the rest
she had bereft them off, and to render to her self the same contentment, which
her cruelty had ravished from him, in outraging the constance of a Lover, and
betraying her own proper desires, through the ungrateful misacknowledgement,
whereby she did receive his pure affections. As Minerva had bin provoked and
agreed at the indifference of Adraste, she was now well pleased to see him
stirred again with love of her. But being a discreetand subtle woman chiefly
in the art of faining, in which she out-went the most exquisite of her sex,
she so far as possibly she could hid him from her intents, that were to
re-ensnare him. And as the ordinary custom of women is to oppose their honor
to such as speak to them of love, Minerva forgot to hold up this buckler
against such arms as Adraste could advance, talking to him, yet nerethelesse
in such a manner of the sense she had of the one, as she put him not in
despair of such as he had of the other. But they so long had known, and were so
well acquainted with one another, that they could not possibly so well
dissemble it, but that they espied each other behind the best curtain could be
drawn. Minerva proposed extreme difficulties in the love of Adraste, and
Adraste as many resolutions upon those difficulties of Minerva: she alleged
first her marriage, which absolutely hindered her to be any way lawfully sought.
Adraste put her in mind of Arnolphe, whom she had loved before, and since,
and whom yet she loved after in death, however she was straightly obliged to
love him, that lived, and was in affection before the other. By which he let
her see that the marriage she alleged, was but a pretext, by which she covered
her ingratitude, being assured that if it had been the true cause that hindered
her from loving him, it had bin so as well for another as him. I loved Arnolphe
before I married, said she, and that love which indeed I bore unto his
virtues, nor that which as yet I bear his memory, did ever wrong my honor,
where yours tends merely to the subversion of it. Your honor is easily
protected in my discertation, answered Adraste, and though mine be one thousand
times more deer to me then my life, I should choose rather a thousand times to
lose it, then ever so little to have tainted yours. But you are too wise a
woman, to be ignorent that honor chiefly does insist upon the managing, and is
not incompatible with love. You are too wise a man likewise, answered Minerva,
to think what you say; But if so be I should grant you any thing so unfit to be
granted, what reason have I yet to quite me of Arnolphes affection, to reinvest
me in those of Adraste? it were but to pass from one extreme to another, and
not only from a love permitted, to a love forbidden, but from constancy, to
inconstancy, and lightness; since you are no less fickle then he was ever
constant: and howsoever he be dead, the virtues that I loved in him are
immortal, and in such measure living in me, as I have no memery of life
without it be to think of, and to live in him. One part of this discourse was
true, but the other artificially fained by Minerva, to engage Adraste the more,
and to let him see how much she did deserve to be beloved, in showing him how
capable she was of love, and how much she could cherish the affections of a
living man, since she so long retained those of a dead one. I discourse
according as I think, said Adraste, but you talk not as you think: nor
content to express your want of reason in your words, by accusing me of
lightness, it seems that you will make it appear that you have less in your
actions, by the unprofitable affection you bear to the ashes of Arnolphe. The
cause you have to divest you of which, and put on mine, being reason it self,
that should ever counsel you to prefer things profitable to those are
hurtful, the recreative to the afflictive, and the real to the imaginary.
There are three things in the world which produce and do contain all the rest,
which be honor, profit, and pleasure, and from his affections you cannot so
much as hope of one of them, but on the contrary you must expect trouble,
damage, and shame; whereas you may find them all in the affections of Adraste,
with so much precedence, that if the other were yet living, he must himself
be constrained to avow the preeminence, and you to acknowledge the desert, if
love were to be judged by the endeavors, and by reason. Minerva without
approbation, or reproving the reasons of Adraste, proposed still new
difficulties, and sometimes declyning her own interest, imitated such Decoyes,
as to gain an other man's money, do willingly lose some of their own. Why if it
should be so, said she, an affection cannot be so easily shifted as we do our
smocks, heal me first of my passion, and then will I cure you of yours. It is
most certain, Madam, said Adraste, and I have approved it but too true in that
I undergo for you; But where are now those so sufficient reasons by the which
you have ere-whiles endeavored to persuade me that I might easily discharge me
of mine? Why serve you not your self against your self, with the arms that
you so well do handle against others? Why think you it impossible to free you
from the passions which you have for a shadow, having to fore believed that it
was easy unto me to acquit me of those I have for you? If the subject of my
love be more excellent then yours, and that I be more easy and capable of love
then you, as sure it is too true; does it not follow then that your passion is
less then mine, and that you may more easily discharge you of it then I? But
how will you that I should heal you of a passion which you have for another, if
you refuse to receive from me the remedy you did desire of him? I have given my
self a little liberty in enlarging of the extent of this discourse, that it
belongs to the History, and is necessary to the end that I pretend to therein.
If it be a little too long, Lovers will not be much displeased therewith; And
others may pass it by, or more seriously fix on some other object. So it is
that Adraste again setting on foot this discourse on the last speech of
Minerva, employed all his five senses to cure her of a disease which indeed
she had not, or least wherewith he was more infected, then she, in which it
happened to him just as it did to Clement Marot, who seeing his Mistress bleed,
and the Chyrurgion telling him that with the ill blood he would likewise draw
from her the ill humor that rendered her so cruel to him, and that the new
blood that should increase in her veins, should mollify her spirit and render
her more capable of the impressions of love, added afterward, that it was
true, and that she did become more gentle, and susceptible of love, but the
thing was, he concluded that it was not of his love. So Adraste has purged
Minerva of this fancy, in hope that by efacing from her heart the portract of
Arnolphe; he might the easilier set there his own; renderd her truly amorous,
but his ill hap would yet, it was not of him, as then. I say then, for that he
has since found that it was his good fortune; And that he might well say as
once a great Captain did, that he had been lost, if so he had not then been
lost.

Adraste having once again seen Minerva, continued his visits so thick, as
it seemed he rather dwelt with her, then went to see her. In the morning he
used there from nine a clock till noone. After dinner he stayed till supper,
and after supper until midnight. And howsoever his company was so frequent,
yet hindered she not the diligence of his Letters, that followed and forewent
him twice a day, as does the light both usher, and attend the Sun: So as,
either by Letter or by presence, Minerva could not open her eyes but she saw
Adraste ever before her. From whence proceeded the jealousy of Crassus, who as
we have said, was again restored to her amity, if not love. The first note
whereof that Adraste received, was from her self, that had diverse designs
therein. First she desired to know what he thought of it, and knowing well that
Adraste was ignorant that she was beloved of Crassus, in discovering the love
he had for her, it showed she had none for him: And in manifesting his
jealousy, she would render Adraste jealous of Crassus, as she had rendered
Crassus jealous of Adraste. For she as it were swimming her self in pleasure
at the vexation of another, even to the torment of her own soul, and
suffering the most extreme Martyrcomes, but to procure small ones, it seemed
that her repose was in the midst of pains, and sufferance, and the calm of
her spirit consisted in the impetuous shocks, and violences, wherewith she
agitated others. She did affect a rough and high going sea in love, and did
esteem an affection soft and gentle, withered, and fading, if so it were not
intermingled with the sharpness of some jealousy. Moreover in showing the
jealousy of Crassus, because of Adraste, she manifested to Adraste the
affection she had for him, for from the jealousy of the one apparently
followed the affection she had for the other, it being certain that Crassus
could not be jealous of Minerva for Adraste, if he believed not that Adraste
was beloved of her. To which she added this Art, to feign that she did so much
hate and had in horror that passion, that if Crassus had been otherwise
pleasing unto her, and that his demerits or his services had obliged her to
wish him well, yet was his jealousy such as might ruin and well overthrow
what ever good will she could have for him, and confirm all such affections as
he pretended to subvert in her. But Adraste being no wait moved with the
jealousy of Crassus, only entreated Minerva shre would preserve him her
affection, which only he desired to keep, and feared to loose. That but it,
all other things were very indifferent to him, and the passions of his enemies
so little regarded, as he beheld them rather with pleasure, then offense.
Minerva was much deceived in this answer, for she thought to quicken his
affection by the jealousy of another, believing like them that esteem of
nothing well that is not dear; that amorous delights cannot be pleasant, if
not sharp. But dissembling, as full well she knew, and was accustomed to do,
she by so much the more approved of this humor of Adraste, as he cared little
for the jealousy of his Rival, and made show to love him the better for it;
In the mean while bethinking her of other means to heighten his affection,
insomuch as this had failed. We have said that Adraste visited her at many
hours of the day, but chiefly after Suppers, which she had forbidden all
others, of purpose to afford it him only; and which he so dearly valued, as
he never failed to let flip one without going thither. They were lodged in the
Suburbs of St. Germans, but a good way one from the other; For Minerva lodged
near the Market, and Adraste by the River side. One Evening as he went to see
her according to his custom, he took along with him a young gentleman named
Polinice, and a Laquay which she had sent then unto him to borrow a book; they
were no sooner out of Adrastes lodging, to take the way that leads along the
ditch from port de Nifle, to that of Bussy, but they heard some walk after
them, and turning about, they saw a man muffled up in his cloak that made great
haste, having his sword under his arm, and who having overtaken them, followed
the same way they held upon the Causey, which is along by the houses. At the
same time they perceived there were others yet, that kept them behind the piles
of dirt, which the passage of Coaches and Carts causes commonly in winter
along by the ditch. And presently Adraste perceived that he that had overtaken
them, slacked his pace, and reeld as he walked, as if he had been drunk. This
man said he to Polinice, counterfeiteth the drunkard, and h'is not so, for we
saw him walk otherwise then thus, and very upright and lustily, and believe me
not another time, if it be not to put some trick upon us. Be it what will,
answered Polinice, I think he will gain little by us. In which saying they
walked on still. Adraste bid the Laquay to go forward some five or six paces
with the light before, and not to be surprised, drew his sword from out of his
hangers, and bore it upright in his hand, and Polinice did the same by his
likewise. They walked thus some thirty paces, and overtaking this Roister, that
stayed to the same purpose. When he was amongst them, and he perceived the
others which were not far off, he began to call aloud, Who be those that
laugh there? no man answered a word. But Adraste houlding this for suspect, and
believing it was the word given amongst them, as the event proved, bade his
footman go on, and Polinice follow, keeping himself two or three paces before
him Mounsieur, quoth then this gallant to Polinice, in siding him, and
counterfeiting the stranger, can you show me the way to St. Germans gate. No
Mounsieur answered Polinice, scoffing him, I am not off this Country, more then
your self are, nor do I know the streets of the City. I am glad of that
answered the other, what is that he would have said Adraste, who extremely
mistrusted these devices. St. Germans gate replied Polinice, St. Germans gate
Sir, quoth the Impostor. Look you where it is said Adraste, you are at it, or at
least in a fair way to it. I thank you Sir replied the Rogue; who not two
steps after, seized on Polinices sword, saying, what will you draw your sword?
So soon as Adraste heard talk of swords, he drew his; but howsoever it were as
suddenly as he could speak, he had not so soon drawn it, but it was laid
hold on, and their light put out at the very instant; which saved his life, for
those that laid hands on him, casting themselves altogether, and at once upon
him, one wounded the other in seeking to kill him. So as of many thrusts made
in the crowd, and in the confusion of this darkness, there was but one touched
him, and that upon the arm. All the others lighting on the parties themselves,
on whose behalfes they were made. But feeling his sword engaged, and seeing
himself in the midst of so many enemies, as the greatness of their number
hindered themselves, he heard some cry out kill, kill, and at the same time
others, Oh you kill me; which put him in such a fury as having recovered his
sword in two or three shocks, he made himself such place, as the field, and
fought battle rested on his side. As for Polinice, Adraste thought him dead,
for that he had heard him call out Murder, Murder, and having seen him fall
to the ground; he believed certainly they had killed him. But these theeving
Rogues having taken their flight, and the Neighbors being come in at the
noise, with their weapons, and lights, he found that he had disingaged his
sword, and quit himself of them with the loss of his cloak, and some light
hurts he had received, wherewith he was become less bloody, then miry. Quite
contrary to Adraste, who found himself more fowled with blood then dirt,
though it were with that of his enemies; For the thrust he received on the arm
was so favorable, as it passed not the skin further then the flesh. He lost not
his cloak, but his Hat falling off, and his Galloshooes, both one and the
other were presently found in the Street, with the sheathes of their swords.
And howsoever that after the distemper of such an encounter, he had more cause
to retire to his lodging, then follow his design; so is it, that apprehending
more the affright Minerva might take at this news, then the damage might come
to him in the visit, he believed it was a small cause to deprive him of a
good, which he believed could not be too dearly bought, not with the greatest
mischief of the world: And this hindrance not having served but more to
re-inflame the desire he had to see his Mistress, he took only another
Laquay with another Torch at his lodging, and in the same case he was in, he
came presently with Polinice to that of Minerva; he found her and the Laquay
yet shaking at the affright they had taken, and he recounting to her the death
of Adraste, and Polinice: For having seen them laid hands on, and environed by
so many, he bleeved not that they could escape, and for him, it was easy to
flee, for that they had nothing to do, but with his light, which being at first
put out, they gave him very good leisure to retire. So soon as Minerva saw
Adraste, she seemed to rejoice extremely, And I assuredly believe it was no way
fained, whatsoever has been said, that this ambush was laid, and Minerva had
not sent for the book by her Laquay, so much for that, as to bring him in
compass of the snares of these Rascals; which could never enter in the thought
or belief of Adraste. You have prevented me of an ill nights rest, said she,
which this companion went about to prepare for me: I believe you could not
have bestowed a visit on me this good while, or so pleasing, or necessary as
this was; But tell me, how happened this misfortune to you? Madam, answered
Adraste, your Laquay is not so blame worthy as you may think, for he saw me in
such case, as there was more liklihood that he left me dead, then alive: But it
pleases God that I live yet for your service, and to bestow on you more
necessary visits, and more pleasing nights then this. And then he recounted at
large to her what had befallen him since Supper, whilst the uncloaked gentleman
Polinice entertained her women with the same discourse. Very well said Minerva,
then I bid you good night, and desire you come no more at such hours to see
me. That is to take good nights from me, answered Adraste, and not to give me
good night, this same command not to see you any more by night. It shall be
what you please, replied Minerva, for I shall indeed rather choose to take from
you good nights, then suffer upon my occasion that you perchance have your life
taken from you, as you have now very narrowly escaped with it. Adraste
accepting her will for reason, retired with his good, or ill night, after
having told her, that God did reserve him to some better end; and that on no
occasion his life could be so well employed, as in the loss of it, for so
worthy a Subject.

Adraste being retired without any further mischance, passed the night as
accustomed in the thought and contemplation of an enchanted Lover, by the
charms of a fair Mistress. The next morning rising very early, he went to take
a turn at the Louvre, where he was informed of the departure of the King. It
was at the time of the great assembly at Rochell, which being made against his
Majesty's permission, and continued contrary to his command, gave cause to the
Court of Parliament to declare them that held it rebels, and to the King to
arm himself, for the defense of his authority. Adraste went from thence to the
uprising of Minerva, carried her these sad news, not so much lamenting the
public misfortune that threatened the State with a civil war, as his own
particular condition, that forced him leave his Mistress, to use his life in a
quarrel wherein he had so little interest. For howsoever he were not
constrained by any place, or benevolence of the Kings, he was nerethelesse born
and enforced thereto, by the laws of his own worth and honor? But since that
nothing induces you said Minerva, to follow the King but your honor, you are
not obliged to follow him other where then in service. Let other men then go
along and wait on him, whose offices and pensions do oblige them to attendance
every where besides, and do you stay until he does sit down before some place,
or that he has made some overture of war wherein you may be seen to do the
service you desire: and think not then that I will make it difficult to give
you leave, for that your life being of smaller esteem to me by much then is
your honor, I shall rather choose to command then to forbid it you. Adraste was
easily persuaded to stay with a Lady, whom indeed he could not endure to part
from, but seeing he had not liberty to entertain her as he wished in her
house, where she was watched by her own people, gained and corrupted by
Crassus, and the prime of the Spring, inviting every one to see the beauty of
the Country, he entreated her to bear him company to Ruel, to the end that no
other but the Nymphs of those fountains should be by at the last farwels he
would take of her. Minerva that desired but to pass time away, rendered Adraste
his desires in that, by contenting likewise her own. But what she might easily
and absolutely of herself have done, was accompained with so many limitations
and circumstances, as the pleasure of it was ever less then the sufferance,
were it that by the difficulty she would render her favors, the more
estimable; or were it a quality inseparable in love, that often promises much
sweetness, where naught is reaped but much bitterness. Reason, and what was
decent not suffering that she should go alone with Adraste, caused her to take
with her an old Gentlewoman that was rather her Governesse then Servant, with
two little children that she had had by Tatius, and would yet have Plancus and
Melite, besides of the company. Melite was one of her friends, and Plancus a
new Captive of Minerva's whom she had ensnared without Adraste once perceiving
it: whom she made believe, how she could tender him amorous of Melite. Adraste
agreed very willingly to that, thinking that whilst Plancus entertained Melite,
and that the Governesse should be busied with Minerva's children, he should
have no ill opportunity to govern her. But the difficulty was to get from her
house, and people unsuspected, for she would not by any means that they should
know of this journey, for fear it might come to Crassus ear. And this Lady
otherwise exceeding able; had already given him such Empire over her, as not so
much as ever remembering Tatius that was her husband, she let her self be
troubled with the jealousy of a man, that she said was nothing to her, and
that she seemed not only to be unable to love, but also one of whom she could
not endure to be beloved. It is most certain that such as be in love are
blind, for if Adraste absolutely had not bin so, he might by this have seen
that Crassus had more interest in his Mistress, then himself. But he believed
more in her words, then in his own eyes. To the end then that Minerva's people
should take no notice of the design, she willed that Adraste should wait very
early in the morning at Church with a coach and four horses, that Plancus and
Melite should come thither another way without either of them coming near her,
and that she would meet there at the same time with her little companions. The
Coach and horses they were ready almost before day; scarce was the Church door
opened but Adraste was got in; he had heard at the least two Masses, before
Plancus, or Melite came, though they failed not at the hour appointed them,
bnt she that appointed it failing them many hours after. And after having
waited one or two, which were so many ages to the impatience of Adraste; who
had sent three or four Messengers one after another, that brought back word,
that she was ready, that she was come out, that she came; she arrived at last
about ten a clock when every one began to despair of her coming at all. And
in place of excuse for having made the company stay so long, she would needs
persuaded Adraste that he was extremly bound to her for the pains she had
taken in getting so soon away from her household, and affairs both: for she told
him that she had an occasion of extraordinary importance at the Palace, which
she had neglected for his love. Adraste replied not a word to that, but letting
her say what she would, got him into the Coach with her, sufficiently
manifesting by his silence, and looks that he was more offended at her words by
which she would excuse her fault, then at the fault it self. They were soon
out of the City keeping the direct way to Ruel, when Minerva angered at Adrastes
silence and grudge, asked him whether he had desired her to accompany him into
the Country to air themselves there, or his ill humor? and seeing he still
forbore to speak, she continued, I am very unhappy to quit such company as
adored and reverenced me, to find me slighted here, and to have neglected my
affairs, to offend them I thought to have obliged. Turn about Coachman, said
Adraste, without answering Minerva, and drive to the Palace, that this Lady may
by no means neglect her business. It is not possible to express the despite
she took at these words. He shall turn I assure you, said she, or I will go
back thither a foot. But Melite blaming Adraste, and gently entreating Minerva
that would by all means have returned, persuaded so far as they followed on
their way to Ruel. Minerva notwithstanding having got out of the Coach, Adraste
took her under the arm, and led her along a fair way more then a mile, whilst
the Coach followed them softly with the others that were in it. And as Lovers
are soon angry, and soon pleased, and re-alight the fires of their affections
by the breath of such brabbles, they had not so soon began to discourse
together, but they became agreed: For Minerva cared not if one offended her, so
they asked pardon of the offense. And Adraste cared not to offend her on those
terms, if it were a giving her offense, to resent the offense he had received
from her. Arrived at Ruel, the first thing they talked of was dinner; after
which they fell into discourse, which they themselves would be much troubled to
resaye, watched yet by that importune old Beldam, who unable to follow them
walking, left not yet to importune them with her eyes through every Ally of the
plots, and parteries into which these excellently beautiful Orchards are
divided. Notwithstanding, the burden of age, and the care she had of the
little ones in her charge, gave leisure and opportunity yet to our Adraste,
somewhile to enjoy his Mistress in the cool of a shade, whilst Plancus and
Melite entertained each other in another place, where in the presence of the
Nymphs and other loanly deities of those sacred fountains, their waters were
taken to witness the eternity of their flames. Adraste summoning yet, things
more firm and solid, swore that the Heavens should change their course ere he
his Mistress; and that the earth should sooner leave her firm stability, then
his love its lasting quality. And Minerva swore that waters should rise upward,
and fire descend downward, ere she would leave to love Adraste. But those
things she swore by being light, and transitory, could not produce but
lightnesses, no less agreeing with their qualities, then her nature. After
having pleasantly past the remaynder of this day, they took again the way back
to Paris, so late as they durst stay, but they got not thither without danger,
for the Coachman being drunk, drove his Coach so carelessly over a bridge in the
way, as for lack of take heed, the Horses, Coach and all that was in had like
to have fallen into the water, but God was pleased to show them the precipice
only, and keep them out of it. The rest of the way, they talked not but of the
journey of Adraste, Minerva wishing it as short, as happy to him; and Adraste
beleeching her not to let such, (as then he being present desired to cross
his fortunes) any way to ruin them in his absence; it being a certainty that
such as sought to overthrow him, in her affections being now with her, would
not forbear when he were gone. Minerva complained of this his request, as
grounded she thought, upon the mistrust Adraste had of her says and
constancy, and showing him the Sun that as then yet shined; so long, said
she, as this so glorious a Planet, still shall be the light and comfort, of
all mortal men, so long shall you be mine; I could pardon one that had not
known my mind so well as you, but you are by so much the less excusable as
you the better know it. Adraste excused him, if the danger to lose a thing, the
preservation whereof was so extremely valued by him, and the loss so ruinous,
had constrained him to entreat her to preserve her affection to him; which
should he lose, he must for ever grieve the mischance, and never cease to
accuse his fate or indeferts, and keeping it as now she did assure him she
would; he should part thence with such felicity, and comforts in himself, as
he promised fortune, never more to to take offense at any lucklesse chance she
ere should put upon him. In conclusion of this Discourse they came to the City,
and to went set down Minerva at the end of the street wherein her house was, for
she would not suffer them to accompany her any further, not for fear of Tatius
who was far enough off, and for whom she cared little, but for fear of
increasing the jealousy of Crassus that lay at watch in the same street, where
he had taken a lodging to wav-lay all resort to Minerva'es. And for that she
desired they should believe yet that she cared not for him; Adraste poor man
that saw this, gave, as I say, more faith to the witness of her words in the
contrary, then he put in his own eyes that saw it. For this cause it is; They
say that love is blind, insomuch as passion hood-winketh all such as follow
him, troubles their judgment, and takes from them their very knowledge. Plancus
went home with Melite, and Adraste retired to his own lodging with intent to
write to Minerva, as if it had bin some long time, since he saw her furious
effects of a violent and extraordinary affection, which we will now leave, the
sooner to see the end of the first part of this Book.

The Argument.
The diverse pursuits of Crassus and Adraste. The departure of Minerva, her
return, and confidence in Adraste. The sudden disfavour of Adraste on the Eve
of his parting, and the Letter he wrote to Minerva. As also the reconciliation
of Adraste with Minerva, and his departure for the Army.

CHAP. VI.
THat very Evening was Crassus advertised of this walk of Minervas with
Adraste, (they say he was so diligent in those things as he went even to the
Devil himself for intelligence) but his Empire being as yet not well
confirmed, he durst not complain but modestly to her, and was contented with
reason back. But the means by which he established his government, were quite
contrary to those of Adraste, as the men, were nothing alike. For Adraste
proceeded with freedom and all manner of ingenuousnesse, and Crassus went
forwards by stealth, and in many winds and turns, hiding a profound design,
under an excellent Artifice. Adraste knowing that a generous spirit aims
chiefly at glory, and holding Minerva for such, rendered her the honors Crassus
could not; and without meddling in her affairs, endeavored only to conform
her to his pleasures, hoping that his compliance, gentile fashion and
affection, should render him more worthy her love then his Rival. Crassus
took another course, for finding that he had not in him those good parts that
sufficed to win the heart of Minerva, and render him preferable to so many
others at all parts better qualified then him, of all whom she was honored, and
adored; under pretense of officiously embracing her affairs, first he got her
papers, and writings into her hands, and not long after, her Jewels, to the
end that both the one and the other, should render him necessary, since he
could not render himself amiable; and that this necessity, and fitness, might
become love, as it had don with Tatius, though he had more cause to shun, then
imitate the example, had he been counseled by his Reason, and not by his
passion. And Minerva, that already once before had been taken in the like
snare, after having been often forewarned, suffered her self yet again to
be caught, but it happened not till after the departure of Adraste. In the
mean time two or three days after the journey to Ruel, the King leaving Paris
to go to Saumur, caused Adraste to provide to follow him. When see, upon an
advise that Arlande was fallen sick some forty Leagues from Paris, Minerva
resolved presently to go see her, her affection overcomming all difficulties
that opposed her endeavors, which indeed were then no small ones, for the want
of a Coach, the abundance of foul weather, nor the inconvenience of the
ways, could any whit divert her therein. Crassus had the first notice, as he to
whom the packets of Minerva were still addressed, who being unable to
accommodate her with more then one Nag to carry her, it was needful to make
use of Adraste, but he was ready to be gone; and to borrow his Horses at the
time of his departure, was somewhat out of season. Notwithstanding which,
Minerva told him, if he were not urged to depart by any necessity, she would
entreat him to lend her a horse for some five or six days. Adraste was so
far from refusing a horse to Minerva, that he could have wished himself one,
for the happiness of such a burden, and already envied the honor of the beast
should bear so sweet a burden; which for all that had been but a miserable
good fortune, for she returned him his horse so jaded, and cripled, as he
never did him service after. But Adraste wished he had been as much worth, as
himself, or as much as he could hope in the world, and the the had died in her
service; believing that his life could not be better employed, then in so happy
loss of it. But he was not content to send her a horse only, he went and
offered himself to be her guide, all other occasions set apart, and most
humbly entreated her to give him leave to wait upon her. She thanked him,
prayed him to stay her return to Paris, or news of her there at least, and to
take the charge on him, of sometimes seeing her children for her, whom she left
in the hands of the Governesse we have before spoke of: and parted the same
evening in extreme bad weather, accompanied only with one man, and a maid
that attended her. Adraste bore her company, until such time as she commanded
him return; and being forbidden to follow her any further, he accompanied her
yet with his eyes so far as his sight gave him leave, and then exceeding
pensive, he returned not to his lodging, but Minervas, to cheer him for her
absence in the entertainment of her children. Who in the first innocence
wherein they were yet, not knowing any thing of their Mothers absence, caused
in him no less pity of them, then she caused love in him. In the mean time
while he busied himself there, a knavish Laquay, with whom he had increased
his followers for the Journey intended, having before taken notice of some
moneys he had to that use provided, intended to lay hands on it, which he so
happily brought about, that at his going from thence, Adraste found himself
first without Footman, and so soon as he came to his Lodging, without money,
which was indeed a divertisement, but very hurtful to his purse, and little
wholesome for his passion, for it yet hindered not, but he thought still on
Minerva, that to say truth, took up his whole thoughts: And in the violence of
that grief he suffered by the absence of two or three days, he apprehended
what he was to undergo in the length of so many months, so as he was not
only burdened with his present ills, but likewise with those were to come.
But Minerva having found her Mother in better state then she expected, came
back to Paris eight days after her departure, with the same diligence she
was gone from thence: and by her return dispersed such clouds as darkened the
serenitie of Adrastes spirits, that might say with one, That as her parting
caused him grieve amain,
So greatest Joys with her returned again.


The first day of her arivall was passed in complements, gracious favors, and
kind welcomes The second, however Adraste never feasted uninvited, as the
French has it, nor took notice of any others affairs, but when he was
thereto required, she entreated him to persuade one of her Farmors to give up
the Lease of the lands she formerly had made him. This Tennant of hers was a
clown, if ever were such, and yet a more knave then clown; So as he deserved
to have been well cudgel'd, nor would Minerva have taken it amiss. But Adraste
loving the reputation of his Mistress equal with his own, and seeing it was
not for the honor of the one or the other to beat this Looby, rendr'd him,
how extremely so ever brutall, yet so capable of reason in the end, as he
promised not only to give up his Lease, but also to become conformable to the
will and pleasure of Minerva. Minerva as then had few thoughts to which Adraste
was not made privy, for in recompense of his service, she communicated her
secrets, at least such as he had not interest in. For proof whereof, she
recounted to him an action of Tatius, which well notes the great confidence
between them. Tatius being privately some time before come to Paris, got one
day unperceived to his Wives house, where staying below in a little Parlour,
he caused Minerva to be called down thither, who not believing she might
honestly refuse to see her husband, not mistrusting any ill, came down to the
same room, where he stayed her. After having saluted, Minerva praying him to
walk up into her chamber, he told her, that he had but a little while to stay
there with her, and he desired not to be seen, no not of her servants, and
that being borne away by that extreme affection which he ever had for her, she
must believe that this visit so unexpectedly made, and by stealth, was a
sufficient testimony thereof. But thou most fair Minerva, continued he, having
taken her in his arms, art thou not in pity any whit sensible of my
misfortunes? Sir, answered Minerva, I am not so insensible and stony but I
suffer some impression from your passion; and in your disgraces do
compassionate yet as in mine own. But you know well the cause that parted mine
from your interest, and I wish no other Judge in this case, then your self.
Indeed said Tatius, I did not use you I confess as your demerits did oblige
me; but excuse the passions of a Lover, pardon him that does repent him, forget
the ills that I have done you, and but now remember you of all the good that I
have wished you, you shall make nature a liar, if you become not then as
pitiful, as you are fair, if you have not the same sweetness in your mind
you carry in your looks. They were all alone, for the servant that had called
down Minerva, was gone out, and Tatius enjoying those rights the opportunity,
and his condition afforded him, and reducing so his words into actions touching
the heart of Minerva, which was not made of wood, or marble, as partly by
consent, partly by force, he reentred the possession of those favors he had
formerly lost. But so soon as he had satisfied his own desires; See but the
thanks of this disloyal* and ungrateful soul. No man can witness, said he,
that I have now been here, Think not I came for love of thee, but of my own
revenge; to the end, that after having left with thee what I can utterly deny,
I so may give thee lost. Lo here the wicked act of Tatius, which amongst the
most remarkable basenesses that ere were perpetrate, may hold the place of the
most enormous treason, and the most faithless wickedness, that husband ever
committed against a wife. Minerva never trusted this secret but to the fidelity
of Adraste, who never abused that trust, or ever wronged her in it, and if he
has spoke on it since, it has been still to her defense, against such as have
accused, and blamed her much, for living from her husband. And to make seen
what cause she had to be for ever doubtful and mistrusting such and so
inveterate and settled a malice.

As Adraste had no care that tended not to the service of Minerva; it seemed no
less that she had no inclination but tended to the love of Adraste: She spoke
not but of his merits, remembered her not but of his services, nor in
appearance, thought of any thing more then of the means to acknowledge them.
Yet this fair sunshine, but presaged a storm. Sailors have cause to sear a
calm too smiling, And physicians think it not amiss to doubt a health too
perfect and secure; for as the one does but presage a furious storm, the other
argues still a dangerous disease. But when that sickness does succeed excess
of health, Raines, a great wind, or storms ensue gross clouds, no man at all
is moved thereat; for that already were foreseeen the signs that usually
precede. But when that in a time clear and serene, the face of heaven is in an
instant bound about with clouds; Or that we see a man to die at going out of
bed, that did arise in health; It Is then we do become afraid, and that
amazement, seiseth us, for that we are surprised, and by so much the more
astonished, from these accidents as we could not foresee the event. So had
there been but any cause, or a pretext that had preceded the disgrace of our
Adraste, here, he had not marvailed at it aught, for he knew well what kind
of soul he had to deal withal. But all at once when he the lest expected it,
and that he did esteem himself the most in favor with his Mistress, not
knowing why, or doubting how, he found him fallen in her contempt: and in the
place of recompense and those kind favors, whereof his tried affections, and
his services did render him most worthy, he did yet undergo the scorns and
chastisements, which he had no way merited. He had not three days to stay in
Paris, when going to see her one morning a little later then he was wont, he
found she was gone to Church, whither very readily following her, rather in
desire to see her, then for any other devotion he had: It is no mervaile that
God permitted him to be so ill entreated. She had in her company only the
Governesse, and had already heard Mass upon the arivall of Adraste, who having
bid her good morrow, presented her his hand to lead her home, dinner time
pressed them not so, but having sufficient leisure, fair weather to walk in,
and the place they were in, inviting them thereto; Adraste, that thought he
might have better liberty to entertain her in this walk, then at her house,
entreated her to take a turn in the Garden of that fair house, belonging to
the Queen Mother. And Minerva admitted him to conduct her, as well to
entertain him, though very differently, and with an entertainment, and welcome
much contrary to the desires and hopes of Adraste. So, as he pressed her to
recompense his services, and at the least, would needs have some kind favor
from her; for him to bear along with him unto the wars. Minerva changing her
discourse, did tell him strait, that his so frequent visits, and disorderly
addresses unto her, had scandalized her much with all the Neighbors bout her
house, so as she was enforced to entreat him come more seldom there, that
esteeming his company as she did, she could not deprive her of it, she said,
with little grief, of which she did believe that he would have his part, but
knowing likewise that he did esteem more of her reputation, then himself, she
hoped he always would prefer that good, to any pleasure that he could
receive from seeing her; that would the best she might temper her sorrows for
not seeing him, with the remembrance she would keep of him; And never should
she have so living in her breast, ought else besides as that everlasting memory
of his deserts. Adraste having such a lecture, upon the Eve of his departure,
lost all manner of patience, and strait it came into his head, that it was but
an effect of the jealousy of Crassus, and that contempt he had ever had of him
till then, turned into fury; He remembered him of the advice Minerva her self
had given, and how often she had said that all her house was still averse to him
but she; and casting an eye upon the Governesse, accompanied her, he did
believe, as it was true indeed, that nothing but her counsels, and
seducements could have power to make her capable of his disgrace, and her
maliciousness. And as amongst a multitude of things one knows not what to
choose, or leave; So Adraste did not know in so great choice, and such diversity
of Reasons, what to answer her; so from the abundance of his Reason, did
proceed his want of words. At the last his passions breaking silence, this he
said. Madam, so long as you assured me that it could not alter your affection,
I have scoft my enemies, and made me merry at their jealousies; but now that
you do let me see the contrary, by a discourse so out of season, and all
sense, it is no slighting them. And I see well to what it tends. Minerva
perceiving that Adraste spoke this by Crassus, answered in his favor, and by
her answer as it were partaking in his interest, she more incensed Adrastes
fury, who not willing to continue this discourse further with a woman, and one
he had so perfectly adored, left her to walk alone with the Governesse, and
went to Crassus his lodging, resolved if he met with him, to make him tak to
his sword. But not finding him, he passed away his rage in dining with an il
appetite* Minerva retiring home extremely grieved, that she had so reduced
Adraste to despair, and apprehending what mischance might rise thereon,
instead of going to dinner, went to bed tormented even to death, and much
offended at the Governesse, and Crassus too, the cursed Authors of so unhappy
counsels. Crassus coming to her hereupon, and then much out of time, desiring
to impart his passions, found so ill a welcome, that having very handsomely
received her leave to be gone, he took her at her word, and went not only
away from her house, but out of the City also, though not very far, for he
returned within two days, were it on his own motion, or that she sent for
him. Adraste having sent away his Equipage before, but after the King* changed
the desire he had to call Crassus to account, into a much better design of
serving his Prince, and more bravely manifesting his courage in occasions more
honorable and more dangerous indeed to take his journey the next morning, with
a Horse and one Laquay only, which he had caused to be left for him, he was
though to conclude his leave taking, and bid some adieu which as yet he had not
done, and he determined to depart without once bidding farewell Minerva. Who
returning the same day from Vespers, and seeing Adrastes Laquay who waited him
with his horse at the door of a Ladies lodging by, asked him where his Master
was? Madam answered the Laquay, he is within here. Why replied Minerva, and is
he not yet gone? not yet Madam but his Equipage is already well forwards on the
way, these words touched the quick, for Minerva thought Adraste had not bin so
near ready, nor that he could have resolved to part without bidding her adieu.
But whatsoever she thought, dissembling it before the laquay, she said to him
well my good friend tell him, I pray, that I do kiss his hands. The Laquay
failed not to tell his Master so at his coming out from thence, which did not
alter him at all, but on the contrary the little day which yet rested
importuned him more then that, and he wished night were passed, to the end he
might the next day make a great journey forward on his way, and by so much
withdraw and bear himself the further from this thanklesse and ungrateful
soul. Notwithstanding which he had wrote a Letter that he determined should be
delivered to her when he was gone, by which he gave her to understand.

That if he had followed the stream of his first motions, to which the violence
of hers had born him, he had let her see an action, which she not only had
permitted, but the indifference that she had manifested unto him, had clearly
engaged him to. That he had sought, found, and ruined the honor which she did
so much esteem, or else himself, which yet he could not think; or at the worst
it had bin the best, that could befall him, for that his life was so unhappy by
her means, as it must needs have been a great good fortune to have lost it.
But since upon reflection in himself and having less regard to his own
passions, then to the interest she had in them (whatever oath she had taken to
have none) he had believed that it should no way misbecome him, go his way to
a place, where a more great and honorable danger might make seen to her, his
more obdience and courage, then he could render her in the defeat of one, so
miserable, whom he did deem sufficiently punished in the vexations she would
procure him. Besides he was not willing to ruin so many incomparable proofs of
affection, as he had daily manifested, by one action that might be the least
displeasing to her; and not expecting that there could be found content for him
after (for her pleasure) being banished from all that he enjoyed in the whole
earth. That this had caused him hasten his desire, least some new accident,
with the remembrance of so bloody a discourtesie, bore him not yet to mend
himself as he could. And however that he parted thence, deprived of the
honor of her sight, by her so cruel doom, with as much spoil and ransack as
an extreme fury could possibly make in the breast of a man, he yet did bear
along with him, those his affections to her as freshly living even in this her
great disfavour, as if she had honored him with all the graces, that she could
confer. Which now he did not say to bend her ought to pity; for he in
giving her this last adieu, did give it also to all hope to see her face, or
once to write to her more, but it was to let her see the constancy and
excellence of his tried love, since that he did conserve it yet, within the
midst of loss, and that how low and base compared with his were those
affections which she yet preferred to his.

Adraste bethinking him of means to deliverher this Letter, was visited by
three or four of his friends, that caused him to sup at home, and to pass
with them the remaynder of this troublesome day. After Supper, taking the air
with the same company along the walk by the River, which is right against the
Louvre, and talking of his departure, as one that meant to be on horseback by
eight a clock in the morning, he felt one pull him behind, and turning head,
he saw Minerva's Footman, who having caused him break off discourse, and bid
adieu to the company, presented him with a note from his Mistress, which Adraste
as then did not open, nor could he have read it without light; But have thou
said he, to the Laquay, nothing else to say to me? No Sir, answered he, but
that I most humbly kiss your hands. Well then, return said Adraste, and
presently bear back this Letter to your Lady, which I had thought should not
have bin delivered till after my depart, and having given him his Letter, went
into his lodging to read Minerva's, that was to this purpose.

These lines that bring you my adieu, since I my self cannot otherwise give
it, may assure you that I do wish you a happy journey, and a ready return that
am your servant.

Howsoever Adraste were extremely incensed against Minerva, he became so
appeased by the reading this note, as he resolved to see her that Evening,
though it were very late, In which might well be seen he was truly amorous; And
that Minerva knowing him no less easy to be regained, then rejected, caused
these devises with him on assurance or rather presumption she had of regaining,
or calling him back at pleasure. Going then to her house, they told him that
she was in bed: but if he would go up to her chamber he should not fail to see
her. So went he up and having sat him down on her bed side, after saluting her,
but with countenance somewhat cool, and shameful, said she to him before he
had leisure to speak. Now you see my goodness very true, said Adraste, yet are
you as slow of compassion, as ready of anger, if you were but as quick to heal,
as you are to hurt you might yet be better. But what will you say of my
easiness, said she, that had not the heart to let you part, without calling
you back. Nay, what will you say of mine, answered Adraste, that had not the
spirit to go my ways, after so many indignities, without returning upon so
small a sign, as you gave me that you desired it. Call it not easiness, it is
obedience in you, answered Minerva, or rather your duty, you cannot be a slave,
and a free man, both at once, nor to be to me, and execute your own designs,
without conforming them to mine. It is then less in you answered Adraste,
without you will have it easines to call back by reason, him you had banished
without cause. It was an easines in you to take from me your company, and a
generosity, to render me again, since there is naught so slack and ill as is
ingratitude, nor any thing more generous then is a free acknowledgment and
requital. You say your pleasure, answered Minerva, and I have done as I ought.
As you ought Madam, replied Adraste, was it a part of your devoir, to forbid me
visiting you the Eve of my departure, behoved it you, to have permitted me so
long, just then to bar and keep me out. Behoov'd it you to have so many
times given notice to me of my Rivals jealousies, to banish me upon the first
complaint I made of them, and openly so much oppose your passions, to my
Reasons. Nay, said Minerva, lets abolish now, and quite forget those things; I
protect the absent against the present ever. And you are ignorant what I have
said to him on your behalf, you being away; and you perhaps think much at
what he holds himself contented with. Madam answered Adraste, absolutions and
forgivenesses, if so you mean, are still for crimes, as recompenses are for
services. You have cause to wish you could forget the wrongs you have done to
me; And I have reason nerethelesse to urge my satisfaction. As to the cause
that others have to please themselves, or to complain them, of the usage,
good, or ill, that you afford to them, I not observe, or near, or further off.
I have told you heretofore, that your deportment was so just on my behalf, as
that the very wrongs which you have done to me; to me, have yet seemed good.
But I complain that any one should ere control both mine, and your carriage,
that people no way interessed in the one, or other, should yet take upon them
both. And above all I needs must grieve, that you, that ought not once to
grant your pardon to the thought, should have so much approved the effect, as
that in place of being offended against that tyranny, seeks to subject you, to
the furious jealousy of one; you take offense against your humblest vassal,
that has never ownd a thought, but how he might honor you. Well then said
Minerva, if I have done you any offense, I hope you now are satisfied? And
Madam from what satisfied? from seeing you so beautiful within your bed,
answered Adraste, that indeed were well, if so we could be satisfied by sight.
Is there a greater satisfaction to see the party that you love, replied
Minerva. Not any said Adraste, so as we likewise may possess it too. But
otherwise the sight of what we have not power to enjoy, does serve but to
torment us more. And by so much as it is dear to us, even by so much it
breeds our vexation more, and chiefly when it rests in the possession of an
other too, and one that altogether is unworthy of it. They did proceed so far
in this discourse, as the whole house at last were fallen a sleep, some here,
some there. Adrastes boy that had attended below in the Court, seeing that it
was already so late, that they were all fallen a sleep in the house, retired
to his Masters lodging, and left him there; believing he would pass the night
as he did. But Adraste, and Minerva, slept not, it being scarce long enough to
finish one part of what they had to say. And at last, there was not any thing
that parted them but day. Minerva, being afraid that Adraste might be seen to
go out of her house, entreated him to go his way, and that he would see her
again before his departure. Sweet light, does rejoice the heart of all
mankind, and which of all things in the world, art most delightful, and most
beautiful, how importune, as then were thou? and much displeasing to these
happy Lovers here. And oh sweet night, offensive only, that thou were too
short, permit that I express the rest of their kind language, each to the
other then, by thy own silence. And that I never violate the sacred mysteries,
of thy loved shades. Adraste seeing that he needs must part, and judging of
the pain, and sufferance, he was to undergo in parting from Minerva, when as
he must away unto the Camp, by that he now did feel, in but retiring to his
bed. Oh me my greatest bliss, said he, why should we ever part? what ominous
star, what Spirit of portent, or what cursed state is it, has power to force
me to it? Alas, I do but hunt, and run in quest of that false honor that
deceives me, to leave that true and real glory, that does render me content.
Nay Sir, go on, said she, you cannot part from me, for I shall ever follow you,
at least in my imaginations, since that it is not less within my choice, to
live within your sight. Oh me my better Genious! said Adraste, then. I here
consigne you ore my life, and do conjure you there withal, that you do still
remember you of this your promise made. Assure you said Minerva, I shall sooner
lose the memory of my name, then ever of this promise made to thee. And that I
sooner will be drawn to leave my life, then this possession thou have put me
in. I swear this by thy self, that art the only thing I wish to swear by
under heaven. And adue my dear Adraste, content thee yet with this my full
assurance given. My goddess, then farewell Adraste said, in going back, Once
as yet, farewell, And again once more, farewell. Adraste being parted from
Minerva, as from his own Soul, how ever no less contented in her favors,
then an other Jason in his conquest, retired to his lodging by the light of the
morning, which he could more willingly have cursed, then saluted, for having so
soon brought back the day: And going to rest at such an hour, as others
rise, and as he had believed he should have rose himself, instead of being on
horseback at eight a Clock, according to his forecast, he found it was
almost eleven, when he was yet in bed. But he had promised Minerva to see her
at ten, who perceiving the hour passed, went to Mass, and to meet him, she
made choice of the next Church to his lodging. But Adraste being up, said
prayers, and broke his fast almost together, and both in haste, with a
gentleman that had stayed for him, even since the morn, to go along with him.
So soon as he had dispatched such encumbrances, as ordinarily do hinder men
upon their leaving such a City. At last he got on horseback, after one
thousand adues of his friends, and went on passing by the Lodging of Minerva;
there yet, to enjoy one moment of the pleasure, of which he now went to
deprive him utterly. Minerva having commanded at her going out, that they
should tell him at what Church she would be, He prayed the company ride on,
whilst he went back thither, though it were a good way off. But he would have
gone much further: Minerva being gone on foot for love of him; well might he go
on horseback for the love of her so far. He found her at the church, just as
the mass was done, when her devotions being finished, she rested wholly in
expectance of him. After having pratled some while at the Church, he led her
back to her house, there to chat at more liberty, and having withdrawn her
again unto her bedside, where he so happily had passed the former night. Good
gods, what said they not? Oh Love! how much renowned might thou render me
herein. And I again might render thee most famous to the world, if so thou
would inspire me now, but with a part of those adues they took. Minerva
heretofore more cruel then a Lioness, was then become more gentle then a
Dove. Adraste holding her between his arms, transported with this object of
his high felicity, and present happiness, remembered now no more the great
misfortunes he had passed. Oh happy condition of a blessed and perfect Lover,
had it not been disturbed by the apprehension that he had of loosing it. It
was past two a Clock, before Adraste could remember him to take his leave, or
that Minerva thought it time to dine. But Adraste fearing to spoil Minervas
dinner, and Minerva being afraid to hinder Adrastes journey, both of them gave
way to the necessity of a separation, and in the end resolved them of their
last farewell. But God knows with what violence their souls met in the kisses
of their lips; and then their hearts feeling the one to approach the other,
leaped with such force, as it did seem they would have changed place. Adraste
never ceasing to conjure her love him still, and to write to him often. Entreated
her now to bestow a favor of him, that he might bear in this war, and with
the title of her Cavalier, or Palladin. The favor was promised, but not given,
because Minerva did desire to have it a scarf of such a fashion, as would take
more time, then she as then had to make it up. The quality of Paladine was yet
conferred on him, as we shall term him in the second part of this history;
which we hope ere long to render you more pleasant, and Heroicke then this
First.

The end of the First part.
DIVERSE AMOROVS Epistles wrote by the Author to the same Lady, during the time
mentioned in the precedent story, and not therein spoke of.
The Argument.
That neither his love, nor the perfections of his Mistress could be possibly
spoken of, but imperfectly.

Epistle 1.
Madame,
I Was extremely rash to dare once to entertain the first conceptions of my
love: nor am I less unhappy in my desires to manifest their resentment. An
extraordinary passion like mine, should not have been expressed by an ordinary
means, like those of the common sort. I should have dyed without speaking,
hiding the depth of my disease in as profound a silence, that the novelty of a
respect so great, might have invited yet some pity. It may be she whom the
most to be lamented sorrows of life, has not had power to touch, might yet
have been made sensible by a too late compassion of my death. And Madame, think
you as you please, it is not so sure, that now I talk, as it is most certain
that I dye, and that these here be groans I utter, and not words, for that a
passion so extreme learnes rather how to sigh, then speak, nor think that
mine are less for being ill expressed, for that does best explain how great
they are. I never speak of them but to their prejudice, and still confound me
in willing to express them. For would I show the ills you cause me undergo,
the words torture and martyrdom, are too too gentle to express what I from
time to time do suffer; and would I entertain you with the good which you
forbid mere to hope, the words delight and glory, seem to me but low. Would I
manifest my obedience and my service to you, the qualities of slave and
vassaile, to me, seem not sufficiently humble; and should I go about to speak
your power* and your demerits, why the titles of Empress and Goddess are not
sublime enough. So as Madam, be it that my wit confounded in the excellence of
yours, be unable to endure the brightness of it, be it that yours incomparably
elivate above mine, be not less inaccessible, then you your self are
altogether inexorable; be it that the chaos of despair whereto your cruelties
have reduced me, do take from me my speech, together with my life, or be it
that as there is no thoughts can equal the greatness of your merits, so is
there no words can reach the greatness of my thoughts; be it what it will be,
Madame, this is sure, I cannot speak, or of my love, or your perfections; but
imperfectly; and that a style most new, and words unknown, behoved to express
as yet so rare and most unheard of things.

The Argument.
Upon his Mistress forbidding him to love.

Epistle 2.
YOu yesterday gave me in command, not to love, which I confess I have ill
obeyed, for be it, for the afflictions I feel in that cruelty, be it, that
things forbidden are ever most desired, I have not had the power to think
another thought since you forbade it me. Madame, there is no kind of duty that
I owe you not; command me that I shed your enemies blood, or that I spill my
own, I shall not leave one drop within my veyns; I shall oppose the violence of
times, and of the elements, nor is there cruelty of chance or fate, to which I
shall not willingly expose my self to obey you. But either cease you to forbid
me love, or otherwise forbid your image to pursue me, since that does watch me
every where, and leaves me not or liberty or thought, but what it does inspire,
or else you may as well forbid the Sun to enlighten the whole earth, the
earth not to produce her fruits: you may as well forbid the waters to descend,
and fire to mount on high, since all these functions are not half so proper
unto them, nor yet so natural as it is most natural and proper unto me, to
think on and to live in you. But Madame, I beseech you say, what Empire else
but yours has ever reached so far as to the thoughts of men? what tyrant but
your self, forbids to think of things desired? Is it not sufficient that I
obey you in things most difficult, but you will yet command me those
impossible? shall then so much respect and passion, with so much violence and
lasting too, avail me naught, nor ever bend the cruelty of your so pitiless
spirit? how many years is it I have sighed for you? is it not time at last to
yield, is not my constancy as yet sufficiently proved? shall you not reap more
glory and contentment to preserve me, then to betray your self in my
ascertained loss. Madame, I have told you heretofore, that no desire so
violent bides in the heart of man, or mad indeed, as that I have to possess
you. But I shall rather choose eternally to undergo such rage and violence,
then seek my remedy in any thing displeasing to you. Oh what mistrust, or what
so feeble strength as now has power to make you doubt a faith so known? If
quite disfavourd as I am, I cannot choose but love you yet, and worship now in
you even this ingratitude and cruelty, that makes me dye, what should I then
do, would you but render me possessor of that grace, the only hope whereof does
cause me live? Madame, conceive the rest by thought, and think your self of
what you do forbid me think.

The Argument.
He says that he loves as well by election, as destinate thereto, and
entreats his Mistress to examine the cause for which she doomes his death.

Epistle 3.
Madame,
I Told you yesterday that I did love you, as of mere election and free will,
but likewise by an absolute necessity, with an ardent, excessive, and a most
furious passion, of which I could not possibly be healed, without it were by a
possession, or by death: and that herein was neither end or meaue; you Madame
as if to slay the creature that adores you, were to do better, then to give
him life, did absolutely then forbid me ere to hope the first means of
recovery, upon necessity reducing me unto the second then, that is to say, you
did condemn me unto death: unto what Judge Madame please you shall I appeal?
In what religion, in what school have you learned so bloody adivinity? Who
has given you such assurance as to persuade me after this, that yet you wish
me well, and to command me live, when you have doomed me unto death? Who has
been able to persuade you to impose such rigorous laws, as do oblige me beg
your pardon, even for the ills you do me, and for the love it self which I
bear you? Madame, yet this once, and as the last, I do most humbly entreat
you, but to examine the cause wherefore, and why, you kill me? It is for a most
perfect love, which has extended so it self as unto those, that naturally
indeed I ought to hate. Was ere man found but me, that for the love of his
Mistress, loved his rival too? But wherefore busy I my self to represent my
affections here to you, that have confessed that you believe them much more
then I know how to express. Do you represent them Madame in the true
perfection I have conceived them, and see if for being too faithful, and for
having in your love exceeded the most violent passions of man, it be reasonable
that you cause me undergo the heaviest torments of mankind. Think that my
fate, or good, or ill, dependsnow on your answer, and that I beg not here my
life, but for to make immortal yours; and seen in the extended vastness of my
sufferings, how boundless the perfections are, that render yet your cruelty so
lovely.

The Argument.
He complains of the indifference of his Mistress.

Epistle 4.
Madame,
I Should live ill satisfied as well from you, as from my self, might I not
complain me of the ill you do me, of which the little care you take, is yet
more cruel then the ill it self. That feeble spark of reason rests to me
amid the blindness of so much amazement, lets me yet see in you, so much
indifference, as not to see it I should take it for a blessing to have lost my
sight. I know well you will accuse me of a raving, but to complain with reason
of an ill suffered without cause, is, by no means, to rave. The long
continuance of my servage Madame, and the advantages my affection gives me
before all such as honor you, makes me presume, I hold in your affection yet
some place above the common sort. And you have told me so: but suiting ill your
deeds unto your words, there is no company so ill, the entertain meant, and
converse whereof you have not still preferred to mine. Madame, I will not comment
on your actions, your deportments being so just on my behalf, that even the
ills you do me, do yet seem good to me. But I complain of heaven, that has
bestowed on me so little merit, and so boundless love, according unto which
proportions, the one bears me to adore and honor you, the other does invite
you to disdain and scorn me. Nor can I deny also, but that it seems extremely
cruel unto me to see you hark to any other speech then that of my complaint.
Nor that I conceive not an ill opinion of my self, by the slight esteem that
you have of my sufferance. Yet Madame since that you are so pleased, I shall
conform me to your humors, and make you see, that I have no content at all,
but in what pleases you. But if my frequent visits render you, my passions
importune, I shall most humbly beg you will accuse your own perfections of the
fault; that in the image of such beauties have caused me to adore even cruelty
it self, and seek the vain shadow of contentment in a most sure and real
martyrdom.

The Answer.
Epistle 5.
Sir,
I Expected the least of any thing such a Letter from you, whom I believed
better then ever satisfied in my deportments and intentions. You judge both of
the one and other rather by opinion then by reason, and falsely accuse me to
have done you ill, since I have neither had the power or will, and that you
never can reap the good I wish you. You have cause to say that I will accuse
you of raving, and to call to mind that I have promised to love you more then
others. This truth me thinks, should hold sufficient place in your belief, to
hinder that any other contrary impression should ever usurp the room. But if
you take the pains to remember you of what you do complain, and chiefly of the
compliance, wherewith you say I gratify all the world, without remembering you;
You will find they are but complements, to which civility inviteth and
obliges me, and that they have been more liberally imparted to your self then
any man. I am never importuned by your visits, but on the contrary they have
been so valued by me, that I desire the continuance, on condition that you give
no more faith to any thing averse to the esteem I have of your demerits.

The Reply.
Epistle 6.
Madame,
I Judged what you would answer me before I wrote unto you, and well I knew,
that you would not want words, whatsoever reason you might see deficient in.
But I know not, nor can I, as yet, learn, on what deportment of yours I ought
take up my satisfaction, for either I am very blind, or else I have not seen
any so favorable, as might render me more satisfied then I have been.
Notwithstanding you have cause to say, that I rather judge thereofby opinion,
then by reason, for that I have pronounced them just against my self, which
reasonably I never could. To say I accuse you wrongfully of the ill you do me,
and that you have nor power nor will thereto, were not only against my
knowledge, but also against yours, and cannot be said without gaine-saying the
most certain experience that I have proved therein: against which it is
impossible to believe that you have ever wished me well. As to my raving I my
self give sentence against my self, upon condition you confess that it
proceeds not, but of too much love. And for the verity of your promise, I know
not what place it may hold in my belief, to hinder a contrary impression, not
having ever seen the proof that was not to the contrary. To remember me of
things whereof I do complain, were but to afflict me more. It were better
seek some means to forget them, as her, has been their causer since that I
neither can or ought hope other thing.

The Argument.
He amorously seems angry with his Mistress.

Epistle 7.
Madam,
I Should indeed never write more, no nor speak, calling to mind how much both
the one, and the other, have been bootlesse to me, and how much that
faithful, steadfast, and most perfect affection which I bear you, continued of
so long time, and with so wonderful a perseverance, might speak for me, were
not you on my behalf, the most imperswasible woman under heaven; But the
violence of my torments, and that rigorous usage wherwithall you entertain me,
when I ought be rather cloyed, then starved with your favors, constrain me to
lament my self, and to accuse you both of ingratitude, and cruelty. What is
the matter Madam? have you lost the name and memory of him that has not any,
but to love you, and to serve you; And is it not enough that you are lovelesse,
but you will be too without memory, without* knowledge? How long have I sighed
for you? and you withstood, not only my felicity, but more your own. Remember
you, that he that begs love on you now, is he, that of so long, has been your
suppliant, and that it is not a vain humor that invites him to it, but the
truest passion love did ever yet enforce. Content your self in that so violent
resistance you have made till now, against your own good hap, and suffer you
your self to be overcome at last, by an invincible spirit. All things invite
you to it, and nothing lets you; your honor is protected in my wariness, and
my discretion, and this same innocent fear you have to do amiss, in my
favor, is altogether causlesse. God is no enemy of Natures, but its Author,
and the offense committed without scandalls is no offense; for this'tis said
that they are blessed whose sins are covered. But Madam, the men of the first
times, having composed their civil Laws, did after give them out unto the
people, as divine, to the intent to render them the more venerable, and
themselves the better obeyed in their Authority. So Numa, made the Romans
believe he had the Laws he gave them from the Goddess Egeria. And Lycurgus
persuaded the Greeks that Apollo had given him his. Stand you not then on so
vain a scruple, which indeed is no other then a bare pretense, to hide your
cruelty. And if you still doubt of that so faithful constancy, of which you
have had so long experience; Alas! with what manner of proof have I not
testified the same? which notwithstanding, if so be there yet remains one I
have not renderd; may it include my life, and all that ever I have, command me
here that I present you with it; that so living and dying in obedience, as in
affection, I may cause you find me more worthy of the good you refuse me, then
of the il you do me.

The Argument.
He comfort his Mistress, on the death of his Rival, and manifests the
excellence of his Love, above all other affections.

Epistle 8.
Madam,
YOu commanded me to ease you of a passion, gave you offense, and at the same
time promised to cure me of another, gave me death; And howsoever I hope
nothing less then the effects of such a promise, your repose is so dear to
me, and your Empire so pleasing, as I have imposed silence on my own passions,
to give care to yours, and forgotten all the ills you do me, to haste to your
help, even in those which you your self procure you. I cannot deny Madam, but
your sorrows are natural, since they proceed from love, and from the death of
a man you loved; you have not loved him sans merit, and you have lost him
without possessing him, so as you lament him justly. This is a truth, and
cannot be denied without offending the resentment you have for him; But Madam,
against whom complain you of his death? Is it against God, who did permit him
live, or against your self most innocent of his death? If it be against you,
are you not still the more afflicted, and the more sorrowful? And if it be
against God, knows he not better what is fit for us, then we our selves?
Could not he have suffered him whom you love dead, to have been living, yet
possessed by another Mistress, within whose arms you had less loved him, then
in his grave? Could not he as well have taken you again, as him, thereby
reducing you to that first nothing, which he made you of? Consider what you
complain of Madam, and you will find, that it is naught, and that to be moan
your self, and vex your soul for nothing, is an inexcusable weakness; We
well may pardon the first complaints that grief inforceth us to utter, for
that there is no courage so assured, whom the violence of these first motions
does not overturn; But this storm ceased, there is no more excuse, if Reason
reassumes not place, and at her turn does not obtrude those passions, that had
turned her out. It is for this Men say that the superior part of the Soul,
should be like the supreme Region of the Air, that never is agitated with, or
storm, or tempest. See here Madam, the difference twixt what you do, and what
you ought to do, for doubtless, discourse, time, the necessity of death, and a
thousand other considerations I omit, should before now have settled your
resolution, to have borne a remediless mishap. Where see the quite contrary,
instead of making your constancy appear, and shine in such an accident,
showing by how many ways you exceed, in the beauties and perfections of your
Sex; you give your self over a prey to grief, like to some simple and
ignorant woman; you shut your spirits up (which God ordained for heaven) within
a grave, together with a dead Carcass, which he it may be has deprived of
life, even for the immesurable love you bore him, you sacrifice your Soul to a
most singular grief, and vainly run after a shadow, you are sure you never
can oretake. Your Soul is the Temple of God, and you adore there, the image of
a dead man, whom he permitted not that you should love, not whilst he lived.
You make scruple of small things, and make no conscience of Idolatry, which
you your self do know to be the grieuousest sin that can be perpetrate. The
Laws allow a widow but one year, to testify her lawful sorrows, which for
the most part be but in appearance neither, and you resolve to carry yours
eternally within your soul. You will nourish a Woolfe that devoures you,
embrace what betraies you, ruin your repose, outrage your beauty and your
health, and cause your self to die alive. To conclude Madam, you will openly
resist the will of God, according to which you make profession of ordering
yours. Who being our Father, loves us his children, and better knowing what we
want, then we our selves, rules all things by his Providence, and not according
to our fancies. For if the world were governed by the various humors, and
diverse passions of men. Alas! Madam, to what new Chaos were we then brought
back? And if that sometimes he afflict us here, it is alwais yet to profit us,
and never to our hurt, and even that ill he does us, is either still to make
us merit some greater good, or else to cause us shun some greater ill.
Complain not you unjustly then of what he justly does. Think not that he has
suffered now this loss, for other cause then to acquit you of a greater
grief, which howsoever you are unable to perceive, yet see you that his power
is infinite, and that his judgments are unknown, and which it is better far
to apprehend, then prove. But you will tell me the same you told me yesterday,
that your passions are not so easily shifted as your petticotes. It is true
Madame, and I find it but too certain in what I undergo for you. But where
are now those so sufficient reasons, by which you have erewhiles endeavored to
persuade me, that I might easily put off mine? Why serve you not your self
against your self, with those weapons you so well handle against others? Why
do you think it impossible to free you of the passions you have for a shadow,
having before believed that it was nothing for me to divest me of these I have
for you? Is it that you are more capable of love then I am, or that the subject
of your love is more excellent then mine? Madame, I will not lessen the merit
of your affections, which you had never conceived, had they not been most
perfect, of which it is no little proof to see them live yet, in you, after
the death of him that caused them. Yet are they natural, and nothing is more
common then to mourn for a lost friend. But that I had power to humble me so,
to the pleasure of a woman, as for her love, I have loved even the rival that
hindered me to be beloved, is a proof of an affection Madame, that in some sort
exceeds the rule of nature. And in the which you cannot deny, but I surpass
you, as much as you in all other things exceed me. As to the subject of your
love, Madame, he was most certainly lovely, otherwise you had not made choice
of him. But without wroning your election, or his merits, I dare say, that
there was more correspondence in your humors, then in your qualities; and that
more then the compliance and discretion wherewith he entertained you, and
whereby chiefly he was praiseworthy, he was not possessed of so great
perfections, as could make him merit yours. By which you may see, that the
subject of my love being more excellent then yours, it follows that your
passions must be less then mine, and that you may easlier divest you of them,
then I of mine; yea, if so the cause remained; which being now no more, it is a
marvel that the effect should yet continue. But Madame, I have given
sufficient audience to your plaints, it is now high time that you hearken unto
mine, if not for my ease, yet for your own at least, since the most miserable
may find in them some cause of comfort. You bemoane the dead Madame, and think
not of those that die by your means. I do daily perish, and am evenat the
last gasp, and that for your love: and yet have you the heart to sigh for
another before my face, and the power to interdict my passions, to make me wed
yours. I see a dead body preferred to me, which living I in affection yet
preceded, and find you as insensible and wholly inanimate on my behalf as he
is on yours. My whole labors, all my affections and best qualities, are
altogether bootlesse; you know, without acknowledging my faith, you look upon
my afflictions, without once being moved: and whatsoever might commend a
perfect affection, you behold in me, not daigning ought to regard it. Thou too
too much beloved dead man, whose condition is most happy, in comparison of
mine! thou were living beloved of the most lovely beauty under heaven, and thou
art only he that art beloved of her as yet even after death. Thou were not
only beloved of thy Mistress, but thou were likewise of thine enemy. In
stead of persecuting thee even to thy grave, as thief and robber of my good,
which thy remembrance hinders me as yet to have; I have honored thy memory
with my writings, which have so imprinted it in the heart of thy Mistress, as
now there is no other impression can take place for that. Is there any
compliance? Is there any passion or perfection indeed in love, that can come
near to this? Madame I implore here the beauty of your wit, and the integrity
of your own soul, in default of mine, that with this thought passes away in
transe, and leaves me not with other hope or desire, then here to see my life
fail me with my speech.

The Argument.
He complains of his Mistress that she had failed him in a meeting appointed
by her to walk.

Epistle 9.
YOu sent yesterday to let me know that you could not come, and that I should
not attend you any longer. I was told that you supped very late, and you chased
me away, upon pretense that you would sup in good time. A man should be
extremely purblinde not to see that there was something more in this, then
matter of Mastership, and that you having threatened to deprive me of a
particular entertainment, would let me see, that you were a woman of your word.
Hug your self for it Madame, you shall never more be troubled, though I
continue ever in torment. I shall not only leave you your liberty, but mine
own, which I pretend not to withdraw from so worthy a servitude, where I choose
rather to suffer extreme tyranny, then elsewhere to live beneath the perfects
Empire. No Madame, what I pretend to, is to make you see in an unparalleld
respect, an affection incomparable, and in a blind obedience mute and
inconsiderate, how much inferior to me, I leave such as aspire to the glory of
your love: and how much I hope to exceed them by those actions, which my
courage and the violent ambition I have to merit you, do promise meto atchieve
in this war.

The Answer.
YOu conceive things otherwise then they be, and according to your fancies,
whereupon you write to me as you please. I shall better answer you by word of
mouth, then by Letter, and making you find your error, it will belong to you
to make me satisfaction.

The Argument.
He justifies his fancies.

Epistle 10.
THe party you left with me yesterday can tell you, how I knew not what to do
with my self; after I had then lost you. When howsoever it were near night, it
seemd to me a tedious day. There is a fair Lady near you, who lately told me,
she would gladly see me. I light on him had procured me this honor, who
endeavored what he could to get me thither, but prevailed nothing, howsoever I
knew not how to busy me, but in thinking of you turning and returning in my
memory, such things as you have said to me, and those humors and conjectures
whereof you accuse me, after having your self caused them. I humbly entreat
you Madame, take notice there may be fancies and humor without love, but not
love without humor and fancy, and if you upbraid me with them as an error, it
is yet a general one, and common to all lovers, above whom I have this
advantage yet, that I order them so as they never trouble her I love. Most
beauteous Minerva! glory of my thoughts, the sovereign good of my life, and
extreme felicity of my soul, who can render a more faithful testimony of
this truth then your self? that can so casily moderate the furies of my
violence. How many times have you stayed the most impetuous motions of my
passions, with one word, yea with a look. No more then blame my humors that
do rather merit commendations, since they make me honor the cause that
brought them forth, and are not only proofs of my love, but also of my
obedience.

The Argument.
Why his Mistress should not be moved at his Martyrdom, upon his departure.

Epistle 11.
THere is nothing so strange, nor any thing so wonderful, the accustomed use
whereof, wears not out the astonishment. Observe, that death is most horrible,
notwithstanding which, the habit thieves have in murder, causes that they
kill men, not only without horror, but with some kind of pleasure and
voluptuousness. The comparison is bad, but it is proper. I would say that
albeit my martyrdom be without example, and that the novelty thereof, amazeth
me, and renders me, my self, thereat affrighted, you are so accustomed to
plaints, and to the tears of such whom you make sigh, as that you suffer not
your self to be the least touched at mine. No Madame, I believe your intellect
extremely generous, and consequently pitiful, but it is beaten so with such
discourse, as it but laughs thereat, and looks on me dying, not only with dry
eyes, but with some sort of pleasure too. Oh Madame, were I capable of
comforting the afflicted, I should, and not without good cause, begin with my
self, rather then with those, whose jealousies are more worthy of derision,
then of pity. You Madame, with whom I am to part this day, in no less sorrow
then if I were to be separated from my proper life; expect not words at my
depart, my sorrows will not suffer them: it will be much if I be able but to
bid adue, since that is the last word a man should use in leaving life.

The Argument.
He entreats his Mistress so torment him, to the end such pleasure as she takes
therein, be increased proportionably to the increase of his torments.

Epistle 12.
Madam,
I give you good night, letting you know besides for news, that my dolours are
become more pleasing then they were, since I took notice of the contentment
they bring you. Wherefore I entreat you not to lessen them, but to provide me
new vexations, to the end your delights be increased proportionable, to the
abundance of my punishments. For I am not content to undergo only the ills
you do me, but I would yet too suffer those are done to you, and become the
most miserable soul that ever lived, to render you the most happy. No Madam,
I love not for my pleasure, I love for yours, and love not to torment you, but
to vex my self for the love of you, by whom I desire still to be tormented. I
say not this or to flatter you, or to decline your anger, I know that the one
is bootlesse, and the other impossible. I speak it as a truth, by which I am
thereto enforced, and to make it appear to you, how much my affections are
elevate above all others, the vassailes, and the subjects of your boundless
Empire.

The Argument.
He excuses himself for putting his Mistress in collar, by preferring a just
complaint unto her, and protests that he will never more complain, since
he sees he cannot complain, without giving her offense.

Epistle 13.
Madam,
I Were not a man, if I had not passions, nor a Gascoine, were I not violent,
nor could I be amorous, were I not furious. But that these conditions are so
eminent in me, that they have ever appeared to the prejudice of that respect,
that subjection, or that obedience which I owe you; I most humbly entreat you
Madam, be you your self the judge, and do not as yesternight ye did, when
desiring with all the humility, and submission a slave owes to his Lord, but to
lament a just resentment; you caused me feel the effect of such wrath as I
nere merited, after the depriving me of an entertainment promised. For you
alone both pleaded, and adjudged the cause, with such precipitation, not at all
harkening to me, that I had more haste to obey you, without reply, then by
reasons to defend my self, though it were most evident on my side, and that
your award was not only unjust, but likewise injurious. But Madam, I beg yet
of you, though it were yesterday forbidden me to speak, it may be permitted
this day to write, and that you will receive this complaint, as the last I hope
ever to prefer. For since I cannot complain without offending you, I shall
rather choose to undergo all the rigours in the world, then once to complain
of any one. You are Madam so just, as you never give cause of complaint to man,
and if any one do of himself offer it, you return him such satisfaction, as a
man much injured, could not but be well contented. There is none but me only
destinate to suffer, not alone hopeless of satisfaction, but more, most
ascertained to be checked and curbed for all sorts of occasions, and for all
sorts of people, which I should embrace yet as a favor, if no other but your
self might take advantages thereby. But you have entitled me unto the place
that does give way to all the world, and forces me give you away to others,
for whom I should most gladly give my life. If instead of those whole days you
say you will afford me, you would vouchsafe me only but one hour, to accept
the adue you have commanded me to come and render you, it would be easy for me
to justify this truth. If not, then must I bear it away within my breast,
together with an eternal sorrow to have most innocently offended you.

The Answer.
Sir,
HAd I words so sufficient, as I had yesterday cause to be in collar, I should
enforce you to confess that you are in an error, to take it ill at my hands.
And if you please to be at the pain to to come hither, I shall not forbear to
tell you, what I think therein, and assure you that I am your Servant.

The Argument.
He endeavors to maintain a wager he had propounded to have laid, that he
would write no more to her, and begs pardon, that he does not ask her pardon
for it.

Epistle 14.
Madam,
YEsterday upon the assault of my first motions, I offered to have laid a wager
with you, of which having better considered, I find that I had reason to have
done it, and that you were in an error to take offense at it, for what can I
more in writing present you with, which I have not already sent, and said unto
you? And if all that I have said, and all that ever I can say, will not yet
incline you at all to pity, to what purpose should I trouble my self in a
labor, that is not only bootlesse unto me, but likewise hurtful? For is it
not true, that they are so many firebrands, to incense those flames, wherewith
I am already most miserably burned? And if I must not hope for any ease
therein; why would you that I should again enkindle them? If the most perfect
love of the world, the most extreme fidelity, the discreetest modesty, and
most steadfast constancy that ever was; if all these together so often tried,
and so many times approved by your self, have not power to leave the least
impression in your breast, but that on the contrary, my complaints have served
merely for your sport, and pastime; why should I obstinately continue to
lament me of an ill, which you have told me, and my perseverance lets me see,
is altogether helpless. In a word Madam, why are you pleased that I should
ever ask you that, which you will never grant me? Would you not think a man
extremely cruel, that should put his enemy to death, that had begged life at
his hands? Yet am not I your enemy, and yet you use me in this manner, I and
worse, for you do take offense both when I ask, and when I do not ask; But
Madam, I have so perfectly conceived the greatness of your demerits, and find
my words so mean, in comparison of this conceit, as the despair to attain it
only, is a sufficient cause to make me hold my peace, and religiously adore in
silence, what I cannot in my discourses, honor but imperfectly Here is the
great offense I did you yesterday; Madam, I most humbly entreat you pardon me
that I ask you not your pardon for it.

The Argument.
After his Mistress departure, he comfort her in her afflictions, by the
example of his own adversities.

Epistle 15.
Madam,
AFter having bid adue, and followed you with both my eyes, so far as the way
you held would give me leave, I returned to go visit those pledges you left
here behind you in the City, where the sorrow not to see you with them,
renewed those griefs I had for your departure; And sending my man thither to
day, Mistress N. let me know, that she would write unto you, which has
invited me to do the like. I can assure you Madam, if it be a consolation to
the afflicted, to have companions in misery, you have great cause to comfort
you in your sorrows, by the example of mine; which really are the most
sensible I ever yet have felt. You have not wept alone, you have taught me the
mystery, and a mystery that has been altogether unknown to me ere since I
knew my self. I most humbly entreat you that my sorrows may mitigate yours;
that now at need you make use of your constancy, and fit your heart to bear
all accidents that can arrive, and if so be the pity of your self cannot yet
apt you to it, let it for your Children order you therein. They fare here much
better then you, and weep much less then him that now blotteth his paper with
his tears. Adue my fair and dear Minerva, I am afraid to be surprised in
this exercise; And find no words that can express how much I am yours.

The Argument.
An Epistle of a Lady, to a faithless Lover.

Epistle 16.
SInce that I must write to one that answers not my Letters, take it not in
favor of you, it is not to you, but to this paper I will tell my thoughts, and
hereon so disburthen me of them, as I will never more have them in mind, but
to detest their Causer. You have not deceive me, for I long since foresawe my
goodness unable to render you better then nature made you. Yet I accuse you
not; for being so light and wavering as you are, what could you likelier follow
then the motions of your own lightness. No I complain of my self, that have
shut my eyes upon your actions, the better to give care unto your words, and
believed rather in your fained persuasions, then in the true knowledge I had of
your humor. If yet you did but tell me the cause of this your infidelity, and
not being able to find a just occasion, you took the pain but to search a
pretense that were colored with some false appearance, I would herein excuse
you, against my self and seeking some reason for your fault, should my self
put up the wrong thereof, to absolve you. But to talk to me of a servant that
never sees me, is an excuse worse then the offense, of which though you may
well avoid the displeasure, you can never be able to wipe away the sorrow. This
then is my comfort, that you have no other reason for your change, then your
own inconstancy. And if so that I have not ties enough to stay you, yet have I
resolution enough to let you go; and have as much patience in your loss, as I
had contentment in your possession. Go on then, add to the honor your
courageous heart propounds to you to seek from far, the triumph to have
unthankfully acknowledged my affections. But send me my Letters, for that I
will not that you carry any thing of mine along with you, but the remembrance
to have lost my good will, and the despair of being ever able to recover it.
Adue.

The Argument.
He justifies his silence.

Epistle 17.
Madam,
YOu have stayed a long while to reproach me of my silence. You have not shown
so much patience to hear me speak, as you have manifested to see me forbear.
Yet must I take this for a testimony of the esteem you have of me, for which I
stand so much obliged, as I never shall be able to acquit me. See here how
admirable you are in your persuasions. Had I wrote to all such friends, as I
may have in Picardy, and yet had forborne to write to you only, you then had
had some cause for your reproaches, and consequently I had erred in my silence;
But I have not wrote to any one, where you have written to all such as you know
hereabouts, not forgetting any one, but me only; You are too blame then, for
not having writ to me, as well as others, and afterward upbraiding me for not
having wrote to you. But I cannot write to you without complaining, and I choose
rather to be silent, then to importune you with a bootlesse complaint, whence I
should have hoped as little satisfaction, as I have had by these already made.
Here is the true cause of my forbearance, and not that I have better exercises
then those that busy me in the entertainment of so dear thoughts as I have of
you. What I have done since I had the honor to see you, has been to so little
purpose, as it is impossible here to set it down, had I not once been
resolved for Comprigne to have seen you, but that I doubted of finding
youthere, for that I was told you were gone to Paris, whither I am now returned
to remain ever yours.

The Argument.
He dares not see his Mistress.

Epistle 18.
I Sent you that you desired, and I crave your pardon that I brought it not my
self, for fear of that amorous contagion, wherewith you strike all such as
aproach you. Knew you with what grief of heart I endeavor to keep away, you
would have pity of my life, which I had much rather loose for your love, then
entreat you to preserve to the prejudice of that you have for an other. Having
often heard say that it is one of the finest subtilties of the world, freely to
do that which a man should of force have been co^straind unto. See here the
cause why I endeavor to render me my self; to be able yet once again to give
me back to you. Howsoever I hope nothing less then ever to see you mine as I
am yours.

The Argument.
He complains of his Mistress absence, and of those would hinder him from
seeing her.

Epistle 19.
THere is no longer means of living absent from my life, since you are not
with me, I am no more my self. I may be forbidden the seeing you, but never
the loving you, or if they will forbid, yet can they never hinder me, such as
owe me most good will, do testify the least unto me, and that by reason of my
affection. But I choose rather to be little obedient to them, to be the more
faithful to you. Live you then in this assurance, if so you will not that I
die; and become assured likewise that my life shall sooner be extinct, then
that fair flame that daily does consume it.

The Argument.
He comfort a Lady upon some displeasures she had received.

Epistle 20.
Madame,
I Received the notice you gave me of your remembrance, with as much
contentment to find me hold any place in your memory, as sorrow for not being
able to merit the same in my services. It is your extreme courtesy Madame,
makes you say that you are indebted to mine. For the good will I have to serve
you, has hitherto been to no purpose. And had the effect equalled my good
will, I had been more then gratified for it by the remembrance you have of me;
howsoever I can never render you so many services, but I must still owe you
more. The end and middle of your Letter testify some sense of trouble you have
been put to, which I will entreat you loose, for as much as it serves not but
to augment them. If so you have had irrepaireable losses, it is lost time to
think of them; and if they be to be helped, it were fit to bethink you of
means to redress them, and to that end to endeavor whatsoever may be done;
and if nothing can, to comfort your self that it has not been your fault,
that you have therein done what could be possible, that you are not obliged to
do more, nor justly to grieve your self for acci^ents you cannot avoid. Here
be the remedies that I often practice on my self continually, since I first
knew me, wrestling beneath so injurious a fortune, as the most miserable may
find wherewith to comfort themselves, in the contemplating me. But I am
estrayed Madame, and forget that I increase the number of your troubles by the
length of this my Letter, which may witness for me if you please, that the
desire I have to live, is not so dear to me, as that I have to preserve me
yours.

The Argument.
He answers to a Letter of Minerva's.

Epistle 21.
YOur note enforces me to avow it, that you have a better memory on my
behalf, then heretofore you have had acknowledgement; and that you do
something acquit you of what you owe me, if so you can pay all my love with one
bare remembrance; I find also that you have cause to bear me in mind, for if
so be I have not rendered you the service, the memory whereof may be dear unto
you, at the least I have given you no offense, that ought to render you ill
apaid. As for me I have a thousand reasons that oblige me to cherish yours, but
one only forbids me, which is that I cannot remember me of you, without
passion, and to suffer a man's self to become passionate, for a thing cannot be
had, is but a folly. I have of late pretended to wisdom, and have believed my
self but ill favouredly therein, as you may think, notwithstanding which, if
so I cannot attain to it, I will at least seem to have done it, and begin by
the forgetting of my passions, and of her that was the cause of them; it is
true that it is but an ill way this, to begin to forget my love by renewing the
memory thereof, and indeed of what should I ever remember me after once having
forgotten you?

The Argument.
A Ladies answer to her Lover.

Epistle 22.
THe care which you have to preserve my memory, and the passion you feel for
my absence, to my thinking, are less then the means you have to express
them, notwithstanding I value them so, as I am not much displeased to see the
new assurances you give me of your affections, which are not over-pleasing unto
me, though I were well satisfied with the former. The fairest proofs and most
desired effects you can give me of your good will, consists in your return: I
imagine not that you have cast the affection behind you, that you had for me,
but contrariwise I deem that you ever laid it amongst the most eminent of your
best thoughts, and that like enough you may draw your cr^^es after you, but
cannot break them. As to the ^^cape you have made without my leave, I
attribute it to your affairs, never having any design that tended to the
diverting you from them; if I render you beautiful thoughts, it is not in such
abundance, but I always reserve some to my self, for the entertainment of my
solitude in your absence, you say that you resolve to attend my answer at
Brux*elles, and I am resolved to write to you thither by an express messenger,
if so your coming do not prevent me. Adue, I am your servant.

The Argument.
He makes answer to a complaint she had made of him* for his silence, and not
writing.

Epistle 23.
Madame,
ONe chanced to deliver me a note, which by the hand and the style I knew to be
yours. I confess to you Madame, that I scarce understood any thing in it, and
that as I have no cause to believe, that my good wishes are any thing valued by
you, so have you yet less, to say that you cannot consent to the loss of
them. You think not that such as love not, but in presence, know well how to
love. I know not wherefore you say that Madame, to one that both in your
presence, and in your absence, has testified so much love unto you, and one
that therein has been so ill requited, as you cannot renew the memory of his
affection, without refreshing that of your own ingratitude. You continue to
write to me almost against your will. Indeed I cannot deny but in that you do
me a favor, which I hold extremely dear, but with it you ought to avow, that
my affections do merit a greater, and that for every word, that you have wrote
to me, you have received many Letters from me, from any of which, I cannot
think that you can draw argument to prove, that I desire not the continuation
of yours. And to demand that I should clear your scruples thereupon, is it not,
to demand new proofs of a passion which you cannot be ignorant of, without
belying your own experience? you say that should be much contrary to your
desire; so sure should it be to mine that has never tended but to honor you
(though to no purpose) and that cannot yet repent the time therein lost. Thus
would I entreat you to write to me, answering my Letters, as I reply to yours,
and arguing with me reasonably, without framing to your self such chimera's,
as have not for support, but your own fantasy. You will be thereby more
satisfied, and I more contented, since my contentment depends on your
satisfaction. I am not in the mean time your servant, but I shall always be
so, whilst it shall please God and you to let me live.

The Argument.
Upon some discontent a little before his departure.

Epistle 24.
Madame,
IF so be this paper be not as unwelcome to you, as my self, I entreat you
here peruse a word or two which my extreme dolors hinder me to come and tell
you. I nurse sufficient ills in my despair, without the need to have had them
more exasperated by the interdiction of your speech, and of your sight. Yet
nerethelesse are any of them so cruel, but I would rather undergo them still
without complaint, then be displeasing unto you. No Madame, I am sufficiently
possessed of my affections, but not so much to the prejudice of my obedience,
that they shall ever give you cause to term your self a miserable one. I
know not what you think; but I wish no part in heaven, if there be any manner
of misfortune upon earth, I would not undergo, to render you in happy state
thereby. Adue, I go to breath forth my afflictions, in some place, whereas my
worst of sufferings never shall offend the due respect I owe to you, and which
I ever shall preserve to you even in my own loss.

The Answer. 25.
YOu have made an ill construction of my intentions, if so be you think that I
desire to banish you my sight, since yours have ever been too dear to me, to
value it now no better. And you shall much offend me if you do not bid adue by
word of mouth. When you shall enter into your self, you will I assure me
confess, that you are in an error, and that all such things as you accuse me
of, are the furthest may be from any design of mine.

The Reply. 26.
IF I have ill interpreted your intentions, you may blame your self, that have
always hidden them in words so mystical, as I have been unable ere to
penetrate. I well might think you interdicted me your speech and sight, when I
perceived that you would neither see nor yet give care unto me. And that has
caused me to resolve to bid adue by Letter, not to offend you, but to avoid
your offense, and to punish my self for the sin I have committed in loving
you too perfectly. But since you let me know that I should give you offense, if
so I should not come, to present it you by word of mouth, I shall collect
whatsoever remains to me of life, to come and tender you that word, the sole
and only thought whereof is killing. I believe I shall confess me in an
error, if once I do re-enter in my self, for really I think not therein ever
to re-enter. Yet am I not so besides my self, that I shall ever forget me so
as to accuse you of any thing; no it is I, that I accuse of all the ills I
undergo, and I, the man that does impute them still to my misfortunes and my
ill deserts.

THe next Epistle he wrote unto her, is the last mentioned in the story, where
we leave him departed for the Army, from whence having sent her six or seven
several Letters before he received one back, being returned to Paris, he
wrote the following Epistles, which may give much light to the Reader, of the
argument of the second part, that was near finished, but could not wholly, for
that, what the Author intended otherwise (as may be thought) fill out an
unhappy tragedy signed with his own lives blood, after he had four or five
times victoriously returned out of the field, on several appeals, honored
with the better on his enemies, by whom he was unfortunately murdered, near
the bedside of this Lady.

The Argument.
Being returned to Paris, he found that his Mistress had harkened to some ill
reports of him, whereof he complains, and for that she had taken from him
such hours of visitation, as he had hardly acquired to give them to another.
The first occasion of breach between them.

Epistle 27.
YEt ought I not to die, without so much as one word speaking, nor see my self
condemned in a cause so just, without defending me at all. I had thought to
have smothered my complaints in silence of my death. But the griefs are too
too smarting, and the injustice you accuse them of, oblige me to defend them.
Madame, when I remember me of my departure, of my absence, and of my return,
and do consider that in all the three, I have not cone any thing, but still
adore and worship you amid the most affrightfull and the hazardfullest
divertisements could be; and that in recompense of this, and of an infinite of
love, which I have testified to you, you in the instant, and almost on the
first day of my arrival, picked a quarrel with me, upon pretense as false, as
my affections are most true, and as remote from my deportments, as two
extremes can be the one from the other. When I call to mind that you have too
forbidden me the honor of your entertainment, and of visiting you at the
hours, which I acquired by such, and so many cares, and which you now have
taken away from me, to give them to the jealousy of a watchful spy, that day
and night orelooketh, and controules your carriage, and continually besieges
your person. When I see the importunity of his tyranny unworthily preferred the
merit of my services; and that there is not that troublesome, or prattling
gossip, that does not importunely approach your ear, and entertain you three
or four hours without the least offense; where I am only he to whom minutes,
I and moments still are interdicted, being forced to pass whole days entire
at home with you, to attend the opportunity to speak one word, and
notwithstanding after this, to go my ways unable once to do it. It is
impossible such bitterness succeeding such sweetes I promised me, and which you
caused me hope on my return, can be digested and past ore without complaints
In one thing it may be Madam, I have failed indeed, I mean in that I have
dared before you, ere to sigh them forth, to whom no sort of plaint as yet was
ever just. So have you accused them of injustice, and wrote to me that you have
not loved the possession of my amity, but to consent unto the loss of it;
which is a strange conceit, and I dare say not yours for you have too much
judgment, ere to love a thing unto no end* without it be to loose it. For me,
right well you may loose me, even when you please, there is naught so certain,
Madam, and I shall readily serve you therein against my self: But for my love,
you never can, and if I would, I have sworn to you that it shall abide
eternally. And once again I promise you it shall: but never importune, or with
such tyranny as does extend unto the deprivation of your liberty; But on the
contrary, I never shall pretend once to stretch mine, but to depend always and
absolutely on yours. Here is what I had wrote when your man gave me your
Letters. After dinner I shall tell you more if so you please.

The Argument.
Upon that she had answered to his former Letter, how she was enforced to her
grief, to suffer anpleasing company, and that she was sorry she could not
admit of his entertainment, as she would. He returns that the party whom she
fained her to be unable to be rid of, was rather commanded to stay, purposly to
keep him off. And that he needed not his assistance in such case, knowing well
that she might absolutely command, and forbid him what she pleased, in full
assurance to be obeyed.

Epistle 38.
INdeed Madam I apprehend you freer of your elbowes then of your heart, as we
say, and that the party you feign ye unable to keep off, is rather commanded
to stay with you, purposely to keep me away, and by his presence to deprive me
of that, which otherwise you cannot deny to the justness of my desires: For
how should it possibly be, but having so good a wit, a judgment so excellent as
you have, and both accompanied with so sublime a spirit, you should give such
power over your self unto a man that is nothing to you, so as he should not
give you leave to dispose of one poor hour, that I have any time this month
begged at your hands; if you had not expressly bid him so to do? And what
indignity were it, that he upon pretense of service, and affection, should so
possess him of your estate, and of the liberty of your person, that not so
much as a breathing time should be free to you? And if that it be so Madam, you
little need the use of his assistance, you know sufficiently by former
experience, that my will is no way moved, but by the spring that orders yours;
of which the least demonstration you may please to make me, shall be my fate.
You may absolutely command, and forbid me what you please, in all assurance of
being obeyed, I, were I most certain of death in the performance. Yet have I
taken an ill course, since that which is refused to my submission, and
obedience, is borne away by a strong hand, or at least constrained to render it
self to importunity. But if you do not deceive me, but are really besieged
against your will; whence comes it that you have such power in me as to command
me go or stay, just as you please, and that you have no liberty to take a
moment from another, to gratify me? Is it not that it is only I, that fear
you, and that you fear all others? Is it not that you love their
importunities, better then my discretion? and that you will be troubled, and
not served? So had it been better for me to have done as others; for by the
means of tormenting you like them, I had possessed your entertainment as they
have done, or they had been dispossessed thereof as I have been, and the
disgrace had not exceeded the demerit of the action. Notwithstanding Madam, I
shall never repent me to have served well, I had rather been punished for well
doing, then noted for ill: But I most humbly entreat your pardon, if so I
cannot brook this passion sans complaint, nor loose my time, my understanding,
and my self, for you, without ere sorrowing for it. I have told you often, that
you might render me the happiest, or most miserable amongst men. But you can
never render me what you may make me loose.

The Argument.
He complains of the languishing he suffers in her absence, and entreates her
presence of her, as the only thing sufficiently able, to chase her image from
his thoughts.

Epistle 29.
Madam,
I Thought by the request I made unto you yesterday, to have given some bound
and order to the confusion of my thoughts; but I have done nothing but multiply
my own impatiencies; I am mortally wounded in the imaginative, nor is my
grief less certain, for being imaginary, you cannot conceive, nor I
express, the havoc your image has made in me, since yesternight; It has
not failed to persecute and follow me unto, but past the Altar, respecting
naught the sanctity and freedom of the Church, as if it would withstand and
hinder me from worshipping of other deity then yours. Beauteous Minerva, have
pirtie on so many languishings which I do cherish, and do amorously embrace
for love of you, that are the cause of them; Afford me your presence, that
only has the power to chase your image from my thoughts; And if in opening a
vain this morn, you have lost blood, If so you please, command that I replace
therein of mine.

The Argument.
He begs of God, he will inspire him with words of force to make her more
favorable. And he complains, that he had been made to attend all the day for
an Answer.

Epistle 30.
I Beg of God he will inspire me with words that may be pleasing unto you,
and that I may foresee the means to incline your heart to me, and to persuade
you to become more favorable. I lately wrote a word or two unto you, and I
have attended your answer all this day; Have I done you the offense, that
hinders you to write? No, you pay not back with silence, those offenses you
believe that you receive from me. And if I have done none, why hold you me in
the uncertaintie of this expectance? I shall trouble you yet more to complain
of this. I were better bid you good day, and be silent.

The Argument.
She answers to his precedent Letter, that she knows not what to say or send
word of, and complains much of the importunity of those that visit her.

Epistle 31.
I Cannot tell what to say or send you word of, not knowing at what hour I may
see you: Never was woman in the world so importuned as I am, or rather
Assassinde. I have not leisure so much as to write, be it never so little;
Nevertheless I shall afford you some hour after dinner, or else it shall not
be in my power, Lament I beseech you, and believe me your servant.

The Argument.
He replies, that if she knows not what to say or send him word of, he knows
less what to do.

Epistle 32.
IF so you know not what to say or send me word of, I yet know less what to
do, being much more grievously assassined by my dolours, then you can be by
your importunities. Notwithstanding if what you say be true, I lament you, if
not, I am the man the most to be lamented under heaven. You might disabuse me
in one word, and as I shall believe what you say to me; I shall likewise do
whatsoever you command me. I am afraid you will cause me spend this day as
others. Patience is a virtue. I cannot choose but obey you, and attend my life
as your favor and grace.

The Argument.
He prays her not to loose her peace of mind in the affairs, wherein she is
busied. And so falls in discourse of his passions, and sufferings for her love.

Epistle 33.
BEauteous Minerva; Accept if so you please, the good morrowes wherewith I
present you, together with this advise, not to loose the traquilitie of mind
you owe your self, in such affairs as you are now agitated with. Alas! I
trouble and torment me on your behalf, and for your occasions, and have no
care or thought that I can possibly withdraw from yours, to apply them to my
own. Madam, I say not this to witness my affections, you see them better in
my silence, then in any discourse of the world, they can be manifest. For all
my words, and all my actions too, being bootlesse still to me; finding my
self reduced to all extreamitie, you pitiless, and resolved to see me die,
most careless of my ill, or of my remedy: what should I hope from any thing I
possibly can say? Besides I know well this that I say now, is from the matter
quite, and that you, finding your self engaged in things that more concern
you, will now, or not regard them them ought, or else but slightly stay on
them, as you were wont to do. And how can I believe that this same Letter here
should nearer touch ye yet, then all the passions you have seen me vent, and
all the assertain'd dolours you have known me undergo, even with as little
sense, and less compassion of my ill, then if you had seen me suffer for
another one. So as if for a rare and singular proof of my affection, you
wished to see the mad discourse of one distract, and reasonlesse, this same is
it. Yet Madam, is there found a kind of ease in the complaint of things
remediless, and some manner of consolation in the relating of mishaps, which
certain ought to be permitted to the miserable, like my self, and which yet I
will not stretch so far, as to the importuning you, but rather choose to burn
and hold my pe^ce, as hoping in your help more from your pity, then my own
complaints* Good day Minerva, fair one, once more good day, and again once
more good day: permit I here do give good morrow to my Lady your mother too,
together with the antiquity of thieves, which I did promise her. But it is to you
indeed I ought to have presented it, as to the greatest thief on earth* For if
they be the greatest thieves that make the greatest thefts, what greater robber
can there be, then one that steals away our hearts?

The Argument.
She answers, that if he knew how much she partakes in his sufferings, he
would rather lament her then himself, and that no one should ever esteem
better of his merits, nor so cherish his affections, as her self.

Epistle 34.
IF you knew how much I partake in your sufferings, and how often I wish some
means in my power to remedy them, you would rather lament me then your self;
no one shall ever esteem better of your merits then I, nor more cherish your
affections then I do; if so I could assure you of this truth by effects worthy
you and my own desires, I should not now make use of these misbecomming words,
which nerethelesse I entreat you to accept, for that they come from her that
honors you the most.

The Argument.
He says that it is impossible he should undo him from the thoughts, that
have undone him. Represents to himself the time he has lost, in serving her,
what she has taken from him, and what she has yet left him. And concludes,
that it is high time, that he retire all naked as he is, to some desert,
whither her image shall not be able to pursue him further. But that all this
discourse vanishes on her presence.

Epistle 35.
IT is impossible I should ever undo me from those thoughts have utterly
undone me. You are with me as Hellen with the Trojans. So often as they in
absence did consult on her affairs, they concluded that they would discharge
themselves of her: but if so be that she were present, then they did resolve
they would retain her yet. So when I call to mind the many years, that I have
spent in serving you, where seeking to obtain you, I have lost my self, there
is no reason but does counsel me to put you off. But what! I have lost all
care of my affairs, the repose of my mind, the health of my body, the
pleasure of life, and the remembrance of my self. You have taken from me my
memory, understanding, and will, and have not left me my life, but to prolong
my torments, or for the pleasure that you draw from them, or for the glory;
since you receive such honors yet therein, as are not rendered unto any other
one. Is it not time all naked as I am left, I seek to save me in some desert
place, where your pursuing image nere can find me out: but this discourse does
vanish all, if once I come in sight of you; and I in stead of my supporting it,
become as one that dumbly plays the Amorous, demanding straight your pardon to
have had the thought; overcome, not by your reasons, but your beauties: And in
your absence is it yet much worse; I weep not, no my dolours were full light if
I could heal them with my tears: I dye in passion not to be believed, whilst
you do cause, and yet do sleep secure and careless of my ill. I was yesterday
to have seen some Ladies, to have diverted me, intending to have spoke to them
of love, as unto them indeed I did, but it was still of yours, or rather indeed
of mine. Pressed thereupon to name the cause from whence my sighing did
proceed, I told them there, I sighed not for a woman, but a deity. My goddess,
then adue, receive part of the sighs you cause, which bring you a good morrow,
and know the King departs on Monday without fail. I am to go this morning
into many places, whither I shall not carry other then my body, howsoever I
have much to do with the best gifts of my soul. Of which if so that you be
asked the news, say boldly, that it dwells with yours, in Flying-heart street.
I his suffices not, I must add that you have lost one half of my Letters
which I entreat you to look out.

Argument.
He complains that they would debar his visits on the passion week, and that
it was not a general rule: but his greatest grief was, to leave her in the
hands of her enemies, whose drifts he discovers to her, and offers himself
to undertake them.

Epistle 36.
Madam,
NOt seeing you yesterday at Church, according to that you have told me, I
judged you were retained at home by some unhappy discontent; but I was ignorant
of means to inform my self thereof; for to have sent to you, it was at such
an hour as you had not dared to have returned me answer, and for to have had
me come unto you much less: I too, remembered me of what you said, concerning
visits on these days, of which I think full well, and should much better yet,
were it a general rule for all, and not a particular exception for me only.
But if it were not amiss as yesterday, it is yet good to day, and to morrow
better, and I being to depart on Monday, shall consequently go without the
honor to see you, for whom I not only am and stay here, but for whom only I
live, which is not the greatest of my unhappiness, though it be extreme,
since having always placed your pleasure above my own, I easily can resolve
of any thing contenting unto you; but my misfortunes being to me a much less
burden then are yours, it is the greatest sorrow I can have, to leave you in
your enemies hands, from whence it seems you have no will to free your self,
and from whence my mind foregives me, that you will not part, but by the light
of some debate. Madame, to say truth, it is not for me to talk of this: for as
it is fatal to me to foretell you verities, it also seems that you are
destinate not once to credit them, and that you have no faith nor cares, that
you can lend to any one, but such as will deceive you. By so much the more as
you are good, and generous, by so much are you subject to deceit, since
generosity is always opposite unto distrust. Who does no ill, suspecteth none,
and one that does not think ere to deceive a friend, beneath the shadow of
affection, cannot believe that in an other, they cannot once conceive in
themselves. But feel you not the effects of some designs, that you have never
seen? do you not see, that they have got possession of your goods, and of
your liberty, and that under a pretense of serving you, they do but tyrannize?
But though it be a marvel, I should herein confine me to so little speech,
having such reason to extend me in so sensible a cause, for all this I wish not
that my passion Madame, should yet render me importunate; but on the contrary I
most humbly crave you will pardon me, if the sorrow to know you in these
displeasures, and the fear to see you fall in others yet more great, have made
me hazard the displeasing you. It is no part of my design, no rather may I dye
then once to think it. You know how much I honor you. I wish no other witness
of the affection I bear you, then your self. Believe then, it is that which
makes me speak, and that I look upon all other things, sans interest. Here
then, accuse me not of humor, and of fantasy, upon mine honor there is
none, if you call not humor and fancy an extreme passion to do you
faithful service, for which there is no desire of honor, nor necessity of
business, that I Will not quit, nor man upon the earth I would not undertake,
and he by so much the more heartily then others, as he does undertake
concerning you, and does not only mar the good of your affairs, but more
the beauty of your days, in shadow of obliging you. Yet pardon me that I do
take offense at the ill is doneto you. I cannot choose but do it, being so
entirely yours, as that you have not any thing so properly belonging to you as
my self. And after having pardoned me, give leave I bid you here farewell.

The Argument.
Having fought this morning upon the occasion spoken of in the former Letter,
and having astonished his Mistress, by the recital of so unlooked for an
action, he writes to her that her astonishment caused him to judge that she
hoped some better end, or feared a worse. And shows that neither the one, nor
the other, could be.

Epistle 37.
Madame,
THe astonishment wherein I saw you o'rewhelmed at the recital of an action,
wholly advantageous, as well for you as me, and whereunto I did not bring less
consideration, for any thing might have regard to you, then ought that might
concern my honor or my life, has put me in care for what you undergo, and
caused me judge, or that you hoped of a better success therein, or feared a
worse. To hope a better Madame, it could never be, that one should render
satisfaction in the field more happily then I have done, unto a man so offended
in his honor, without the least submission made, or any hurt received; and for
to fear a worse, I cannot think he has received so much content therein, as
that he covets much to come more there. And to what purpose were it indeed to
return to the place from whence we of our selvesretired without the least
obligement from another one? For me, I am well pleased to have rendered him the
satisfaction, he did desire to see me with my sword in hand, and he has seen
me; but he has not let me see, that he understood so well the maxims of
honor as by his chartell he did promise me, since he did let me part from him
without enforcing of the satisfaction, which he did pretend unto. See here the
cause by which he most importunes me, to speak no more of this our combat,
then I have done therein. For me, Madame, I am not so ill versed in the
mystery, but I know well it will be said, we had no great desire to hurt our
selves, and that these sacrifices ever are by so much the less honorable, as
they are little bloody: but it was to preserve my honor, and not to atchieve
thereof, from him that I came there, I have acquired enough in hotter places
far, and as I do not fear the faces or the swords of all of any enemy; I
likewise not desire to reduce them unto such despaires, as make them undertake
more then their courage could. He was offended, and he has done nothing that I
know, but bear away the sad repentance of his own offense, and left with me
the pleasure of it. Good day my goddess, send me back my man, to the intent he
may direct me where you please.

The Argument.
He complains that she had judged amiss of a good action. Says that he
believed that she had seen the man of whom he spoke, and got from him the
confession she desired. How conformable which was to his words, he should
find when she should fulfill hers. And that he nere should rest, till he had
made him avow the truth.

Epistle 38.
Madam,
IF so I caused your astonishment this morning, by the discourse I had with
you, you have now after dinner rendered me again sufficiently amazed at your
judgment, and opinion thereof. I am become so much dismayed to see you doubt
the verity of my words, and blame my carriage, as that there cannot be that
fault, whereof I deem my self not guilty. I was this morning much satisfied in
my proceedings, and it seemed to me I had done well inso easily rendering him
content, that was so much displeased. But your opinion Madam, quite perverteth
my whole sense; And as I rather do believe in what you say, then what I do my
self, I now conceit whatsoever I did think well done before, most ill, for that
you judge it so. And the worst of all is, that as on the one side you
absolutely forbid me to do better, so on the other, you most openly enforce
me thereunto. And if you knew how much I suffer in this thought, and how much
I esteem me miserable in that sufferance, to loose the bliss of your
presence, for having but too carefully endeavored it, you then should have the
most merciless heart that ever was, if so you had not pity of my life. But
Madam, I believe you have seen the man of whom I speak, and got from him the
confession you so much desired. I know right well, you will not tell me so: for
you are forbidden to reveal it; but I shall find, if so it be conformable
unto my words, when you accomplish yours, that promised me nere more to make
esteem of his friendship; and in such case I demand not but the continuance of
yours. But by the esteem that you shall henceforth make of him, I shall
perceive or that you are no woman of your word, or else that he has disavowed
of mine. I assure you Madam, I shall never rest until I have enforced him to
avow the truth of what I have said; And do assure you yet once more, that you
shall not again blame me for having done too little. Adue Madam, impart yet of
your hand to him who you do utterly debar your sight.

The Argument.
He says that he has something to say to her, which he had not yet said, for
that whatsoever he premeditateth to tell her in absence, flies his memory when
she is present. Represents to her his languishings and the put offs, wherewith
she had from time to time protracted him, yet without complaint, for that
loving her with an extraordinary affection, he was well pleased to testify it
by respects in common.

Epistle 39.
I Had a large discourse in my head this morning, which certainly I should not
yet have delivered you; for whatsoever in your absence I premeditate to say
unto you, vanishes still in your presence like shadows before the Sun: But
whatsoever I have said to you before, I found me greatly disburthened to see
you, and to hear you speak with such freedom as yesterday you did, and by so
much the more as I hoped it was with little divertisement, and much leisure:
but the event did no way answer to my hopes, since in place of a day more
favorable then I had propounded to my self, I approved it yet a hundredth
times worse, more tedious, and unhappie. After having attended you from ten of
the clock this morning, until twelve, your man comes to tell me that you
cannot come, but that after dinner I shall hear from you, with advertisement
that you were still extremely busied. To night returning from walking those
fancies which you have so much blamed me for, I found Poliarque before your
door, who entreated me to come in, as if it had been his house. I most humbly
thankt him for his kind offers, and he perceiving that I did not accept them,
at last asked me if I would not enter, to which I answered, that there was
nothing in the world which I would more willingly, nor any thing likewise which
I durst less. He marvailed at this, And I do marvel at it likewise, well
knowing that the continuance only of my acquaintance, did give me better
access to you, then he could proffer me: Nevertheless Madam, I tell you
this without any kind of complaint; for loving you as I do with a more then
ordnarie affection, I am well pleased to testify it by respects incommune. I
would only that they did cause you see, that they are such which ought to be
invited, who you with ease may rid you off, and not those men, of whom one
knows not how to be freed, for fear they do not render you like to that wife
that was feign to be enforced, and torn from out the arms of her lovers. But
see here if I be not estrai'd from the discourse I said I had to make to you,
and if I should not mightily have erred before you, that have upon my paper so
let my self be carried away, in thoughts so much estranged to the subject of
my intentions? which was here to have cleared such difficulties as you have
propounded to me, since I could not do it by word of mouth, and you see on
what I am fallen. I hope well, it needs not neither, that this suit should be
legally tried by form in writing, you will not always be so busied, and
inexorable, but you will give me some time of audience to plead my cause; were
I but so assured of your favor, as of your justice, I am sure I should not
doubt of a good issue, which nerethelesse I expect more of your grace then its
demerits.

The Argument.
He persisteth still in the discourse of his languishings, and some others
which he framed in walking alone a long the Seine. At last he concludes
absence, for absence, it were more supportable, far off then near, and that
the more he deferreth, the more he draws out in length the violence of his
torments and vexations.

Epistle 40.
IF the afternoon were yesterday tedious, this morning has seemed again to
me an age. I had sufficient leisure to hear mass at little Saint Augustines,
and after that to walk as far as The good men's, in which walk I have been
agitated with such variety of imaginations as now I cannot say. I had no other
company but one servant though somewhat too much of him; for besides that many
times words escaped him that disturbed my thoughts: I held for enemy whatsoever
opposed me their entertainment, and sought so carefully to order them, as to
be solitary in them at the better leisure, (if I could have separated me from
my self) I should have done it. It behooves Madam, since I am unhappily
deprived that good of seeing you, that at least yet I retain that of
entertaining you in my contemplations, and that augmenting with my tears the
waters of Seine, I should oblige some of her deities one day to make you the
pitiful recital of my sorrows; Yet I believe that such as think that
certain deities do haunt the banks of Rivers are mistaken much; for had there
any one been there, they must have taken some note, and consequently then some
pity of my ills, and I had not returned from thence disconsolate. Yet it may
be that they perceiving my griefs remediless, chose rather not to seem to
see them, then vainly to insinuate their good wills, to cure an ill, incurable,
or such a one at least, as merely did depend on you alone to help. At last
Madam, having well weighed my passions, in a confusion of diverse thoughts, in
the revolt of my best wits, and in so profound a forgetfulness even of my
self, as with much a do dared I hope once to return from hence: I thought it
did behoove me yet to lend some ear to what my reason did enforce, and not to
stop them still against all that ever she can speak; that it is not enough for
us to manifest courageous hearts against our enemies, but that we ought employ
our constancies against our selves, and use the utmost of our powers to
vanquish us; for that the fairest victory that can be had, is that we do
obtain upon our selves; that absence for absence tis-easier to endure far off
then near, for that you shall be thereby the less importuned; and I by so much
the less afflicted, as I shall not see my enemies near a good, which I am
constrained to decline. That at last yet I needs must come, and that which
reasonably I should not do, I shall yet by necessity be enforced unto. This is
the most cruel and the unhappiest resolution to which my il fortunes possibly
can bring me: but things inevitable cannot be avoided; Of needs I must be gone,
of force I must depart from you, and the longer I defer this parting, I do
but the more enforce the violence of my torments. My devoire, the good of my
estate, and my honor calls me away, and nothing stays me here, except your
company, of of which I am deprived. It is not possible to tell you now the
havocke, and disorder, which these thoughts have caused within my breast. Yes,
you know more there of then possibly I can relate, but you know not of all that
I do undergo therein. But Madam, you know well I she them not in hope to make
escape, I may perchance extend, but cannot break your chains, but wheresoere
I go, I still shall bear along with me their weight, together with your figure
in my breaft, when e I shall never honor ought like it. You that know better
then my self this that I say to you; pardon if so that I herein do still
appeal to you, and if that henceforth I forbear more to disturb the peace of
your fair soul, by the outrageous furies and despaires of mine.

The Argument.
He conjures her take some pity on his languishings, and not still to detain
him in the solitude she had the day before. Complains that he having so
little time to spend with her, should waste it so ill, that he abides here but
only for the sight of her, and yet he sees her not, but amongst such company
as do deprive him of her sight.

Epistle 41.
IDoe conjure you here take yet some pity of my languishings, have some regard
to the constraint I undergo by my not daring to approach your sight uncalled.
If so again you will afford this day unto the company you did the last, I
shall again become o'rewhelmed in the same solitude I was, and in the self
same sorrows which do as yet remain with me, for having so little time to stay
with you, and employing it so ill, not being here but only for the good I
reap in seeing you, and not seeing you at all but in such company as do
deprive me of your sight. But if so be that this disfavour were yet recompensed
by some particular grace, I then should be persuaded that this your ill usage
were to hide from me that small good will you bear me, and that I were not
absolutely lost, for that I might believe I had acquired something in you. But
you will not afford to me the time you know not what to do withal. Our walks
and visits after supper too, are taken away from me: others may see you in bed,
where I can scarce at Church, and yet have you the heart to let me part with
this discomfort in my breast, even I that likely you shall nere see more. This
very thought is now my murderer: but here I call to mind the argument I had
with you this morn: how that you wished me well, or that you did not wish me
well; and if so be you do, why then should I afflict you by this same recital
of my ills; and then if not, why should I afflict my self for an ungrateful
one. I left you three of my Letters, to which you have not answered yet, but
not to oblige you any whit thereto; no, could I oblige you unto any thing, it
should be to love me, as I do you, above all other things on earth.

The Argument.
Upon a quarrel which he had had on her occasion, of which she had
endeavored an accord, upon some terms. He entreats her to pardon him if so
be he would not endure that it should be conceived in that manner.

Epistle 42.
MAdame, they have spoiled our accord in going about to amend it; they could
not believe that I was in case to fight, without believing the contrary of what
they saw, and of what I said before I dream^ of a challenge. Wherefore I most
humbly entreat your pardon, that I cannot endure it should be conceived in such
terms. I beseech you likewise, Madame, not to think that it is to render me
difficult in what you desire of me, nor yet to show me a brave fellow, I am
sufficiently braved by my sickness, that not only hinders me from sighing,
but from agreement likewise; and I believe but for the visit and pardon which
you were yesterday pleased to afford me, I should not this day have been in
case to accept it. Fair Minerva, good day, since that honor is so much
esteemed of by you, let it please you that I live and dye honorably, and for
that otherwise I cannot merit to be yours.

The Argument.
Being pressed to an honorable agreement, and threatened with her disfavour, in
case he should refuse, he says that she urged him to a thing that she would
upbraid him with so soon as he had done it. Notwithstanding which, he would
consent to whatsoever she should do, to testify his obedience to her.

Epistle 43.
MAdame, you now urge me to a thing, which you your self will upbraid me with
so soon as I have done it, and you threaten me with another, the very conceit
whereof oppresses me so, as I am unable to undergo it. I esteem much of the
merits of that Cavallier whereof you speak, and am his most humble servant:
but he and you both must pardon me if so I cannot think I ought to put mine
honor on the protection of any other then my own sword. Nevertheless, Madame,
to manifest that all impossible things are yet easy, where it ought concerns,
or your contentment, or the inviolable obedience I have sworn to you, I shall
assent to whatsoever you please I shall do, to the intent to live ever in
quality of your most humble and over-obedient servant.

The Argument.
Upon some coldness in his Mistress, he says that he dares not so much as
send to her house to know when she will be pleased he may come thither. Nor yet
can he but do it, having so little time to live near her.

Epistle 44.
MAdame, you are so severe on my behalf, and I so unhappy in giving you
offense still, (however innocently) that I dare not so much as send to your
house to know when you will be pleased that I may come thither, yet cannot I
choose but do it too, for that the less time I have, the more precious it is
to me; four days have passed since I interrupted your affairs, or that I
gave you means to show me the ill looks you did this morning. Wherefore,
Madame, I most humbly entreat your pardon, if so I seek to husband what is left
to my best advantage, and if I pray you forbear to heap all your indignation
on the head of a poor innocent, that lives not but to dye yours.

The Argument.
Upon a promise she had made him to afford him her company and entertain, at 5
of the clock, he sent to see if her watch were not stayed or put back, or if
she had not yet again some other demurre, to put him off to another time.

Epistle 45.
IT is at least 5 of the clock here abouts, but for that all watches go not
alike; I have sent to know if yours be not stayed or put back, or if so be you
have not yet again some device to put me off till the morning. It may be that
thus protracting time, you hope to weary me out, or that you may find some
occasion to break asunder what you have so often stretched and extended. It Is
true, I may be wearied with importuning you, but never can by honoring you,
and that you may at pleasure break any thing with me, but the chains that
fasten me to your service.

The Argument.
He excuses himself of an action to which the violence and indiscretion of a
bad woman, had born him, in the lodging and presence both of his Mistress, for
which he humbly entreats her, either to pardon, or punish him. So taking
again a discourse in hand that he had left, he humbly entreats her to weigh
the importance of it, and to afford her one hour upon that subject.

Epistle 46.
THe discourse you began with me upon the arrival of the good woman, and the
bad action she enforced me to commit, have incensed new turmoiles in my breast,
the sense whereof I feel in the indisposition of my body likewise. Not Madame,
that I am sorry for any thing she said to me, or I did, but that it was in your
lodging, and almost in your presence, which I would have as religious a regard
to, as to the Temple or the Altar. But I am outraged in the resentment you have
testified therein, and feel so great sorrows for that I have really sinned
against the respect I owe you, that I should never receive comfort therein, did
I not know that her impudence provoked my modesty, and that you your self,
Madame (pardon that I dare to say it) made the first way unto this mischief,
by opening your door unto her. Moreover, Madame, it was not for any offense she
did me, that I offended her, but for the clamor she made in your lodging, which
I was not able to endure, so as I left not my duty, but to enforce her to keep
within hers. Wherein, Madame, I confess I have done amiss, and most humbly
entreat you either to pardon, or else to punish me for it: for any one of them
shall content me, so you may be satisfied. But as to that discourse was entered
into by you, I hold it a thing so serious as you never did that act wherein
there might be more judgment or discretion needful then in it. I will not
write thereof unto you, but forbear my advice: for besides that the interest
of my passions might render it suspected, I am still so unfortunate in such
things, as I know you would choose the contrary, to that I might counsel you,
as you know well you have done erewhiles in the most important actions of your
life, the repentance whereof is not yet absolutely past, You know too, Madame,
that there is no passion in the world so dear to me, but your good is yet much
more valued of me; and when you do let me see that it is for your good, I shall
forbear to oppose it, and most faithfully serve you therein against my own
affection, and against my self. But be you not so rash as to precipitate a
design of that importance, without scarce thinking of it. Remember you how
often I have been unhappily certain in my predictions, and how many deaths I
should suffer to see you commit a second error worse then the first. But I
beseech you grant me the favor I may have one hours discourse with you to
morrow on this subject, be it a walking, or any other where that you shall
think convenient, to the end I add not such an apprehension (to those sorrows
I groan under) as to abandon and loose you, you, that have begot hopes in me
much contrary to this despair.

The Answer.
Epistle 47.
I Pardon you yet again this one time, but more of my own goodness, then
overcome by your reasons, and I will to morrow afford you an hours conference,
if so it be in my power.

The Reply on the same occasion.
Epistle 48.
YOur Indulgences be not absolute. Yesterday you pardoned me, and to day again
you punish me, by forgetting your promise. I am nevertheless ready to endure
all, as one that you know yours.

The Argument.
He says that he will write to her continually, since she has commanded it,
and will never lament him, for that she has forbade it. Confesses that he
wants the good parts might oblige her to wish him well, and that he has but
too many ill ones, to merit her bad usage, says that all things work
according to their properties, and that he having a heart of flesh, and she one
of stone, it must be that she should be as insensible of his affections, as he
is quickly sensible of hers.

Epistle 50.
HOwbeit I do but irritate my ill in going about to express it, and that it
is some kind of ease to me to complain, I will nerethelesse no way cease to
write to you, because you have commanded it, and never will I lament me because
you have forbidden it. For besides that complaint is bootlesse and extremely
hurtful; it seems `to me injust that I should complain of the ills which I
suffer but justly, either through the excess of your deserts, orthrough the
want in me. No Madame, I learn now to acknowledge the wrong I do you, in
complaining of you unto your self: and as I most humbly crave you mercy, I
likewise confess that it is at my self that I only ought to take offense,
for that I have not sufficient good parts, to oblige you wish me well, and that
I have but too many ill ones, to merit your bad usage, And then, it must needs
be too, that all things should work according to the constitutions of their
proper and immediate natures. A man should be but laughed at, that should
complain because the day is light, and the night dark, it being a thing so well
known, that the one cannot be without cleernesse, nor the other without shade.
Wherefore then should I expect less on my complaints, for that I see you so
obdurate in the behalf of my passions; since that he that made me a heart of
flesh, made yours of Marble? Must it not then be, following our own
constitutions, that you are as obdurate, and insensible of my affections, as I
am quickly sensible of yours? But who renders me thus subtle, to produce such
reasons as arm your cruelty, against my self? Is it not a proof of the
greatest perfection in love, to which the wit of man can attain? You Madam,
amongst the many slaves which you have captivate, have you ever heard whispered
of an affection so perfect as mine, or once heard speech of an Empire so
absolute and powerful as yours. But it is unworthily done of me to betray my
passions, in going about to speak them. Learn you them then, of your self that
cause them, and believe me more capable of the sufferance therein, then of the
expression thereof.

The Argument.
She answers that the cause why she prayed him to write, was, that her deserts
could not be commended, but by the judgment he gave thereof. That she sorrowed
that a passion so worthily entertained, should be for a subject so incapable of
the acknowledgment.

Epistle 51.
IT is not with design to irritate your ills, that I have prayed you write to
me; It is for that your Letters being welcome still, and perfectly well
composed, cannot but greatly oblige those to whom they are addressed, and me
more particularly, that more particularly do honor you. I agree not neither
that you have so many defaults, and I so many perfections, they be words of
courtesy, which serve rather to make known your demerits, then mine
commended, which indeed are no way recommendable, without it be in the
judgment you give thereof. I answer not to the marble heart, whereof you
complain, since I have told you by word of mouth, whatsoever can be written
thereupon. And it is true that you sigh, and not unworthily become passionate,
and I am sorry that you do it not, for a subject more worthy the
acknowledgment thereof.

The Argument.
He replies that if she knew the greatness of his passions, she would not say
that he did worthily entertain them, but that he injures them. And entreats
her to give him leave to come and learn at hers, the subject for which she
desired he should become passionate, according to her promise to him.

Epistle 52.
IF so you knew how great and many more my passions are, then my sighs, you
would not say that I did worthily entertain them, but rather that I much
injured them; And as to the marble heart to which you will not answer, you
cannot better then thereby, make seen that you your self are wholly marble.
You are agreived that I sigh not for a subject more capable of an
acknowledgment thereof. I most humbly beseech you Madam, to give me leave that
I come to your house this afternoon, according to what you promised me
yesterday, to learn it of you. And likely I may as well sigh for some other,
when you have commanded it, as I have power to leave sighing for you, when you
have forbidden it.

The Argument.
He says that if he did not by obedience, what he also does through
affection, he knows not why he should write to one that is little moved by
his Letters, as the posts and corners of the walls, to which our Bills be
usually fixed. That instead of animating an image, and rendering it sensible of
his passions, he has rendered her senseless, by the virtue of his sighs. And
of a heart of flesh he has made one of impentrable stone.

Epistle 53.
IF so you had not commanded me to write, and that I did not in obedience; what
I likewise do through affection, I should be much troubled to say: wherefore I
write to one, that permits not her self to be once touched at my Letters, but
rests as little moved therewith, as the posts, and corners of walls, to which
men use to fix their writings. It Is said, a Lover once of old, through the
force of sighs and vehement desires, did animate an image, rendering it sensible
of his passions: But I by the power of such sighs, and vehement desires, have
rendered you sensible of mine, and of a heart humane, and naturally pitiful,
my hard mishap has made an inaccessible Rock. It is indeed a Prodigious
mervaile, that I should still continue opinionatly obstinate, in seeking means
to mollify your disposition, having so long since had sufficient proof, that
my perseverance daily more hardneth you, and whatsoever can be imagined in
love, to decline the cruetly of a woman, seems but to heighten yours, and make
a temper still more impenetrable, Why then do I persevere? I know no cause,
unless it be that having no manner of reason in what I do, it belongs not
unto me to give a reason for my actions, and that not doing any thing but what
you please, you are to render reason for what I do. Tell me then you, why it is I
busy me to present to you a passion in paper here, that is no more unknown to
you, then to my soul; and each one sees so clearly in my face, that even my
man has simply told me, that they at yours, report that I but pine away, and
languish for your love. It is most certain true, I do, and that for a subject
so solely worthy of my languishings, that I should deem me most unhappie not
to do it. But yet it does belong to you, my beauteous Goddess, not to
forbear until this passion has reduced me unto such extremity, as your too
tardive pity may deprive me of my life, and you of the most faithful subject
ever lived beneath your Empires laws.

The Argument.
Having forborne three days without writing back one word to him, (whatsoever
may be said in her answer) for missing this morning, she seems astonished at
his silence, and commands him to ask her pardon for it.

Epistle 54.
I Cannot believe you can accuse me, having so much cause to lament me, and
marvel that you have not sent unto me this morning, being you know well, how
much your Letters pleasure me as a contentfull divertisement. You should
demand my pardon for having failed therein, since you are yet to remain here
some time in this City.

The Argument.
After so many complaints and delays thereon, upon which he had resolved to
speak no more, then in one Letter, he intended to send her on his departure,
he yet gives her answer, and bids her farewell.

Epistle 55.
AFter having born my patience even unto despair, and having let my heart fret
and eat it self for 3 or 4 days, regardlesse of my ill, howsoever you have
put me off as many times, from eve to morn, and then from morning, until eve
again. In the end, you send your man to me to enquire of my health. I told
him you knew better then I, and then I was resolved to have said no more: for
whatsoever reason I can have, yet am I still in fault if I complain, and find
no other satisfaction to be had, then acccusation of an ill dispose, and
humorousnesse. My intention was thereupon to have born my unhappiness alone,
not speaking or once writing to you, more then a Letter, which I meant to send
you just upon my parting, and which I really thought should be the last of all
my life. For what other thing can you expect from me, then to see my rage
converted against those that are the causers of my banishment, or by a worser
stroke be turned upon my self? Madame, if so I lived not with you, in more
respect then they are capable of, or ere can render you, I might come to you as
well as they, nor could you shut your door against me, in opening it to them,
without the giving me just cause to make complaint. Am I not then extremely
miserable, to loose the happiness of seeing you, even by the means that ought
to acquire it me? To see me punished for the honors that I render you, and they
recompensed for the offenses they commit against you? And if in other things we
were equals, and they were able yet to honor you like me. Me thinks, coming
from so far, and having staid so long time here, but for the sole desire of
seeing you, now that I am upon the instant of my departure, and my visits, it
may well be, the last that I shall ever render you, ought in some sort to be
preferred before such as you have time enough to see when I am gone: but of
these things I had resolved to have spoke no more. Two reasons yet oblige me
here to mention them; the one to show you that I have no other humor in it,
then is most reasonable, and would to God it were much less, the other in
answering of the note was given me from you. You have reason, Madame, to say I
cannot accuse you; for how should I accuse one, of whom I dare not once
complain? You safely may continue your blows, and well believe that if I have
not accused you of the ills which you have done, and as yet do unto me, I
never shall accuse you of those you do procure me. For the cause (you say) I
have to lament you, you know well, Madame, it is unknown to me, at least as
much as the depth of your intentions, in which I never entered yet, without it
were in that did naught belong unto me. You know, Madame, likewise, that this
is not the first time, you have commanded me to lament you, on such occasion as
there was more need by much, that you lamented me, though by much less then
there is now. Yet I have nerethelesse lamented you, and I as yet do grieve for
you* though I have never been lamented, nor do know the cause as yet, for why
I grieve. You are astonished that I sent not to ye this morning; you flout me
Madame, for my astonishment, and cruelly you here renew the impatience and the
anguish that I groan beneath, in the prolonged expectance of what you should
have sent me. As to my Letters, Madame, it is true they were not drawn but
merely for your content, and for your glory, and if so be I knew my pen, or
tongue were animated yet, from other object then your felfe, I never more would
write or speak, whilst I had breath; so am I indeed at the next door to do
nor one, nor the other: but they have served you for a may game, your sport,
and not divertisement, and have procured me more ill, for one poor word taken
amiss, then I have had of good, from so many commendations, which I have not
less worthily expressed, then rendered you. You will that I demand your pardon,
Madame, hold you to that, I have my knees as plyant, and my heart as humble
too, as ere they were* but then it must be only in my thoughts, since, that
your sight is positively so denied me, and that I cannot think that the little
time you have to afford me your company, can wipe from off my soul, the
sorrows that I feel, for that you have made me loose. Adue then Madame, amid
the sorrow of such griefs as bear me away, I yet shall carry along with me,
the contentment never to have increased the number of those importunities,
which make a rape upon your liberty, nor never to have dispensed with the
obedience which I owe you.

The Argument.
Meeting him yet by chance, and being made friends, she fails again of her
promise to him, which obliges him to break with her once for all, and send
her this his last farewell.

Epistle 56.
When I met you yesterday, I thought it had been for my good, but I find to
day it had been for my good, but I find to day it was but to render me yet
more miserable. I had set up my rest, and as there is more sufferance to
resolve of an unhappiness, then to support it; I had already digested therein
the worst of bitterness, for that I was resolved. But this unhappy encounter
has as it were reburied me in the ills from whence I was almost gotten, and
have caused me to find them by so much the more sensible, as they happened to
me unexpectedly, and upon the promise of a false good, that has caused me a
thousand real evils. What can I have done unto you since yesternight, Madame,
who has obliged you to do me the displeasures you have caused me feel this
morning? which I begged of you, and you promised me as the last I had to pass
in this City, I did put you in mind of it last night, and having rose this
morning by 4 of the clock, I expected news from you until 8. At 8 a clock I
sent my man to you, who after a long stay returned to tell me that you went
unto the Friars to mass: you came not there until upon eleven: the mass
lasted till 12. and then I perceived you in conduct of another, to hinder me
from coming near you; you that the night before would by no means permit me
to lead you. Is not this right worthily to acquit you of your promise? have
you not cause to enquire if I be not in better humor then yesternight, having
so well satisfied me? but this is not all, to the end I take away all cause of
your accusing me of fantasticknesse; it is fit I justify a latter action by
another word or two. You know Madame, that I have this two months entreated
you to afford me the audience, caused me to come two hundred leagues to obtain
it: for I had no other business here, and could conveniently have staid the
return of the King, without coming to seek the misfortunes I have found, in
place of those felicities I promised me, after a thousand assurances, and as
many failings, in the end you did vouchsafe it me the last time I was with you,
but in such sort as it had been better much that you had never afforded it, for
it was neither to talk to me, nor yet so much as once give ear to any thing I
said, but to render me a spectator, at such discourse as then you held with
some that I found with you, and whom you gave command I should leave there.
Setting aside, that whilst your entertainment was refused me, you have
afforded it, and do afford it yet most orderly on every day to some, without
the least divertisement, and to a man, of whom, observe the end which ever
crowns the act. Not knowing what more to do or say in this, wherein I have done
or said as much as can be possible; I resolved to embrace despair, and
patiently to go my ways without once taking my leave, rather then bootlesly
lament me of an ill remediless. You found me yesterday in this resolution,
which then you made me leave, to cause me take again to day, by this unkind
ill use. Your servant notwithstanding coming from you to seek me, and
imposing your commands not to depart without my bidding you Adue, obliges me
to write unto you. I have told you Madam, heretofore, that I had rather once to
fall, then stumble still so often; That the time you can afford me now, by no
means can repair what you have made me loose, and that the long and violent
sorrows for such a loss is far more cruel unto me, then such a short
possession can possibly be sweet. I am none of those that can crave pardon in
their midst of punishment. When we are come so far, the worst is past, there is
no more but one step then; Nor should I be in fit estate to receive it, would
you vouchsafe it, nor do I now expect it. You have used me thus this Twelve
month, and if this parting should yet happen like the last, why my return were
likely then to prove the same. Which is the cause that I most humbly request
your pardon, Madam, if not to interest you in my disgraces, I bear them to some
other place where you shall never be accused of them; and if not to importune
you with my visits, and complaints, I write you here this last farewell that you
shall ever have of me so long as I live. To come home and give it you, to speak
with you, and to see you; It needs not that I take here the heavens to witness
for me that I do desire it, since from having too too ardently still coveted
it, and from having been over injustly denied it, proceeds all my un
happiness. But you have too much irritate my sores, to heal them now, A
moment of time wasted in interrrupted tears, and unprofitable sighs, and
yielded at the point of my departure, cannot eface the sorrows for the time
that you so long have still withheld from me; And then it were indeed, but
now to knit, to break again to morrow, to beat one round, and endless path,
again and again to ascend one rock. I had rather die, then once more think
of life, after the loss of all that ever made me value it. God knows the
outrage that I do my self, and the good whereof I do deprive me; But I offer
my self no violence that you have not constrained me to, nor deprive me not
of any thing you have not first deprived me: All the ills I can apprehend you
have already caused me undergo, and I have yet this comfort in my griefs,
that if so be there is nothing I can hope, there is also nothing that I can
fear. It is as now almost a year since you did promise me a boon, Alas!
with what an infinite of gentle thoughts have I still cherisht that, without
once seeing it yet! I render it back unto you; and I beseech you gratify some
other therwithall, whose merits are more known unto you, and affections more
esteemed; For me, I never shall withdraw mine from an object so lovely as your
self, and shall ever believe that as they could not be more ingratefully
acknowledged, they likewise could never be more worthily employed. But I shall
leave you at least in peace, and never more with my misfortunes will I ever
trouble your repose.

The Answer.
Epistle 57.
IF you depart not to day, I shall make you acknowledge you are in the wrong,
and I entreat I may speak with you; If you desire it, I will give you to
understand of me at two a Clock, And in the mean time, I pray you think you
are in an error to complain of me.

The Argument.
His Mistress being informed he was in blacks, took occasion to write word
unto him; by which she condoled with him the new affliction she believed had
been befallen him.

Epistle 58.
I Have learnd that you are habited in mourning, and that consequently some new
affliction is befallen you. The laws of what is decent, and those of my own
inclination, cause me partake therein, and to condole with you, with so much
the greater sorrow, that it is unprofitable unto you that I am your servant.

The Argument.
After having a long while disputed with himself whether he should answer
her Letters, or not, he tells her that besides the afflictions he undergoes for
her, he slighted all such as could happen to him. That he could not believe
that she condoled the ills, she daily augmented. And wherefore he believed so.

Epistle 59.
I Disputed long with my self whether or no I should read your Letter, before
I would receive it, And whether I should answer it or no when I had read it;
And not finding me any ways obliged either to the one, or the other, I thought
for sufficient answer to have returned it you, with some others that were
better in your hands, then in those of a man you have offended. Nevertheless I
thought that I ought you yet a word, or two, and following rather the advice of
my passion, then that of my reason, I chose to break the oath I had made never
to write more unto you, before the resolution I have taken ever to honor you,
to whatsoever contrary effect you may possibly oblige me. I do let you know
then, Madame, that if I mourn, it is not for any new affliction befallen me,
and that after those, you cause me I slight all such as can happen to me,
That is very true that according unto the Laws, of what is decent, and of
humanity likewise, if you have any, you ought therein compatiate: But that I
can never believe that you condole with me an ill, that you your self do
daily augment, letting me find so many effects contrary to your words, as
there can be no day of my life, wherein I shall not repent me to have been
thereby so much seduced. For to what purpose speak you to me of sorrow, you
that do all that ere you can to loose, and ruin me* You have offended me to
death, not only without cause, but for such reasons as are most capable of
appeasing, had I offended you. And I have undergone it, not only without
revenge, but likewise fans complaint, continuing still in more respect then in
offense. If I complain of you, I cannot do it but commending you, And if I
take offense, it is ever against my self, or such as do defend me against you,
and render those praises as due, rather to my goodness then your merits. You
Madam, on the contrary seek to defraud the man that honors you, and repair
not the wrongs you have done him, but by most irrepairable outrages. Be it
true, that I was offended at the speech you had with me about the business
chanced in Easter, you have amended that, with another much worse, that since
you held in my absence, with distinction of quality, which could not be done
without passion, nor suffered but with rage, and madness, I complained that
you refused me the honor of your entertain, and conduct, and you have
satisfied me in affording it to al sorts of people else, And walking night by
night before my window in company of those you know do hate me. And after
this, to write that the Laws of your inclination enforce you to partake in my
misfortunes; is it not to take me for the arrants Wittall ever lived? But I
see well your meaning, you are not content to have heard say that we fought,
but you would see it. And I shall deem me most unworthy life, and to have
dared once to pretend unto your service, if I manifest not to you, that I am
your most obedient servant.

The Argument.
She replies, that she is more amarvailed then offended at his Letter, and
wishes that all his vanities were in that paper, to the end they obliged no
other one to answer them.

Epistle 60.
I Am more amazed then I am offended at your Letter, and I could wish that all
your vanities were enclosed in the paper you sent me, to the end that being
unknown to any one but me, they should not oblige any man to answer them. I
mean not for what has respect to my self, howsoever you have reported that I
entreated you to come and see me, and that you had no desire, nor would do it,
you know it a thing I never thought, and me think it would better become you to
observe a modest silence* then to discourse of your goodness and of my
demerits, since both the one and the other are but imaginary, as whatsoever
appears, or in your Letters, or your discourse, be but vanities; which I
fear every one will not ever suffer from you. And for that you accuse me to
have said, I will let you see so soon as you pleasein presence of those have
made that report, the cause you had to give credit thereunto, and the wrong you
do me to complain of my walks: I have not refused your conduct when it was fit
I should admit it: and for the rest, the little interest you have in my
actions, ought to forbid you, or meddle with or observe them. I conclude with
this counsel which I entreat you make use of, viz, that you speak of others
as they do of you, that is to say, worthily.

The Argument.
He answers her threats, and to the vanities she accuses him of, in a style
altogether estranged from the respect he had wont to render her, though not
from his discretion.

Epistle 61.
YOu have cause to say that you are more amazed then offended at my Letters,
since indeed there is more cause of astonishment then of offense. In all the
rest you are in the wrong, and chiefly in accusing me throughout of vanity,
wherewith you manifest your self so stored, as you think to arrest and stay
my words by your threatenings. I answer not to what has been reported to you,
because indeed it merits not an answer; and that it is altogether opposite to
common sense, that a man that has perpetually complained, that you would never
see him, should vaunt to have been entreated thereunto, and not to have been
willing. But there is no imposture so manifest, to which you rather lend not
your belief, then to my best reasons, provided that it be against me, for that
suffices to render it ever just. Notwithstanding you know that I have other
manner of subjects to cherish my vanities with, would I embrance them, and if I
were not more discreet then your advice can render me, I avow it, that it had
been better indeed for me not to have spoken so worthily of your demerits, or
my goodness, but not that the one or the other are imaginary, nor that the
modest silence seems to you so comely, has ever been broken yet, unless by
you. As to that you say that whatsoever appears in my discourse, or in my
Letters, is all but vanity, I appeal unto the judgment you your self have
heretofore pronounced thereof, and to posterity that better far shall judge
therein then you. But you know me little, having had so long experience of me,
and have exceeding ill impressions of my courage, if so you think it is fear
that renders me so modest as I a m. I never feared but you, for that I never
loved but you; and and when I shall not love you any more, I shall then fear
you no longer. Those whom you think to oblige to answer me, are for themselves
already sufficiently engaged, and they shall find me ever as free, but more
advised then they have found me yet. You are afraid that they should know what
I have said, and I will print it to the end that none be ignorant thereof. I
take no knowledge of the report was made to me, and so lightly believe not what
is said of you, as you believe whatsoever is said of me; but by that you have
said to my self, I have judged what you might say to others. As to your walks,
it is true I have no interest in them, more then in the rest of your
deportments, but you deserve well to see some sport made you for your love; and
my promise, and your threats, oblige me to let you find that I do not forget
you. For conclusion, you counsel me to speak of others as they speak of me:
that indeed were good, if other men's actions were as even as mine. But I give
you an advice, which is not to menace a man you can neither hurt nor fright.

Reasons of the Authors against his Love*
IT is true that it is the thing of all the world that I have loved the most;
but it is that also loves me the least. I have a great delight in loving, but
it is traversed with a thousand torments. I grieve extremely to forgo it, but
that is sweetened with abundance of peace. And indeed, how should I preserve
that I never well acquired? have I not done my utmost both in the acquisition
and preservation? what can I do more then, after the most I was able? I never
loved woman equal to her, but it is better not to love at all, then to love
ones vexation, and render a man miserable in the humor of an ungrateful one.
She has at all times sought me, but it has been to loose me: and those
pleasures she has caused me, have been so short, so thwarted, and so imperfect
still, that compared with the painful afflictions she has procured me, it
has been a twinkling of fair weather in the incessant hail of a perpetual
storm: and one drop of sweet water amid the boundless extent of a vast sea,
brackish and bitter, where the continual winds and billows roaring and
rolling on each others neck, in their contentions move an eternal tempest,
that meets no calm in her embroiles, nor end in the strife of its perpetual
motions. In a word she is an ungrateful one, that has done all that ere she
could to torment and offend me. And one that has not worthily acknowledged my
affections, but recompensed them with her outrages. Where is the memory of
those indignities and those offenses which she has so often done me? Has she
not poorly abandoned me, in favor of my enemies? has she not taken from me
her converse and company to give it them? Has she not permitted that they have
challenged me three or four times, not once or twice, but I say three or four
times? And if she shall deny the approving of their actions, her own bearing
gives her words the lie. For has she not since opposed me, to sustain their
quarrel? has she not preserved their friendship with the loss of mine? Had
she loved her honor, or my life, could she ever have seen again the men,
conspired both against the one and the other? And nerethelesse having broken
the band of her affections sworn tome, to knit the faster with them, is it not
to make seen that she the only approved their actions, but also, that she
co^ceivd and formd the^ before they were produced? But since she disavowes
others actions, let us look a little into her own; When honor and the*
service of my King called me before Saint Iean, 3 or 4 days before I bore my
life thither, fell she not out with me on the Eve of my departure, pretending
that my visits were scandalous unto her Neighbors? Since has she not let me
see the weakness, and untruth of this her pretense, when she has permitted
him for whom I was turned off, not only to see her at all hours, but also to
take a lodging in the same street, to besiege her in hers, and to hinder the
resort of all others thither? There is no more to be said then, of scandal to
them of the street, then to those of the Indies. Called she me not back before
my going, to the end I carried her figure along with me in my breast, as I did
with so lively an impression, as the practice of so much pains, suffered in so
long and laborious a journey, nor the frequent Alarums, of so dangerous a
fortune, speeding to the aproaches assaults, and bloody sallies, of so many
sieges, had ever power to eface the draught? Writ she not to me that so long
an extended absence, could not be compatible with great love, complaining that
I testified unto her more courage, then affection? Forced she me not from the
beloved place of my birth, and from between my parents arms, where the
contentment of my soul, and good of my affairs required me, here to make me
wed vexations, and misfortunes infinite, in hope yet of incomparable
happiness? I knew well the King would come again, and that I should do
nothing here, but take an unprofitable walk of some two or three hundred
Leagues for the love of her; But I was passionated with so violent a desire to
see her, that I beheld all other things sans interest, and deemed the time I
passed from her, not only lost to me, but even that it was death it self to
forbear her sight. Let us see now, this great good fortune, and this glory so
desired, hoped for at my return, as end and crown unto so great a Martyrdom.
It Is true that I was welcomed, well received, and much made on the first day of
my arrive; they told me that they had grieved my absence, and deplored my
death that a false bruit had spread, and all, full of other complements and
pratles of a woman: but found I not my place possessed by my Rival, and those
former favors she had permitted me, and I again looked to have had, cut from
my hopes, and to another given before my face? Set by those subtilties, the
escapes, and the repaires, wherewith so long she entertained and did abuse my
too credulous easiness; the meetings given out of her house, whilst others saw
her day by day, not only with all liberty, but Emptry also, the irreconcilable
enmities, and bloody quarrels she by her imprudence caused me, and her vanity,
for yet I would pardon those. But to bestir her so much as she could possibly
on all sides, to give unto my enemies the advantages God gave me over them! to
say my sword was longer then my Rivals, that he hurt himself, and that my
Laquay was a liar, when he recounted the truth of this action, though his
wound, and his natural innocence, in telling of the tale spoke sufficiently
for him, and whom she her self had given me but the day before, for most
trusty! To be sorry that it was said I had the better, and she to say against all the world and truth it self, I had the worst! to forget her self so far as
in opposition of my self, overweeningly to dispute a thing, of which she knew
nothing and which I my self had done! Can it be imagined that a woman
worshipped and adored, with so much passion and respect as she; or rather that
the weight of all th'ingratitude of women kind melted together, and reduced in
mass, should ere bring forth the eff^cts of so profound a malice? In sum,
she turned me off, not for a single friend, but for some five or six, nor yet
for such as loved her more, or those were better made then I, but much, much
worse. She has been the cause I have been challenged by my friends, that I
have much neglected my Parents, and estate, that I have forborne to follow my
King into my own Country, and seemed to sh^n those occasions I have ever
sought; and which is more then all, that I have left my self to pursue the
injustice, and cruelty of her fond passions, that I have preferred her
martyrdomes before the sweetest rest, her love, to Gods himself, who had made
me happy had I served him so as her; where she has rendered me most miserable
still, for having served her better far then him. To love her then as yet,
after all this, were but to be a sot, and no way amorous. Perfidious and most
thankelesse Soul, what wrong has thy unthankfulness, and thy faith-breach
done to thee! what glories have they ravished from thy memory! I had prepared
thee a place in heaven, where the luster of thy star had been adored,
saluted, and made known to all mortal kind, where those that live beneath
another Pole, had worshipped thee, even as their chiefest constellation. Thy
image and thy name had been so venerable to posterity, that our Nephews had
not filled the earth but with thy Altars, nor had perfumed the air but with
the odours of thy sacrifice; The universe had been thy Temple where men had
preached, but thy virtues, Celebrated but thy praises, and published but thy
merits: And thy renown had been so famous ore the world, as it had found no
other bounds, then the extremity of that's extent, and the eternity of its
lasting. And though I could yet heap upon thee as much blame, as the honor I
prepared for thee, and satisfy my self with as much vengeance as an outraged
heart could wish, yet will I not afflict thee with a greater punishment, Then
leave thee buried in the abisse of thy own forgetfulness, And not remember
me henceforth of thee, but to detest thy memory.

The Argument.
He answers to certain complaints that Minerva had made some while after, as
well to his friends, as himself of his indifference, and shows that it was
founded on the necessity of obeying her, and upon good reason.

Epistle 62.
Madame,
YOu cannot think that I wish you ill, but by that you have done me; the
feeling whereof I have quite lost, together with the remembrance of what good I
wished you. If I should wish you ill, it should be for that you do unto your
self; and in such case, I should counsel you to forbear any further to do it,
to the end I ceased further to wish it, were you not altogether as incapable of
my counsels as of my affection. After such things as have passed 'twixt you and
me, I ought not retain the least affection that may have regard to you, nor
any thought that may acknowledge you. And if you say (...) indifference is
worse then enmity, I (...) it a truth, but you must acknowle^^ (...) there was
not that violence by (...) not essayed to enforce me thereunto, (...) flee, by
the which I have not endeavor^^ (...) me still therein. It is not to be
marvelled at the (...) at last have performed your will, since my will was ever
subject unto yours, or rather was indeed no other but yours. But what you ought
find strange, is indeed, that I can endure your contradiction, whilst you can
by no means endure my obedience. When that I lived not but in you, and my
jealousy made me complain of your deportments, you have full often told me,
that I had no interest in your actions; wherefore would you that I should have
now that you are dead as it were to me? you have full often refused your sight
and entertainment unto me when as it was the chief and only one of my
desires; Wherefore offer you it me now, that it is the last of all my cares? And
wherefore having so many times fled me when that I followed you, do you now
follow me, when that I flee you; if so it be not to make seen that you are
always contrary, and that your pleasure abides in my tortures? but if you
shall reply that I am altogether irreconcilable, I would set you in my place
and ask you but this question. If you had loved me so as I have ever affected
you; and having outraged and discarded you for other women, as you have wronged
and abandoned me for other men. I desired to renew affection with you, yet
livin^ (...) dying for other men, would not you bid (...) discharge me of the
women, for whom I had used you so ill; and that afterward I should see what
you had to do. So quit you first of such men as you have unworthily preferred
before me, and then we will see what reparation you may make me. You say that
you find your fault* and that you repent you of the doing it, and desire to
render me satisfied; begin with satisfaction, and having quit the sin, we
will see if you be capable of mercy. But to thinkthat you can at one and the
same time, be capable of both, there is never a Casuist in Sorbonne but will
condemn your opinion. Yet think not I give you this advice, nor in hope or
desire that you should follow it, for knowing that you have ever done quite
contrary to such counsels, as I have given you, I should then rather give you
this to the intent you followed it not, if I were not very careless both of
the one and the other. What I say herein, is too manifest that it is not with
so much incivility as reason, that I endeavor to escape your snares, and that
it is with more vanity then judgment that you hope to take me there again.

FINIS.

