By the King.
A Proclamation for the better ordering of those who repair to the Court, for
the Cure of their disease, called, The Kings Evil.
WHereas by the grace and blessing of God, the Kings and Queens of this Realm
by many ages past, have had the happiness by their sacred Touch, and
invocation of the Name of God, to cure those who are afflicted with the Disease
called, The Kings Evil: And His now most Excellent Majesty, in no less
measure then any of his Royal Predecessors, has had good success herein, and
in His most gracious and pious disposition, is as ready and willing as any King
or Queen of this Realm ever was, in any thing to relieve the distresses and
necessity of His good Subjects, yet in His Princely wisdom foreseeing, that
in this (as in all other things) order is to be observed, and fit times are
necessarily to be appointed for the performing of this great work of charity:
His most Excellent Majesty does hereby publish and declare His Royal will
and pleasure to be, That whereas heretofore, the usual times of presenting
such persons to His Majesty for this purpose, were Easter and Whitsuntide,
that from henceforth the times shall be Easter and Michaelmas, as times more
convenient, both for the temperature of the season and in respect of any
Contagion which may happen in this near access to His Majesty's sacred
Person; And His Majesty does accordingly will and command, that from the time
of publishing this Proclamation, none presume to repair to His Majesty's
Royal Court to be healed of that disease, before the Feast of S. Michael now
next coming.

And His Majesty does further will and command, that all such as hereafter
shall come, or repair to the Court for this purpose, shall bring with them
Certificates under the hands of the Parson, Vicar or Minister, and Church
wardens of those several Parishes where they dwell, and from whence they come,
testifying according to the truth, that they have not any time before been
touched by the King, to the intent to be healed of that Disease: And his
Majesty does straightly charge all Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other
Officers, That they do not suffer any to pass, but such as have such
Certificates, upon pain of his Majesty's displeasure.

And, to the end that all His loving Subjects may the better take knowledge of
this his Majesty's pleasure and command, His will is, That this Proclamation
be published and affixed in some open place in every Market Town of this
Realm; All which, his Majesty having by former Proclamations, upon the like
occasion published and commanded, he does now again command strictly to be
observed, by all and every person and persons whom it shall or may concern,
upon such pains and penalties as may be inflicted upon them for the neglect
thereof.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the sixth day of April, in the sixth year of
Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent MAJESTY. M.DC.XXX.


