THE DISCOVERY AND CONFVTATION OF A TRAGICAL FICTION, DEVYSED AND PLAYED BY
Edward Squire yeoman soldiar, hanged at Tyburne the 23. of Nouemb. 1598.

Wherein the argument and fable is, that he should be sent from Spain by
William Walpole Jesuit, to poison the Queen and the Earl of Essex, but the
meaning and moralization thereof was, to make odious the Jesuits, and by them
all Catholics.

Matthew. 5. verse. 11.

Beati estis cum dixerint omne malum aduersum vos, mentientes propter me.

Happy are you when they say all evil against you, belying you for my sake.

Written for the only love and zeal of truth against forgerie, by M. A.
Priest, that knew and dealt with Squire in Spain.

Imprinted with License.

ANNO M, D. XCIX.

THE DISCOVERY AND CONFVTATION OF A TRAGICAL FICTION, DEVYsed and played by
Edward Squire yeoman soldiar, hanged at Tyburne the 23. of Nouemb. 1598.
AS he said not amiss in some sense; who said, homo homini Deus, man to man is
a kind of God, in respect of the many-benefytes which some men (though few) do
procure to others: so with no less truth is it thought, that an other wrote
on the contrary part, homo homini lupus, one man is a wolf to an other, in
that he deuoureth, destroys, and rages often times most rauenously against
those, that be of his own kind and condition. Of which subject and argument,
if we will believe the large and lamentable discourses of fondrie credible
authors, we shall find the account made, that all the disasters, miseries, and
calamities, insewing to man from all other creatures of the world, either in
heaven, earth, sea, or air, or from the four elements together with their
distemperatures or violence, does not equal the number of hurtes received by
man from man. Whereunto we if lay on the other side, the opposite rule of
Christian religion, founded upon love of one man toward an other, and bynding
each one to do as he would be donn unto: we shall easily discover the root and
reason, why so many do perish, and so few are saved, of those that profess the
Christian name, for that so few do perform the obligation to that name annexed.
For if hell were raked, and all faults rared, for which the inhabitants of
that miserable dongeon are damned to those eternal torments, I nothing doubt,
but that of thowsandes or millions, scarce few would be found. at leastwise of
Christians, that received not their woeful sentence, for some abuse or wickedness
practiced toward their even brethren and neighbors.

And this may be preface sufficient for the breef discovery and reproof that
here I am to make, of a no torious iniquity, practiced of late in our
country, (where now we are wolves eating one an other by malice of heresy,
though England have no wolves by nature of soil) against certain innocent and
eminent men in catholic profession, named Jesuits, to whose impugnation and
general assault by all kind of means, and by all sorts of evil affected
people, is seems that the devil and his angels, and all his instruments at
once, have made a compact to conspire together, by drawing all that is odious
in the world upon them: but especially the practices of princes deaths and
murders, whereof in my conscience and knowledge (that have known them, and dealt
also with them very intrinsecally for a good part of these thirty years, and
have noted their designementes, actions, and desires not vndiligently) no one
sort of people living are more free and further of from such cogitations then
they, who detest such bloody means in all their speeches, doctrine, and
proceedinges, leaving them to the adversary spirit of Protestants, Puritanes,
and such other like teachers, who both preach, and practice such attempes, as
appears by the acts and monumentes of Luther in Germany, Zuinglius in
Swizer-land, Beza in France, Knokes in Scotland, and others else where, who have
raised the turmoiles and tragedies that all men know, and have brought many a
just and peaceable prince to destruction, desolation, and affliction; which no
man can truly avouch of the Jesuits, notwithstanding their zeal and fervor
in Gods cause be not unknown, which is the fountain of all this hatred,
complaynt, and conspiracy against them.

Cicero said in his second Philippica against Antonie, that by his particular
desteny it came to pass, that no man for many years had becomen an enemy to
the Roman comonwealth, but that presently he had bid war to him also, as a
cheef defendour thereof. But this may be much more truly said of the Jesuits,
in respect of Christ's comonwealth in our days, against whose church and
kingdom there is none lightly that ryseth or stirs, either by heresy,
atheism, wicked life, or factious humors, but that jointly he becomes an
enemy to Jesuits, and it is a common note, and their crown, and Gods special
providence toward them for their good.

But let us see in the particular point of killing princes, what desire there
is of bringing them in question, above other men. There was a king of France
not many years gone, most strangely slain by a religious man, but no Jesuit.
Was his order infamed, persecuted, or afflicted for the same? no, nor ought it
to be, he being but a particular man, whose fault in no right could be laid
upon a multitude. Some years after, the king that now is, was assaulted by a
young man, that had studied in the Jesuits schools only, but now did not, nor
was he ever of them, nor appertayned any way to them; yet were all Jesuits
driven out of France, and pursued for this fact as murderers of princes,
notwithstanding by public sentence of the Parisian magistrate, they were
cleared of all participatio^, council, or knowledge of the young man's fault. What
is the cause of this difference? that which Cicero before mentioned, his zeal
and fidelity to his commonwealth.

Of late there were published diverse pamphletes, of an intent that one Peter
Pan a flemish cooper should have, to kill the Count Morisse, governor of
thee rebelled states of Holland and Zeland for which also the said Peter Pan
was beheaded; and to the end there should not want the ordinary solemnity of
having a Jesuit in one end of the tale, it was faygned and set down in print,
how that one father Oliuerius Manaraeus prouincial of the Jesuits in flanders
(a very grave old man) with the prefect of the studies, and Rector of Doway,
should be the deuisers and sticklers in this act at Doway, upon such a day and
time, with such and such circumstances, which might make the matter probable to
simple people, that cannot imagine the malice of heretics. All which
circumstances, with the principal subject it self, were proved afterward to
be most false, by public examination, and testimonies of magistrates, in
diverse cities of flanders. And among other points it was proved, that the
forefayd father Oliuerius, was more then 60. or 70. miles of from Doway (to wit
at Brussels) at the very time that he was said to deal with Peter Pan in
Doway) and that Peter Pan had never to deal with him in his life, nor had
any doing with the Jesuits, and that he was an heretiqoe, and had never
received penny of money of Jesuits, nor by their means, as was forged in his
pretended confessions. And many other most evident falshoodes are declared in
diverse books written about this matter, and approved by the asseuerations of
public magistrates, in diverse towns and provinces, since that time. So as
the impudence of this heretical devise is made notorious to all the world.

And yet now least England should be behind France and Holland, and other
places, in deuysing some notable practice of Jesuits, whereby not only to auert
me^nes hearts from them, but even to raise the hair of men's heads against
them; there has been brought in of late the tragical comedy of one Edward
Squire soldiar, sent from Spain (as is pretended) by one William Walpole a
Jesuit, to poison the Queen and Earl of Essex, with poison in a dooble blader,
delivered him by the said William, and diverse imbrasinges at his departure, as
also sundry exhortations said to be made out of holy scriptures to the said
poysoner by William Walpole, for prosecuting of his purpose. All which
circumstances we shall examine afterward, to discover thereby the fashood of
this fiction. For albeit I mean not in this place to take upon me to auerre,
that all the whole narration touching Squire is faygned, or that Squire was
innocent in all points that he was accused of, or hanged for (notwithstanding
his denyals at his death) yet dout I not, but to show most evidently, that all
and every thing that concerns the Jesuits, and William Walpole by name,
condemned in this action, by a wrong name (for his true name is Richard) is a
mere fable and malicious devise of Squire, or those that set him a work, to
make Spain odious, and to slander the Jesuits.

Well it may be that Squire, after his return from Spain (whence he escaped
by flight and not by mission as shall be proved) having gone abroad with my L. of
Essex to sea, and that in his own ship, under pretense to discover great
matters of Spain, not fynding such comeditie or preferment afterward as he
looked for; might begin to cast out some words of discontentme^t, and say for
his better credit (not fore seeing the danger that might insew thereof) that in
Spain he might have been employed by principal men, in great matters; and in
this speech it may be also, that father Walpole being a Jesuit, and the man
that was best known unto him, and had done most for him; for relief of his
miseries, after father Persons departure from Seuil; he might I say, perhaps
make mention of his name though he knew it not aright, as has been said: and
that therein being taken at the advantage, and pressed to go forward partly by
fair promises, and partly by torture (as at the bar he affirmed that he had
been five hours upon the torture) he might happen standing thus between fears
of condemnation if he drew back, and hopes of pardon if he accused others, to
begin to frame the tale that in his confession is set down. And when he would
have denied it again (as he did at his arraynment) it would not be taken or
admitted. It may be also that Monday, and Stanley, or other some such
compaignions (for I know or remember them not) coming after him out of Spain
into England, and desirous to get creditt, might (as the fashion of such folk
is) being poor and beggarly, begin upon emulation to appeach, and call Squire
in question, as was objected in the arraynement that they did, and as it fell
out diverse years past, between Doctor Parry and Master Neuil, that called
himself Lord Latimer. The story of which two friends and compaignions, for
that it seems not much unlike to this, both in the matter it self, and in
some particular circumstances, I shall hear repeat with great brevity.

William Parry, after he had served the state of England, some six or seven
years by spierie in Italy, and other places (as himself confessed) he waxed
weary, and to repair his credit again on the catholic side, he went to
confession in Lions to a Scottish Jesuit, named father Critton; and then
hearing that the Lord Paget was comen out of England to Paris for his
conscience, and that Doctor Allen (afterward Cardinal) and father Persons were
come also to Paris to see him, he came thither in the year 84. and used all
means possible, both by himself and his friends in that place, to enter into
credit with the said Doctor and father; and when he saw that in no case they
would deal with him in matter of secrecy or moment (though otherwise they
used hun courteously, and were glad of his conversion to be a catholic) he
was greatly offended thereat, and one evening being led by a certain friend and
countriman of his, to the bishop of Rimini, Nuntius at that time for Pope
Gregory the thirteenth in France, he delivered him a letter written by himself
in Italian to the Pope; wherein he showed first and confessed, that he had done
great hurtes to the catholic cause and church, by his former services of the
state of England, and that now he was to go thither to make recompense for the
same, and to do great services in favor of the sea Apostolic, desiring his
Holiness approbation and benediction, without specifying any particularitie what
he meant to do, as by the said letter of his, yet here in Rome to be seen, is
manifest. And to this letter did Cardinal Como answer, and his answer was
delivered by Parry himself to the Queen, and the same produced against him
afterward at his araygnment: but to go forward. The Doctor having donn this act
with the Nuntius, he got himself away secretly from Paris toward England
without taking his leave, either of Doctor Allen, or father Persons, and
passing by Roan toward Diep in Normandy, he told on master Wattes a Priest
there, that his dissignement was in England, to raise a faction against the
Jesuits, from which master Wattes dissuaded him, but he passed on, and as
soon as he came to Diep, before he would imbarque, he wrote a letter to the
Lord Burleigh for a passeporte and order, to speak with the Queen at his first
ariual in England, for that he had great matters to utter: and so the order
came, and he by secret ways was brought to her Majesty, and had long talk
with her, and told her among other points, that he was sent by Jesuits and
their friends to kill her. And to confirm this the more, he showed her also the
answer of Cardinal Como when it came, as I have said: and well knowing that it
was no treason when himself uttered the same, he enlarged himself in many
particulers, about the manner and order how it should be done, as her majesty
can remember, hoping thereby to get great credit, which yet afterward turned to
his destruction.

There was sent over unto Roan at the same time, or very soon after, the
foresaid master Neuil to exercise the same office of spiarie, which master
Parry had done before in Italy, and waxing also weary of his occupation, for
that rewards came out of England but slowly, he made great means in like
manner to speak with father Persons, who by chance lay for a time in that
town, but secretly, and in the end obteining the same, and proposing his
misery and affliction of mind, he received the same answer and counsel that
Doctor Parry had donn before: to wit, that the best way of remedy, was to
leave that trade of life, and to return to a virtuous and peaceable Catholic
course, and to have patience if for a time he were not trusted by Catholics,
being known to have bin imployd against them, and that as his credit had bin
crazed by works, so must his reputation be restored by deeds also, and by
time. Whereto master Neuil answered, that he could not live without credit, and
rather then he would live so: or see men crow over him, he would adventure far,
and so they parted: and master Neuil returned into England, and there meeting
with Doctor Parry, who was now grown discontented again for missing of diverse
suites (but especially the hedship of Saint Catherins, which he pretended as I
have bin informed) they two fell into new discourses about that, which in my
opinion neither of them ever meant indeed, I mean the murdering of her
Majesty, but the one preventing the other in accusation, it was the Doctors
evil luck to be hanged, who yet took himself for the more conning man. And the
like has happened to this our Squire, that stood not a little upon his own wit
in Spain, and hoped perhaps to enjoy the labors thereof in England; but
dealing doubly, and dissembling with God and man (as Parry did) was taken as it
seems in the same net of his own deuyses, as by the sequel of this narration
shall more appear.

And I have taken upon me the rather to write this breef discovery of his
false and treacherous dealing against Jesuits, for that I knew him, and
conuersed with him in Spain, and with his fellow master Rolls also, both
before and after their apprehension by the Inquisition, and knew the spetial
obligation they had to these kind of men, whom Squire now has slandered so
lewdly, as many others do, that receive help and benefytes by them. And I have
heard afterward being in Rome, by sundry letters from Spain, of the manner of
their departure from thence by stealth, which was such, as does evidently
overthrow all this whole fiction of poison given by father Walpole. And albeit
I dout not, but that when the story of this tragical fable shall come to Seuil,
they will send many authentical proofs from thence, of the malicious falsehood
of so fond an invention, yet could I not omit in this mean while to prevent
their further diligence, with so much as I my self knew, and am able to say
thereof, as also two other reverend priests besides that came with me to Rome
from Spain, and knew both the said men and matter, to wit, father William Med.
and father John Worcester. who were with me in Seuil and have dealt with the parties.
We all three together can and do testify and protest upon our consciences,
that in our judgments it is a mere fiction, for so much as concerns F.
Walpole, and his setting Squire a work, to kill the Queen and Earl of Essex,
or giving him poison for that end, and other like points mentioned in Squyers
most ridiculous arraynement. And this testification of ours, will be sufficient
(I doubt not) to satisfy the judgments of all sober catholic men, as we
beseech them that it may; and as for others also, if they be unpassionate, and
will admit reason or truth for their satisfaction, I refer them to the
arguments and demonstrations set down in this discovery. Wherein first of
all I will lay forth the true history of Squire and Rolls his compaignion,
their being in Spain, and then of their departure or flight from thence, and
lastly by the same declare most evidently, the sottish forgerie of this faygned
calumniation.

In the year 96. when Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins made their
unfortunate voyage to the west Indies, there was sent from Seuil a noble young
Gentleman, named Don Petro Tellio (that had been prisoner before with our Lord
Admiral of England, and speaks great good of him every where, for his
honorable treaty) and he was sent with six or seven light little gallions
(called Sabras in spanish) to wafte home certain millions of gold, that were
remaining in Porto ricco, in the great gallion of Don Sancho Pardo, retired
thither upon tempest out of the Indian fleet, a little before.

This Don Petro drawing near to Porto-ricco fell upon a little ship or pinnace
of Sir Francis company, wherein among others were taken the foresaid two English
men, M. Rolls gentleman (as he said) and Edward Squire a soldiar, who being
brought prisoners to Seuil, found there by their good hap F. Persons, who
presently (according to his custom for all English in that case) began to
deal with Don Petro for their liberty, and obtained the same, after some
days without ransom, or any other let or molestation in the world. And
having done this, he procured also some temporal help for them, and for their
apparayling, to return home into England, and this he did, though he knew them
to be Protestants in religion, upon diverse conferences had with them, both
before and after their delivery by don Petro. In one of which conferences, I
do well remember, and cannot forget, how Squire was so hot and earnest in
defending of his religion, within the English College of Seuil, and that in the
hearing of diverse English scholars, as he said and stood to it, that he knew
for certain, that he had the holy ghost within him, for the true
understanding of scriptures, whereat the said scholars laughed heartily, and so
did F. Persons also.

Wherefore both Rolls and he being ready now for their departure toward
England, they took their journey together down by water to the port of saint
Lucars (some forty miles from Seuil) in the company of one Captain North.
And staying there some days, whether it were by indiscreet behaueour of their
own, or that some of their company accused them (as they suspected) they were
taken in that place by the inquisition, and brought back prisoners to Seuil,
where F. Persons yet remaining, he procured for them all kind of courteous
dealing at the Inquisitors hands, and at his departure from thence (which was
in May after) he left the matter much recommended to the foresaid F. Richard
Walpole Jesuit, and prefect of the studies in the English College, as also unto
me, and others of our nation there remaining, that we should help and favor
what possibly we could these two poor men, for that all their compaignions or
the most were now gone, being let slip away by the favor of the said father.
And so about August or September next insewing, M. Rolls was first let out of
the prison of Inquisition, and placed in the Jesuits college named of S.
Herminigildo, prince in old time and Martyr of Spain, and there he was most
courteously used by the said fathers, and I and others visited him there, and
made a common purse to help to apparayle him, and at my departure toward
Rome (which was in October after) I do well remember in particular, and he
cannot forget, that of my small ability I left him some five and twenty
shillinges to assist his necessities, and others did perhaps more, as they were
able. And of this he being at this present in England may be examined, and I
doubt not but he will tell the truth, and whether any evil word or meaning, was
ever uttered unto him by any there against her Majesty.

As for Squire, though he were detayned in the Inquisition some month after
Rolls was let forth, (for that he was taken to be more obstinate in his
errors) yet at length he was let forth also, and placed for his further
instruction in Catholic faith as prisoner still, in a certain monastery
near to the English colege, which I take to be of the Carmelites, if I remember
well, unto which place as also to Rolls, the foresaid F. Walpole was permitted
to have access, both for their instruction, and further help and comfort, and
so he did. And this endured until the month of May next insewing, in the
year 97. at what time they both conspiring together fled away, and left both
F. Walpole, and other English that had given their words for them in the
briars. Whereof themselves being ashamed, and having some scruple when they were
in saftie, they excused themselves by a common letter written with Squyers hand,
but subscrybed by them both, and sent to Seuil, wherein, they asked pardon very
effectually of the said father, and of all their countrymen, for their flight,
and for the hurt or discredit which thereby might happen to their said friends
in Seuil, protesting that it was only for the love they did bear to their
wives and children, and the desire they had to see and succor them in England,
and not falsehood or ingratitude, or other dishonest meaning.

This letter F. Walpole showed first in Seuil for his better excuse, and then
sent the same to F. Persons in Rome, where it was read one day in public
recreation at the college, among some forty or fifty English together, who
all judged it a traiterous pranke, but yet had compassion of them, and laughed
at certain phrases of Squyers Puritanical vain in Writing, among which, was
this: that they lusted not after their wives in the flesh, but rather thirsted
after them in the Lord. And of these forty or fifty English, that then were
present at the reading of this letter; some nine perhaps or ten are now in
England. By all which, Catholic men may be certified of the truth, and
Protestants also, both by Rolls himself that is prisoner, as also by some of
the other that be in like manner under their custody. So as of this point of
these men's running away from Seuil, without F. Walpole his knowledge or
consent, and without seeing him at their departure, there can no dout be made
at all; for that it may and will be proved by evident demonstrations, and
irrefragable witnesses, both from Spain, Hence, and in England.

Which being so, let every man consider the malicious falsehood of this tragical
forgerie. For if Edward Squire ran away from Seuil out of the monastery
where he was prisoner, and that he departed in company of Rolls his fellow,
who having more liberty, then the other, is thought to have plotted and
procured principally that flight; and if they saw not F. Walpole, nor spoke
with him at their departure, but rather deceived him, and put him in disgrace
by this their running away, as much as lay in them, and that they have
confessed and testified the same, and asked him pardon for it under their own
hands, how then can it be true, that F. Walpole preached unto Squire at his
departure, exhorting him to this fact of poisoning the Queen and the Earl of
Essex, as was auowed at his arraygnement? How did he lay his left hand upon
his shoulder, saying Dominus only, and then making the sign of the cross upon
his for head with his right hand, said: God bless the my son, and give the
courage and strength, and I shall pray for thee both alive and dead, and other
like words, and circumstances, published in Squyers forged and forced
confession.

Moreover, how can it stand with any probability, that Squire should vow to F.
Walpole to do this act of poisoning, and receive the blessed sacrament there
upon? How did he receive the poison ready made and mingled by F. Walpole in a
dooble bladder (as the tale is told) and make experience thereof upon a dog,
that died presently? and finally how did he carry it with him so long a
journey, and yet his compagnion Rolls to see nor know nothing thereof, as he
did not, nor is it so much as feigned or objected in the indightment?

Certain crimes and accusations there be says Cicero, that are so improbable
of themselves, and so evil fitting to the persons upon whom they are feigned,
that albeit no man should refute them, yet do they fall of their own nature,
and necessary circumstances thereunto incident. As for example, if a man should
accuse M. Toplife the halter-maister of England, and boweller of Catholic
Priests in our days, of to much scrupulositie in matters of conscience, which
might smell of papistrie. Or else our new married English Ministers, of to much
fasting, wearing hayreclothes, or over much punishing their bodies, that are
offenses tending to the same error, no man I suppose would easelie believe
them, though they should never so stoutly or cuningly be auerred, knowing the
persons well, and how far their disposition and whole course of life is, from
such excesses in that kind. And even so, he that knows F. Richard Walpole as
I do; and first how learned a man he is, being Prefect of the studies in the
English Seuilian college, and then how spiritual and myld a religious man, both
by nature and condition, and how far of from all wordlie practices and
politic deuyses as these are, he will clearlie perceive at the first sight,
the absurdities of these imputations laid against him; to wit, that either he
should be so fond, as to use those scriptures to Squire for killing the Queen
and the Earl of Essex, which were alleged at Squyers arraygnment: or so base,
as to go and buy or mingle poison for such an effect, and to bring it to him in
a dooble bladder, call a dog and make the proof, with other like foolish,
incredible, and absurd circumstances. But above all other, that F. Walpole
should employ diverse men at once about this foul act, and like a right
Macheuillian or impious atheist, send in Stanley and Monday after Squire, to
discover him to the Council, for that himself had persuaded him to this
attempt, which were scarce credible to some, of Toplife himself, or any other
as bloody and conscienceles as he, and if Stanley and Monday were of Squire and
Rolls their first company, taken with them by sea, they never spoke then with
F. Walpole, but were gone from Seuil before Squire and Rolls came in trouble,
or knew also the said father.

But for the scriptures mentioned, vnum est necessarium, one thing is
necessary; and, quid prodest homini, si vniuersum mundum lucretur, animae vero
suae detrimentum patiatur? What profits it a man if he gain the whole world,
and leese his own soul? It is very lykly that F. Walpole used sometimes those
words of Christ, among others, to Squire. For I well remember that they were
often in his mouth to such as Squire was, of our nation, who dealing about
matters of religion, concerning his soul and eternal salvation, would often
allege humane and worldly respects for impedimentes, as his wife and children
in England, how he should live if he became a catholic, that all his friends
at home would forsake him, that he durst not show his face any more among them,
that his enemies would laugh at him, triumph over him, lay him in prison, and
the like: for moderating of which wordly respects, in so great a cause as is
religion, it is probable, that F. Walpole used diverse times the former speeches
of scripture to him. Which Squire remembering in England, when he was to make
his tale, applied them as spoken to the other effect of poisoning, wherewith as
every man sees, they have no coherence at all.

If F. Walpole had been disposed to have treated upon any such theme, he was not
so simple or unlearned, but that he could have alleged other places and
examples of scripture, far more fit and effectual to such a purpose, seeing that
the question in general is handled largely, by many learned men, to and fro,
how it may be lawful or unlawful in certain cases, for particular men to
offer violence to princes by private authority. Where yet no man makes it
either so necessary to salvation, or so safe or meritorious, as Squyers
fiction conteyneth. And if upon those grounds, or other, F. Walpole would have
been so idle or evil disposed, as to enter into the cogitation or treaty of any
such enterprise (from which in my conscience I hold him most free) yet would he
never have made choice of Squire, whom he thought still inwardly to be a
Protestant (and so he dyed) notwithstanding some times he would make show in
Spain of his conversion. F. Walpole knew him also to be a poor hungry
soldiar, desirous to live, and to get something in the world, which was far
from him that should enterprise such a matter, who must be content to adventure
both life and all that thereof depends, which no man will do, but either of
pure zeal in religion, or of hope of gain and preferment. As for zeal, it is
known Squire had none to the catholic religion, as has been noted, but
rather the contrary. And as for gain and preferment, F. Walpole had none to
give him: nor did Squire say that he was promissed any, from any other party.
What then should move him to take so dangerous and difficult an enterprise upon
him, or the other to trust him therein. Of like improbabilitie is it, or rather
much more, that the same father should remit Squire for his directions in these
affairs, to Doctor Bagshaw, prisoner in Wisbich castle, and to no more, as was
read out of Squyers confession at his arraygnment, which every man that knows
the persons, will see evidently to be most absurdly feigned, for that F.
Walpole never had any friendship, familiarity, or acquayntance with Doctor
Bagshaw, the Doctor having left the Roman College before the other came to
study there, nor ever had they letter or message between them in their lives:
nor had the direction of Doctor Bagshaw, that was prisoner so far of from
London (where this attempt was to be made) been any way fit for this effect,
seeing it was not a matter to be treated by letters, and some other causes also
are well known to diverse men, why the said Doctors concurrence in matters of
such moment with F. Walpole, can no ways be thought probable. Wherefore this
fiction has no show or shadow of probability at all.

And truly it seems to wise men in these parts here, that if it had been
thought expedient for the present time in England, that some such tragedy as
this should be moved about killing her Majesty, for holding catholics in
hatred and suspicion, and for better continuing of our breach with Spain (for
it is observed, that still within certain distances of time, this affayre of
killing the Queen has been renewed, and more men executed or called in question
therabout, then for all other Princes in Christendom besides) and if for the
same, or other like considerations, it were judged also expedient, that some
Jesuit must enter in like manner into some part of the pageant (for that
lightly none goes without them in these days) yet might the matter more fitly
have been laid upon some other of that order, as F. Creswel F. Holt, or F.
Persons, who for their years and experience should have had more authority to
persuade such an action, then upon F. Walpole, who being their punee, and
attending only to matters of study, is very improbably brought into this
treaty. But as for F. Persons, it is well known, that he has had many
occasions to employ much more fitter and resolute men in such affairs then
Squire, if he had lysted, or been of that judgment or humor. For he has caused
many English to be delivered out of diverse ports and prisons in Spain, and to
return home free. And at one time almost a hundredth, out of the port and
galleys of S. Marie in Andaluzia, and this last year above thirty out of the
port and galleys of Naples, which were taken in the ship of Paulo Gundelo the
Ragusean, and I saw them my self in chains at the oar, and were only
delivered by the earnest suit and credit of the said father. And all these
being obliged to him, both by the benefyt of their liberty, and the love of
religion (for that all or many are commonly wont to return well affected to
the catholic faith, by that they have seen and heard in forayne nations, and
in so good a school as tribulation is wont to be) of these men I say, he might
have made choice of far fitter instruments then Edward Squire, in so many
years, to have effectuated such an enterprise, if he had lyked thereof, which
yet hitherto has never been found. And perhaps no persons so fit as priests
themselves, who go directly into England to die, if they were so persuaded of
the matter as Squyers tale does presuppose: to wit, that it is a work of so
high perfection, merit, and godliness, yea of necessity to their salvation,
as in his arraygnement is set down.

Other means also more effectual would have been thought upon, for the
accomplishing of the work, if ever any such had been intended, then is the
poysonning of the Queens sadle pomel, or the chair of my Lord of Essex, wherein
it seems that both his lordship has sitten, and her Majesty ridden, since
that time, and yet neither of them, God be thanked, has miscarried. And truly,
having conferred with the learnedest physicians and Simplicistes of this
city, about the probability of this poison, they do all laugh at the deuyse,
and say that it is a mere fiction, that any such poison can be found in this
world, or made by art; that being laid in such places and in such manner as
this is descrybed, can hurt the sitter or ryder, in the supposed chair or
sadle. which they prove by these reasons that do ensew, of their art. First,
for that all poison must needs work his effect by one of these four means
and ways, to wit, by being received into our bodies, or by one of the senses
of seeing, smelling, or touching.

As for the first mean (which is the principal and most ordinary) it is here
excluded in our case, for that this poison was not meant to be received within
the body of her Majesty or of the Earl.

As for the second, all physicians do agree, that no poison has ever been
recorded to hurt by sight, but only that of the basiliske according to the
opinion of some old writers, whereof yet it is doubted by later authors,
whether that infection came by the sight or no, but all do agree (howsoever
this was) that no humane art can reach to imitate this secret of nature. And
those that handle of this matter, as Cardan in his subtilities, Matheolus upon
Dioscorides, and some others, do add diverse conditions, and necessary
circumstances besides the poison it self, to work this effect by sight, as for
example, the spirit and heat of the live serpent, the fear of the party that
be holds her, and other like, and that no dead or cold poison made by any art
can infect this way, all do agree. As neither by the sense of smelling except
it should be very strong and much used, so as it might infect the very air
that enters into us, and then say they, would it be discovered also, by the
ungratefulness of the very sent it self.

There remains then the fourth way only, which is by touching, wherein the
most learned also do agree, that they have only the saying of Gallen, who
affirms that the spitle of a mad dog, being touched, enters of it self
into the flesh and infecteth, yet is there no certain experience either of
this, or of any other poison, that kills in such sort, by only touching, but
if it be true, yet confess they all, that this touching must be upon the bare
flesh, and that with time, and continuance, and calefaction it must enter, and
not otherwise, but if there be any thing interiected between the poison and the
flesh it self (as it is probable in our case, where her Majesty's glove or
sleeue upon the pomel of her sadle, and my Lord of Essex his apparayle upon his
chair, must needs have place) then do all agree, that by all probability, it
could do no hurt at all, though poison had been put there. For say these men, if
by poisoning only stools, chayres, sadles, or apparayle, that touches not the
flesh, or by sight only, princes may be poisoned, who should be safe? And why
would men adventure to attempt any other ways, that are more dangerous to the
attempter? yet do they still except the infectio^ of the plague, which may be
imparted by a cloth or vestment infected, which physicians hold to be a secret
only of nature, not imitable by any art of man, as is not also the wonderful
secret force of the fish named Torpedo in latin, for that being in the fishers
net, before they touch him they feel torporem, to wit, a numnes in their
hands, by his being there, which effect no art possible can ever arryue to
work or imitate.

Again they say, that if any such poison could be made to work such strange
effects, so far of as here is feigned, it had bin impossible for Squire
himself to have carried it so many miles, and to have put it forth from his
dooble bladder, into his red botle stopped with cork (as he said he did, when
he went to sea with my lord of Essex) without poisoning him self also, and the
like difficulty would have been for him that made and sold the poison.
Wherefore these learned men say, that all this, of the effect of this poison,
upon the pomel of her Majesty's sadle, and the Earls chair, is a very
ridiculous thing. And greatly did they laugh when they heard tell, how the
Queens Attorney with weeping tears did congratulate her Majesty's so dangerous
escape, applying those words of the psalm to her Majesty, that were of
Christ and his power: Super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, Thou shall walk
upon the snake and basilisk without hurt. And M. Soliciter and others giving
unto her Majesty the privilege of Saint Paul, that shook of the venomous
vyper from his hand without danger, and that this was a miracle if ever their
were a miracle. All which was attributed here, either to gross ignorance, or
deep flattery, in these orators, seeing that no danger at all was near unto her
Majesty in any reason, though any such touching of the sadle pomel with
Squyers bladder, had bin true. And they do think, that the enchantment which he
used in crying: God save the Queen, when he touched the pomel with the said
bladder, was a sufficient preservative against the force of this kind of
poison: especially considering the great probability, that this act also of
his touching the sadle pomel with his bladders and lethers, was fained in like
manner. For so it seems, that the poor caitife began to make his tale with
this at the beginning, upon the reasons before put down, thinking that either
it would not have bin so dangerous unto him, but that either he might have gone
back again when he would, or at leastwise have distinguished the matter,
confessing only so much against Spayn and Jesuits, as might serve for the
time and present turn, and deny the rest, that touched himself, and so we see
he did, when he came to his arraygnement, pleading not guilty, with many
solemn oaths and protestations, arguments, and reasons, to show that he
attempted nothing after his coming into England, though he were content to let
the rest stand, which he had said of F. Walpole and of Spain. And in this he
stood stiffly all the time of his arraygneme^t, until he understood first by
the cheef Judge, that he labored in vain, for that the very conceyling of the
matter treated in Spain, for so many months, was treason of itself, though
it had never been attempted to be put in execution within England. And secondly
that he perceived by diverse speeches and large discourses made unto him by
sondrie Counselours, but especially by Secretary Cecil, exhorting him to
confess the whole, that except he yealded to all, as it lay in his first tale,
there was no hope of favor and mercy. And then he falling down upon his
knees, confessed all again. But yet afterward, when he found also by
experience, that this would not save his life, nor keep him from execution
(whereof it is lykely that he had hope, if not full promise) he denied the
matter again at his death, as they can witness that were present at the same
and heard him, whereof some also have written the same hither.

Wherefore to end this narration, the miserable fellow is now hanged, and
whether his corporal or ghostly misery were greater, God knows, the men that
did most for him, to the releef of the one and the other in Spain, are most
wronged by him. The fictio^ of his treaty with F. Walpole in Seuil for killing
of the persons before named, as also of the poison given, and other
circumstances, are fond, and flatly false, and most apparently forged: and to
this I will stand, and bynd myself to prove it. Whether after his coming in to
England, and coffeehouse, he might enter into any malignitie of cogitations,
words, or factes to this effect, as Doctor Pary was said to do that touches
not me now to discuss. The tragical session of so many noble men, Councelours,
and Judges together, made upon his feigned confession, their orations,
congratulations, admirations, exclamations their bitter inuectiues against
lesuites, and the king of Spain, upon so small and weak grounds, and
especially the repetition thereof again at Paul's cross the next sunday after,
is ridiculous, and makes men ween abroad, that ears and lips are more
sought for, then judgments, and populer outcries, before sage inquyrie of the
truth, and that while these matters are in talking to fill men's heads, some
other plottes are in deliberation, tending to other designementes. Time will
tell all, and to that, and to Gods holy providence, that ouerreacheth man's
diuises, I remit me. Rome this first of March, 1599.

AN ADDITION, TO THE READER.
MEAN while the precedent confutation was on the printers press, there came
out of England a printed pamphlet of Squyres forged conspiracy, as a letter
addressed unto a gentleman at Padua. And albeit Master M. A. in this his
confutation has well and sufficiently confuted that fiction, yet is it not
unnecessary to ad a few lines in consideration of this pamphlet.

First it is therefore considerable, that whereas this fiction of Squyers,
being with such asseueration plotted and pursued, and himself condemned and
executed: and the odiousness of the pretended crime so much sounded out, both
from the Bench, and the Pulpit, why yet after all this there should need any
pamphlet, to give new credit to the matter? Hereof the reason forsooth is no
other, but that the forgers in this mint were afraid least else their coin
would be the more suspected to be counterfeit and so the less go for good
payment.

And the rather for that Squyre himself when he came to the conclusion of the
matter, to wit, when he was to be hanged, did there die a true protestant, and
utterly denied the acting of any such thing, and such protestations, and at
such times, do commonly make strong impressions in the minds of the people, who
generally are given to believe, that at the very last instant of life, men are
lykelyest to declare the truth of their causes.

And more-ouer seeing many of the wyser sort being enured to the noting of
such packings (as this might easily seem unto them to be) do use narrowly to
watch and observe, how things pass at arraignements, and might well see that
the course and manner of this seemed rather some such match as Kemp and his
compagnions do handle on the stage, then the lively managing of a matter of
truth in deed, which never would have needed such a playerlyke corespondence
in the actors, for even as Kemp and his fellows having beforehand studied to
con their parts by roate, and each knows to keep his cu, and to frame his
speech and manners according to his feigned function, even so was this
fore-studied tragedy acted in Westminster hall. Where first one played the
prologue, and told a long and lamentable tale of the horriblenesse of the
feigned fact. Another burst out in tears, and very pitifully wept at it. An
other fell in to admiration of the greatness of the miracle, making it in
effect, as very a miracle, as ever Christ wrought any: and Squire himself that
was to make good earnest of all the jest, was held in a tale while some good
part of his indightment was red, to the end he should heed it the less, and
so the less reply against it. This then being easily to be noted, and that
Squire in the end proved the fool that mard the play, by denying the act at
his death (as aforesaid) and so consequently the great miracle if ever there
vvene a miracle. No marvel then is it that a smooth penned pamphlet is now come
abroad, to reuyue the decaying credit of this late-made-matter, rather then
that it should be helped up, by the rymings of some od pot-poet or idle
balletmaker.

The writer whereof (if it be M. Smokey-svvynes. flesh, at the instance of Sir
R. C.) presumes so much upon the faith of the reader, who he hops will
believe him, that he tells him so direct and ready a tale, as though himself
had been in every place, at every time; when, and where, the matter was dealt
in, or spoken of: or else that he has had his intelligence by espetiall
revelation, for that he seems to know all, so precisely, and so perfectly,
yea he knows now to call the Iesuyte in Spain, Richard Walpole, that so often
in the indightment was William Walpole. And moreover he knows that the said
Richard Walpole is a man of principal credit in Spain, and as Vicar general
to Persons in his absence, which is a point in deed that must argue the man's
knowledge to be supernatural, because he knows that, that no man else knows:
but yet to know it better (as also some points and circumstances in relating
acts of Catholic religion) he were better to employ some one spy more
sufficient then it seems he has any: Vnum est necessarium, by which sentence
(by himself repeated) he may correct his ignorances and so make his pamphlets
hereafter to be the less laughted at, If withal he leave out such bald notes,
as that Squire squeezed out the poison out of his dooble bladder in the sight
and presence of diverse, and therewithal did say God save the Queen, for this
also makes the matter smell further of then the poison could infect.

Further it is to be noted (as the indyghtement, and this pamphleter both
testify) the poison was delivered unto Squire in a dooble bladder, that is, in
one bladder within another, and this he pricked with holes, and squeezed on the
pomel of the Queens sadle, and the sadle as the pamphleter says, being on the
back of the horse, and the horse standing in the stable yard (for that the
Queen was ready to ride abroad) it would be known how Squire did, to avoid his
own harm by the poison, that now by the squeezing of the bladder, and
straining it through, must needs be left sticking on the outside: and this
marueil is the greater, for that Squire must of necessity, have done it with a
tryce, and therefore could have no leisure (for fear of being noted by the
lookers on) to put it into a new bladder or vessel (for that he was to reserve
the remainder of this poison for the Earl of Essex chair) and therefore
thrusting the bladder all wet on the outside into his pocket on the sudden, and
yet to get no part of the poison, upon himself or his clothes, is a great
merueil, and to get part upon him and to have no harm, may be deemed a
miracle, but to avoid this question, if the pamphleter had remembered so much,
he should either have said that Squire had had skill in iugling, and could
deceive their sightes that looked on, or else that the sadle was in a corner in
the stable where he was alone by him self, and not on the horses back in the
open yeard, and the sight of many, for now a miracle may be presupposed to be
wrought upon the horse also, if any of the poison squeezed out on the sadle
pomell did light upon him, as very lykely it must, because the pomell is round
and such a substance as may be strayned through holes pricked with a pin in a
bladder will easily run down a sadle pomell. And by this reason must ensew,
miracle upon miracle (four at the least) if all be well remembered. And it is
also a marvel (though no miracle) that neither the Queens sadle, nor the
Earls chair, were presented at the bar, because in all lykelyhood the stayn
or sign of so forcible a poison should be found to remain upon the one or the
other, at least to grace the matter some aqua fortis or alcumisticall
distillation might have been wyped on both, or one, in steed of a pretended
poison, and so might the sadle and chair have been reserved for remembrance of
so many great miracles, and well worthy: if this had been remembered, as in
good earnest it would have been, if it had been a true done thing in deed, or
that the prosecuters of this matter had believed it themselves, or had better
feigned, to have believed it.

But to leave these ouersightes to such as must take better heed to them
hereafter, I will here draw to an end, and tell the pamphleter, that he does
serve his Paduan friend but by peecemeal: for seeming to go roundly to woork
with him, and to tell him a full tale without stop, and yet to leave out the
later and chief part of all, which was played by the principal actor Squire
himself, to wit, in not telling how he ended the matter at Tiburne, and how he
there made two denials, the one of Catholic religion, declaring himself a
perfect protestant, and the other of his practisment of poison, all which I say
to be left behind sticking in his pen, must needs be but a sly trik of his,
and howsoever his friend do accept thereof, or of his excuse thereof, likely it is
that he will be so wise, as not once to tel-the contents of his said letter so
any of the Italians, least he be well laughed at for his labor, for they are
to wise for him to delude with flimflammes, and to well acquainted with the
ridiculous rumors of English Queen-killinges. Some poor fools in England that
know nothing, may do them the pleasure to believe it for them.

They can tell him, and tell him truly, of the cruel and accustomarie killing
that is used in England, which now a days (for the bloodinesse thereof) is
become the most sad spectacle of the universal world.

They can tell him, how when by the open force of malice they list not to take
away men's lives, that then they can do it by sleight, deceit, and coosinage,
and yet still with exterior face and show of Justice, and for proof of this, we
need not seek over our histories of former ages.

They can tell of the great numbers of innocent priests, and Catholic men,
that for old faith and religion, under pretense of new treason, are made
subject to so many and so great afflictions, and lastly to most cruel death:
and this both by Italians and sundry other nations is published to the world in
their several languages.

And who knows not, and sees not, that it is a common custom, before any new
storm is raised up of persecuting Catholics, more violently then ordinary,
that then some pretense is made of the discovery of some great treason, against
the Queens person.

Valentyn Tomson his matter of Queene-killing had prevented Squyres, if he had
come as well from Spain as he did from Scotland, and that he could have said
that he had seen and spoken with a Jesuit, though he knew him not so
familiarly, as to know his name.

This world is now grown over well acquainted with these tales of
Queen-killings, as also that those brutes are inductions to the killing of such
innocent servants of God as light into the hands and power of the
blood-thirsty and are by them alloted to the slaughter, whose glory both in
heaven and earth will be the greater, in that their pains are inflicted with
dooble wrong. And when the Notorious acts of the injustice of England, shall
come to be published in a large volume, to the view of the world, and to the
admiration of after-coming posterity (the hastening Whereof the cruelty of the
persecuter may enforce) then shall sundry fraudulent practices, and many bloody
tragedies, be revealed, and those not altogether free from secret murders, and
with sufficient proofs and arguments for the utterance of truth, and far
different from that which cogging pamphleters and fond baletmakers do divulge
in the mean time while truth keeps silence.


