royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE By the King.
A Proclamation for the better ordering of those who repair to the Court, for
their cure of the disease, called, The Kings Evil.
WHereas, by the grace and blessing of God, the Kings and Queens of this
Realm, by many ages past, have had the happiness, by their sacred touch, and
inuoration of the Name of God, to cure those, who are afflicted with the
disease called The Kings Evil; And His now most excellent Majesty, in no
less measure then any of his Royal Predecessors, has had good success
herein, and in His most gracious and pious disposition, is as ready and willing
as any King or Queen of this Realm ever was, in any thing to relieve the
distresses and necessity of His good Subjects; yet in His Princely wisdom,
foreseeing that in this (as in all other things) order is to be observed, and
fit times are necessarily to be appointed for the performing of this great
work of charity: His most Excellent Majesty does hereby publish and declare
his Royal will and pleasure to be, That whereas heretofore the usual times of
presenting such persons to His Majesty for this purpose, were Easter and
Whitsuntide, That from henceforth the times shall be Easter and Michaelmas,
as times more convenient both for the temperature of the season, and in respect
of any contagion, which may happen in this near access to His Majesty's
sacred Person. And His Majesty does accordingly will and command, that from
the time of publishing this Proclamation, none presume to repair to His
Majesty's Royal Court to be healed of that disease, before the Feast of S.
Michael now next coming.

And His Majesty does further will and command, that all such as hereafter shall
come or repair to the Court for this purpose, shall bring with them
Certificats, under the hands of ye Parson, Vicar, or Minister and Church
wardens, of those several Parishes where they dwell, and from whence they
come, testifying according to the truth, that they have not any time before
been touched by the King, to the intent be healed of that disease. And His
Majesty does straightly charge all Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other
Officers, That they do not suffer any to pass, but such as have such
Certificates, upon pain of His Majesty's displeasure. And to the end that all
His loving Subjects may the better take knowledge of this His Majesty's
pleasure and command, His will is, that this Proclamation be published, and
affixed in some open place in every Market Town of this Realm. All which, His
Majesty having by former Proclamation, upon the like occasion published, and
commanded, he does now again command, strictly to be observed by all and every
person and persons whom it shall or may concern, upon such pains and
penalties as may be inflicted upon them for the neglect thereof.

Given at Our Court at Greenewich, the eight and twentieth day of June, in the
Fifth year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent MAJESTY. M.DC.XXIX.


