HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for reuoking the Commission concerning Archery.
WHereas We taking into Our Princely consideration the great decay of the
ancient laudable, and useful Exercise of Archery, and shooting in the
Long-Bow, whereby great victories have been heretofore achieved by the English
Nation, and of which, good use might be still made in time of War, besides
the good means by that commendable and healthful Recreation, to keep men
from other idle sports, and unlawful Plays and Games, the common Nurseries of
many hateful Vices, Mischiefs, and disorders in the Realm, did for the
better quickening of the execution of a good and wholesome Statue, made in the
three and thirtieth year of King Henry the eighth, for enioyning the use of
Archery, and suppressing unlawful Games, grant a special Commission under the
great Seal of England, bearing date the fourth day of April, in the fourth
year of Our Reign, directed to Timothy Tailor, John Hubart, Henry Hubart,
Gentlemen, and Ieffery Le Neaue, Esquire; Giving them by the said Commission
ample authority, for the better execution of the Statute aforesaid, as by the
said Commission may more largely appear. Now We are lately informed from
several parts of this Kingdom of diverse exactions, and other insufferable
abuses committed by color of the said Commission, to the great trouble,
disquiet, and discouragement of Our loving Subjects. And therefore We, by the
advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby Revoke, Recall, and absolutely
determine the said Commission, and all Duplicats, and Exemplifications thereof;
Straightly charging and commanding, that neither the said Commissioners, nor any
other, do presume from the time of publishing this Proclamation, to put in
execution the said Commission, or any Duplicate or Exemplification thereof, nor
to do, or attempt any thing by reason or color thereof, upon pain of Our
heavy indignation and displeasure, and such punishment as may justly be
inflicted for so high a contempt. Nevertheless, it is Our will and pleasure,
that all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables, and all other Our
Officers within their several Offices and Jurisdictions respectively, do with
all due care and diligence, advance and further the said ancient and
commendable exercise of Archery, and the due execution of the said Statute,
whereby idleness and unlawful Games, and many enormous vices arising thereby,
may be repressed, to the general good of Our Kingdom. And that it may appear
how much We abhor and detest these abuses which have been committed, to the
grieuance of Our Subjects, by abusing the said Commission, Our further will and
pleasure is, that all Our Judges, Justices of Peace, and other of Our Officers
and Ministers, to whom it does or may appertain, do upon Complaint made of
any the offenses or abuses committed by color of the said Commission, not
only punish the Delinquents, but give such remedy and redress to the parties
grieved, as to Law and Justice shall appertain.

Given at Our Court at Woodstocke; the xxiij. of August, in the seventh year
of Our Reign.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. M.DC.XXXI.


