THREE TREATISES. Viz. 1. The Conversion of NINEVEH. 2. Gods Trumpet sounding
the Alarm. 3. Physic against Famine.


Being plainly and pithily opened and expounded, in certain Sermons.

By William Attersoll, Minister of the Word of God, at Isfield in Sussex.

JONAH, 3.5.10. So the people of Neneveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast,
and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them, even to the least of them.

And God saw their works that they turned from their evil way, and God
repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did
it not.

LONDON. Printed at by Tho. Cotes, and are to be sold by Michael Spark, at the
blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1632.

THE CONVERSION OF NINEVEH: Wherein is declared, on the one side, the lively
power of the Ministry working Faith and Repentance in the hearers: and on the
other side, the admirable effects of Prayer and Fasting, calling back the
judgments of God threatened against sinners.

By William Attersoll, Minister of the Word of God, at Isfield in Sussex.

Mat. 12.41. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and
behold a greater than Jonas is here. 2 Cor. 10.4.5. The weapons of our war-fare
are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds:
Casting down imaginations, and every, etc. Printed at London, by Tho. Cotes,
and are to be sold by Mic. Spark, at the blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1632.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. John Rivers, Baronet, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the peace in the County of Kent; Increase of grace in this life,
and addition of glory in the life to come.
Right Worshipful,
HAving heretofore upon sundry occasions divulged sundry Books which are
abroad in the world, whereby J received much encouragement, J resolved
notwithstanding being now in years, and as it were donatus rude, Horat. lib.
1. epist. 1.
preparing for a nune dimittis, utterly to give over, and to enjoyne my self a
perpetual silence touching this kind of writing, and to content my self with
performing the other more necessary duty of teaching. Nevertheless being
requested, or rather importuned by friends to publish some things which had
lain a long time by me (whereof they doubted not but J had some store) J
delivered into their hands, these two short Treatises both of one nature,
preached at such time as the heavy hand of God was gone out against us in
Town and City. For after that he had sent forth his destroying Angel, Psalm.
91.7.
and that thousands fell at our side, and ten thousands at our right hand, and
by his Majesty's express appointment and commandment, we were enjoined weekly
to assemble together for the practice of piety in the exercises of humiliation,
that the Lord at length might say, It is enough, 2 Samuel 24.16. 1 Chro. 21.15.
Stay now thy hand: J thought J could not bestow the time better, than to
deliver and insist upon the doctrine of repentance, which is the life of all
our fasting (albeit handled before by many) that we repenting of the evil
which we had committed, he might repent of the evil which he had executed. For
what is all our prayer but lip-labor and a sacrifice abominable in his ears?
or what is all our outward fasting and abstinence, but mere hypocrisy which
his soul abhors, unless they be accompanied with faith in his promises,
and with repentance from dead works? Chrysostom, ad^ versus Iudaos or atie prima.
It was well said of Chrysostom long ago against the Jews, Ne ita dixeris,
jejunant: quin potius illud mihi ostendito, eos ex Dei sententia jejunare; quod
ni ita fiat, quavis ebrietate sceleratius est jejunium. Let no man say to me,
they fast; rather let them show that they fast according to the mind and
meaning of God, or as he has ordained; for unless they fast after this
manner, their fasting is far worse than any drunkenness, no doubt because
they abused the holy name of God, and under a pretense of piety they practiced
all kind of impiety. And immediately afterward, Neque enim solum considerandum
est quid ab istis fiat, verum illud etiam observandum, quam ob causam faciant,
that is, we are not only to consider the action what men do, but the
affection is principally to be observed, for what cause and intent they do it.
It cannot be denied but the Israelites fasted and prayed before they went to
battle against their brethren the Benjamites, Judge. 20.23.
they wept before the Lord until even, yet were they overthrown, and 18000.
of them perished with the edge of the sword. Some men may justly marvel, that
the cause of the Israelites being good, and of the Benjamites bad, yet that
they fell before the men of Benjamin, yea albeit they fasted and prayed and
consulted with God who should first begin the war: Rogers upon Judges, page
921.
But whatsoever men may object or mutter, the Lord might dispose of the issue
and success of it without any injury to them that were overcome; forasmuch as
it is free for him to afflict and chasten his as it pleases him, who has
always just cause so to do, and among such as are supposed to be most
innocent, what man shall be able justly to say to him, Why have thou done thus?
He does all things well, neither can evil dwell with the Almighty, whereas
we are corrupt, and in our best works defective. Besides, he would prevent
the evils that hang about us, and abate the strength of pride, or some other
sin whereunto by nature he sees we are most prone; yea, he will make
trial, what patience, faith, obedience, and thankfulness is in us, whether
such graces be in us, or not. True it is, it is not directly expressed what the
cause was, why God gave Israel the foil, and forsook them in the day of
battle: But whether they did trust in their great armies and put confidence in
an arm of flesh, and therefore doubted not, but presumed of the victory and
prevailing over their enemies; or whether they did it not in truth and
sincerity, because they did not as well pursue the men of Dan for their
Idolatry and forsaking of God, Judge. 18.30, 31. Genesis 49.18
the fact being as horrible every way, as the private injury offered to the
Levites Concubine: It is most certain, they did not thoroughly repent, as
indeed they did afterward, and prevailed, when they were thoroughly humbled. So
then, notwithstanding the goodness of their cause, the greatness of their
strength, the consultation with God, the practice of fasting, and the duty of
prayer; yet may we still say as the sons of the Prophets in another case, 2
King. 4.40.
There is death in the pot, the want of true turning to God, defiled and
deformed all the rest. This is the great and general fasting, not to abstain
from meat and drink, but to cease from sin, as the Prophet speaks. August.
super Johan. Esaias 58.6. Chrysostom. su^ per Math.
He that sins and yet withal fasteth, (says Chrysostom) does not fast to
the glory of God, but spares his own substance only. This is handled at
large in these Treatises, wherein is noted, what the true exercise of fasting
is, what are the outward and inward parts thereof, the one answering to the
other, together with the several abuses of the counterfeit fastings. True it
is, the Church of Rome complain against us, and accuse us as enemies to
fasting, even as the Pharisees sometimes condemned the Disciples of Christ,
Math. 9.14
whom he excuses and defends: but were we worthy of this reproach and
reproof, yet are they the unfittest to upbraid us with it, who beside the bare
name and naked title of fasting, have nothing remaining of the true nature and
right practice thereof; but the end they aim at, is to set up their own
merits, and to puff up them selves with pride, as it was with the blind
Pharisees their predecessors, whom in this and in sundry other points they
follow. These things thus laid open, J presume to offer to your Worship, whose
good affection to our Tribe, (so much scorned and scoffed at in the world) and
careful frequenting the exercises of religion many ways appears, and as a
token and testimony of my thankful remembrance of your love to me, in that you
disdain not, but upon every occasion of passing by, to come under the roof of
my poor cottage: remembering the words of our blessed Savior, Mar. 6.4.
A Prophet is not without honor, save in his own Country, and among his own
kin, and in his own house. The God of heaven and earth increase your zeal
to the truth, and finish that good work which he has begun in you, unto the
day of Jesus Christ.

Your Worships at command, William Attersoll.

THE DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE OF FASTING and PRAYER; of FAITH and REPENTANCE.
JONAH 3.4. And Jonah began to enter into the City a days journey, and he
cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.
THis Prophecy is wholly Historical, as the other prophecies are dogmaticall.
It contains the History of Jonah, relating what happened to himself, when he
was sent of God to the great City Nineveh, Genesis 10.12.
to denounce unto the Ninevites their utter overthrow. Who this Prophet was,
and when he prophesied, may be gathered sufficiently out of the Scripture,
where we read that Jeroboam the second restored the coast of Israel from the
entering of Hamath unto the Sea of the Wilderness, according to the word of the
Lord, 2 King. 14.25.
which he spoke by his servant Jonah the son of Amittai the Prophet, which
was in Gath Hepher. And it seems that he was the first of all the Prophets,
whose writings are extant, and remain in the Church for the instruction
thereof in faith and obedience. For he lived before the battle of Ioash King
of Israel with the Syrians, about the end of the days of Elisha, 2 King.
13.14. and 14.25. Neither let any object the Prophecy of Micah, as though he
were before in time, the same that prophesied in the days of Ahab, 1 King. 22.
Because these two were not both one but different, neither do their names
accord in the Original, as may appear to every one that reads.

True it is, this prophet has this end and issue of his writing with the rest,
to set forth the judgments and mercies of God toward mankind: but this he has
proper and peculiar, that he is not here sent unto the Church and people of
Israel, but only unto profane unbeleevers and uncircumcised persons, that we
should understand thereby, that God has rule over all nations, and is the God
of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews; Romans 3.29.
and an avenger of sin in whomsoever he finds it, Romans 2.12.
according to the saying of the Apostle, As many as have sinned without law,
shall also perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be
judged by the law, Romans 2.12. For then the Prophets were sent to the Syrians, 1
King. 17.9. and 19.15. 2 King. 8.7.
and to them of Damascus, and to the Tyrians, howbeit extraordinarily at the
will and pleasure of God. And doubtless by his sending of his Prophets to
strangers out of the promised land, God would reprove and condemn the
desperate stubbornness of the people of Israel, who would not be moved and
persuaded by so many of his holy Prophets that were sent and dwelt among them,
and by so many threatenings as were brought upon them; where as these poor
infidels and unbeleevers did by and by believe and obey the voice of one
Prophet, Math. 12.41. Luke 11.32. that the Lord might say of them as he does in
an other case, Matthew. 8.10.
I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.

I will not stand to discourse at large the vain conceit and idle speculation
of Epiphanius, Epiphan. of the life of the Prophets.
touching this Jonah. For he tells us, that Elias gat himsalfe into the
Wilderness by reason of a great famine which he had called upon the land,
where, being nourished by Ravens, he quenched his thirst with the water of the
brook, and when the brook was dried up, he was an hungered, and removed into
Sarepta a City of Sidonia, 1 King. 17.9. Luke 4.26.
unto a poor woman a Widow, the mother of Jonah, and entered into her house:
now the woman left nothing undone of that which he commanded her: and he did
eat and blessed her; for he could have no abode with the uncircumcised. And
when as Jonah the son of the woman was deceased, God raised him up by Elias,
and restored him alive unto his mother, because of the entertainment which she
gave unto him: and that when Jonah was come to full age, he was sent unto
Nineveh to the Assyrians. Where we have some truth mingled with much falsehood,
and therefore he deserves to be credited no farther, then he has the warrant
of Gods word, being deceived with the tales of the Jews that are masters of
such lies. I know the common sort are most of all delighted with such new
tangled devises that have no substance in them: howbeit we should not please
such itching ears, nor feed them with empty wind in stead of wholesome food:
but avoid profane bablings, and oppositions of science falsely so called, which
some professing, have erred concerning the faith. 1 Timothy 6.20.21.


In this prophecy observe a twofold calling or sending of Jonah: the first in
the two former chapters which he rejected: the second in the two latter which
he executed. In this third chapter is set forth the execution of his calling
together with the fruit and profit thereof in the Ninevites, whereby we may see
his error and oversight in flying from his function, and supposing that he was
sent in vain: when as afterward he beheld with his own eyes so worthy and
glorious an effect of his preaching, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.20.
as might rejoice his heart, and be his crown and glory before the Lord, and
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ a^ his coming; who as a fisher of men
cast his net into the sea, and enclosed a great multitude of fish of all sorts.
But yet for all this, it did not sufficiently content the Prophet through a
carnal misdeeming and misjudging of the success of his labors, as if by Gods
showing of mercy, his ministry were contemned, his credit empaired, and his
person scorned and exposed to contempt, because the City was spared and not
destroyed, as appears in the next Chapter.

In the 4. Verse and the rest that follow to the end of the Chapter, we are to
consider two things. First the preaching of Jonah, Verse 4. A Sermon consisting
of judgment: he sings a mournful song, foretelling them of their full and
final destruction. Secondly, the effect of his preaching in the residue of the
Chap. The preaching of Jonah is a fearful threatening of a fearful overthrow to
come upon them for their wickedness, Circumstances in the threatening.
which was come up before the Lord, and did cry for vengeance to heaven, Chap.
1, 2. In this denunciation we may observe sundry circumstances, forty days are
limited for their repentance, as the days of Gods patience, which once expired
they must look for sudden destruction. Secondly, upon you all my wrath; yet
nevertheless I will spare you a little longer. Thirdly, the subject of the
judgment, Nineveh, a great, a mighty, a populous and proud City, whereby
also are understood the inhabitants thereof from the greatest to the least and
lowest of them. Lastly, S^dome and G^morrha and the Cities of the plain, or
otherwise, is not expressed. Now let us come to the words.

And Jonah began to enter, etc. Albeit the Lord might forthwith have destroyed
the Ninevites, yet he gives them some time of repentance, and sends his holy
Prophet unto them; which declares the infinite and endless patience of God
even toward these Infidels that knew him not, neither called upon his name,
Romans 2.4. First let us observe the general doctrine out of the whole
threatening, and afterward come to the particulars. Before the Lord would
utterly destroy the City, he raised up Jonah the Prophet, to foretell their
destruction. Before the Lord destroys he warns by his ministers.
that the Lord for the most part never brings any judgment upon any people
or person, but he first foretells of it, and makes it known unto them; he
warns them, and threatens it by his Ministers. This truth is to be seen
every where in the Scripture, Amos 3.6.7. Luke 13.7. We read that the world
was once destroyed by water: and it shall be destroyed again by fire. Of the
first destruction we find, that be foretold it unto Noah, and by Noah to the
world before ever the flood came. And touching the second destruction which
shall be by fire, 2 Pet. 3.10.
when the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up, God has not left us ignorant, but in
diverse places has plainly set it down unto us.

The reasons of this course and order of Gods dealing, who warns before he
smites, are either in respect of God, or in respect of the godly, or in
respect of the ungodly. Chro. 36.15. Ier. 25.3. by their repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9.
and thereby have judgments kept from them. Matthew. 24.14. therefore the
damnation of such is just.

Use 1. Lam. 3.33.36.
He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men: to crush under
his feet all the prisoners of the earth, to subvert a man in his cause, the
Lord approves not, Lam. 3.33.36. He would have none to perish that are his,
but all to repent and to be saved. He instructs, that he may not threaten: he
threatens, that he may not smite: he smites, that he may not destroy: 1 Cor.
11.32.
yea and sometime he destroys temporally, that he may not destroy eternally.
This is the course which he need not observe; because upon our own peril,
the peril of our souls, we are bound to take heed of judgments to come,
that we should prevent them before they come, He would have us to send out our
Ambassadors, which are our prayers, to treat of conditions of peace between
God and us. Such as intend revenge and the execution of their wrath, are not
wont to give warning, but to watch their opportunity, as we see in Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.22.
who spoke neither good nor evil to his brother Amnon, because he hated him,
and then suddenly, when his heart was merry with wine, commanded him to be
smitten. If God had a purpose to destroy us as his enemies, and to come upon us
at unwares, he would never threaten us, and give us such fair warning to
avoid the stroke of his sword drawn out against us. For wherefore does he not
destroy us? Is it for want of desert on our part? No doubtless: he finds
just cause to proceed against us, and he is of infinite power to punish us.
The Prophet teaches, Number. 11.23. Esaias 59.1.
that his hand is not weakened as though he could not strike us, neither is his
arm shortened as though he could not reach us, Esa. 59.1. v.

Secondly, times. Moses and the Prophets among them, Luke 16.29.31.
when indeed both Moses and the Prophets were all dead long before: but his
meaning was, that they had the books of Moses and the writings of the Prophets
before them. So may I say, that we have the Prophets and Apostles still among
us, I mean we have the holy Scriptures, wherein are contained the works of
the Prophets and of the Apostles: and besides these, God has given to us his
Ministers, that they might as it were put life again into the dead Prophets,
that they might open and declare unto us those things which are doubtful and
obscure: and therefore if any man be admonished by these, that judgments shall
certainly come, let him take heed he withstand not the Spirit of God, for it is
as true and evident, as if the Prophets and Moses himself were alive and
uttered these threatenings; and it is the wonderful goodness of God, that he
will foretell us of his judgments, and after a sort send them home to our own
hearts. Our consciences tell us, that we are guilty of those sins which have
formerly been reprooved, and whereof we have been forewarned: let us
therefore conclude with our selves, that it is the mercy of God, that he does
threaten hell and judgments unto us, as well as promise heaven and happiness:
and let us bless his name in our hearts, that he has granted such a gracious
warning unto us, and endeavor to break off our sins, that so he may be
pleased to proceed no farther with his judgments against us.

Lastly, Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.13.
because his patience serves to lead us to repentance, Romans 2.4. The days of
his patience last long, but they are not everlasting, if we repent not. Let us
meet him betimes, while he is in the way, before he approach nearer unto us
and come upon us. Sin separateth between him and us, and makes God our
utter enemy. Let us make an atonement with him, before his wrath burn like
fire. True it is, he bears long, but if we greeve his Spirit, we shall bear
his indignation, and our own condemnation whosoever we be. He forbeareth long,
but he will not always forbear, Exodus 34.6.
he will come speedily and suddenly upon us. The longer he is in drawing his
bow, the deeper do his arrows pierce. Thus much of the general doctrine.

Yet forty days. Before we come to the chief point offered to our
considerations in these words, Septuagint (...). Intiellgit post 40. dies non
intra, ut quidavolunt. Vide Drusij Lection.
a question may be demanded, how this threatening stands with the truth of
God, and the issue and event of the matter mentioned in the end of this
prophesy? to pronounce such a dreadful sentence against a City and the
inhabitants thereof, which took not that effect; or shall we think that God
changed his mind, to propose that which he purposed not? and does not the
Scripture teach us, that he is unchangable, and no shadow of turning with him?
I answer, the threatenings of God are oftentimes conditional, though the
condition be not expressed, as appears in the last verse of the 3. Chapter:
Chap. 3.10.
God repented of the Evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he
did it not. True it is, he might have destroyed them justly for their crying
sins, if it had pleased him, Chap. 1.2.
seeing their wickedness was come up before him, calling for judgment, and it
had been as easy for him to have sent a destroying Angel to overturne them,
as a preaching Prophet to turn them unto him. From hence we learn, Gods
threatenings are conditional. Genesis 6.3. 1 Pet. 3.20. 1 Cor. 6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.5.
they contain an exception and limitation, except they repent and amend their
ways. The condition is understood. So it was to the old world, Their days
were an hundred and twenty years, which S. Peter calls the time of his
patience, while the Arc was preparing. See the same, 2 King. 20.1. Genesis 20.3.
Mic. 3.12. and Ier. 26.18. Sometimes it is expressed, as Lu. 13.3.5. Re. 2.5.

Let us see some reasons. Ezekiel. 33.14. etc.
the effect will cease: as Ezekiel. 33. If I say to the wicked, you shall dye the
death; if he turn from his sin and do that is lawful and right, none of
his sins that he has committed shall be mentioned, he shall live and not
die. Secondly, God is a God of long sufferance and much patience, ready to
forgive and receive to mercy, yea in judgment to remember mercy, as 2 Samuel 24,
16. and Hab. 3.2. when once we turn unto him, Ier. 3.22. and 33.20.
as Ier. 3. O ye disobedient children, return and I will heal your rebellion:
and Chap. 31. when Ephraim after his corrections lamented, saying. Thou have
chastened me and I was chastened, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke,
surely after that I was turned, I repented: the Lord answered, My bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, he is my dear son, he
is my pleasant child. Nineveh understand this threatening, Chap. 3.9.
Chap. 3. Let every one turn from his evil way, for who can tell, if God will
turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?

Use 1. Caine said, Genesis 4. The Elders of Judah did profit better by the
threatenings of Jeremy. For when he had threatened desolation of the Lords house,
and the destruction of the whole land, for which the Priests and Prophets would
have put him to death, they pleaded the practice and example of good King
Hezekiah for their comfort, as we noted before; when the Prophet Micah
threatened that Jerusalem should be plowed up like a field, and lie desolate as
a Forest, he did not put him to death, Mic. 3.12. Ier. 26.18.
but feared the Lord: and the Lord repented him of the evil which he
pronounced against them. But it may be objected, Nineveh and did it not, then
Gods will is changeable, or else he has two wills, one will to destroy,
another to preserve, which seem contrary the one to the other. I answer,
Deutero. 29.29. The revealed is of things made known by the word and by daily
experience. The secret will is without condition annexed unto it: the reveald
is with condition, and it is joined with exhortations, admonitions,
instructions, and reprehensions, as may best serve for man's salvation, and to
keep him in awe of God and his threatenings. The secret shall and must be
accomplished, notwithstanding all the opposition and gainesaying of men and
Angels, Romans 9.19.
For who has resisted his will? and therefore albeit it be most just and
righteous, yet it is not to us a rule of righteousness: The revealed only is
the rule of our lives, and the square to measure and direct all our actions.
The ignorance of these two parts of the single and simple will of God leads
into manifold error, and the sound knowledge thereof beats down to the
ground the perverse and corrupt practice of many. For when they break out into
sundry evils and much profaneness contrary to the express commandment of
God and rule of the word left unto us for our instruction, a Plaut. Aulid. act.
4. sc. 10. Factum est, fieri infectum non potest, deos credo voluisse, nam ni
vellent, non fieret, scio. Terent. in Eumuch. Act. 5. sc. 2. Quid. si hoc
quispiam Coluit deus.
they follow the practice of the heathen, and excuse themselves, because
forsooth it was the will of God it should be so, or else it could not have
been done. A gross abuse of God and his will. For when they walked in their
own ways, as it were in bypath, and followed their sinful lusts and
pleasures, did they set Gods will before their eyes? or did they ask counsel
of him? or did they enter into such practices with a purpose to do his will?
No doubtless, they were led by their own fansy as by a false guide, that
turned them out of their right way, and therefore let them not excuse
themselves by his will, but rather accuse their own wickedness.

Secondly, it is the duty of all men in hearing the threatenings of God, to
beware of all impediments and hindrances of repentance, for as much as they
must take effect, unless we observe the condition. If we do not keep the
condition, the threatening is absolute, and surer than the heavens. Take heed
therefore of these lets, which, as so many stumbling blocks, lie in our way to
cause us to fall. Impediments hindering true repentance.
First we must not slight the threatenings of God, nor set light by them, as
the manner of many is, who for the most part regard them no otherwise, Esa.
28.15.
than as if they had made a covenant with death, and were at league with hell,
and not with God, to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of
their life. Such were the sons in law of Lot that should have married his
daughters; when they heard of the overthrow of Sodom with fire and brimstone,
and were exhorted to save themselves from that crooked generation, and to
depart from the tents of those wicked men, and to separate themselves from
among that Congregation, least they were consumed with them: he seemed as one
that mocked unto his sons in law, Genesis 19.14.
and therefore they perished in those flames. Secondly, we must not exempt our
selves from them, and post them over to others, or think they belong not at
all to us, Esa. 28.15
that albeit the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come
upon us, for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid
our selves, Esa. 28.15. These are they that hide their own sins like Adam,
and turn them over to others, as he did to the woman, and the woman to the
Serpent, Genesis 3. we care not on whose shoulders we lay the burden; so
that we do not bear it nor touch it with our little finger, neither who
smart for it, so that we be free and do not bear it. Thus we flatter our
selves, and never lay his threatenings to heart, until his judgments fall full
upon our heads, as they did upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians.

Thirdly, be not deceived to think by riches, Zeph. I. Zeph. 1.18.
When God had threatened to consume all things from off the Land, both man and
beast, least they should imagine by their wealth or other wiles to escape, he
says, Neither their silver, nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in
the day of the Lords wrath. Fourthly, delay not the time, nor put off the
threatenings, which the Lord abhors, as Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 12.22.23.
12. Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the Land of Israel,
saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision fails? Tell them therefore,
thus says the Lord God, I will make this proverb to cease, they shall use it
no more: but say to them, The days are at hand, the word that I speak shall
not be prolonged, for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say the word,
and (in your days) I will perform it says the Lord God. Let us therefore
stir up our selves to repentance and amendment of life to prevent his wrath,
least we rushing on in sin do rush into our destruction.

Thirdly, Genesis 15.16.
Genesis 15.16. the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full: but when they had
filled up the measure, then his judgments were to fall upon them. O how many
examples have we to terrify us, and to verify this to our hearts and
consciences! as the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, the falling of the
Israelites into the hands of the Cananites, the Ammonites, and the Amalekites,
mentioned almost in every place of the book of Judges; the carrying away of
the ten Tribes never restored, the captivity of the rest, the seven Churches of
Asia, the destruction of the Jews by the Romans called the abomination of
desolation standing in the holy place, Dan. 9.27. Matthew. 24.15.
and sundry others: all which assure us of the truth of this point. Let us
apply this to our selves, and reason as the Apostle teaches, Romans 11.20.21.
If God spared not the natural branches, take heed, least he also spare not
thee: and if the branches were broken off through unbeleefe, let not us be
highminded, but fear. We hear the threatenings of God denounced, and his
fearful judgments published and pronounced by his faithful servants, but
what repentance, what amendment follows? May we not say with the Prophet, I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, Ier. 8.6.7.
no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one
turn to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle, etc. And is it not
so in our times, nay rather is it not worse? We are so far from repentance
and turning to God, that the Lord seems in his just judgment to have given
us over and forsaken us, and to have blinded our eyes, to have stopped our
ears, and to have hardened our hearts, least we should see with our eyes, and
hear with our ears, and understand with our hearts, and should return and
be saved. Sometimes he does take away his word utterly, and he threatens it
as a grievous judgment unto the Jews, Matthew. 21.43.
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof: and we are assured of the accomplishing thereof, Romans
11.12.
because the fall of them was the rising of the world, and the diminishing of
them, the riches of the Gentiles. Sometimes, he will have it to remain and
continue among a people, for the farther hardening of their hearts, and the
increasing of their just judgment and condemnation. This is a secret
judgment, and therefore more sharp and greevous than the former, as Esa. 6.
Make the heart of this people fat, Esaias 6.10.
as they had fatted and fleshed themselves in sin, and even glutted
themselves in iniquity: make their ears heavy, as they had stopped and stuffed
them with vanity, that the word could not enter: and shut their eyes, as they
had drowsy and sleepy eyes, and had closed the eyes of their bodies, so God
threatens to shut the eyes of their minds, as men benumbed and past feeling,
least they should see with their eyes, and convert, and be healed.

Lastly, as it is with the threatenings of God, so on the other side it is with
his promises. We have many worthy and precious promises mentioned in the word,
some of this life some of the life to come; some temporal, and some eternal,
but all sorts are conditional, and all sorts are to us as if they were never
made, except we leave our sinful ways, and so turn to the Lord with all our
hearts. Psalm. 130.4. Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 28.3, 4, 5. etc. Matthew. 6.33.
We have the promise of mercy and forgiveness reserved for us under hope: but
to whom is it made? to them that fear him and love him. We have the promise
of earthly blessings to be ministered unto us, Deuteronomy. 28.3.4. etc. but to whom?
To such as first seek the kingdom of God, and to none others. We are ready to
lay hold on the promise, but we forget the condition, like hirelings that
regard the wages more than the work. There is a promise to hear our prayers
and to save us: but to whom is it made? Not to the profane and to
unbeleevers, Ioh. 9.31. Psalm. 66.18.
for God hears not sinners; and if we regard wickedness in our hearts, the
Lord will not hear us, as we shall show afterward. This admonishes us of two
things. One that we despair not, nor distrust the mercies of God toward us in
earthly things or in spiritual, transitory or eternal, in things of this life
or the life to come; we have comfort and strong consolation, when we are truly
and unfainedly turned to God, Psalm. 37.25. Heb. 13.5.6. The other, that we
bless not our selves in our wickedness, adding drunkenness unto thirst, as
the manner is, promising unto our selves peace when we are at war and open
defiance with God. It may be said to such as Iehu answered unto Iehoram, 2
King 9.22. Esa. 57.20.21.
what have thou to do with peace? What peace so long as the whoredoms of thy
mother Iezabel and her witchcrafts are so many? and Esa. 57. The wicked are
like the troubled sea, when it can not rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt: Iussus fuit pradicare aliquid amplius quam hic dicitur. collego ex cap. 4
2. Io. Drusij Lection. in cap. 1. Io^ae.
there is no peace says my God to the wicked.

Nineveh shall be overthrown. That is, the City and the Citizens, young and
old, rich and poor, one and other. This is the sum and effect of Ionahs
Sermon. We may not imagine that he cried nothing else, or spoke no more than
is here expressed. Iussus fuit pradicare aliquid amplius quam hic dicitur.
colligo ex cap. 1.4.2. Io. Drusiij Lection. in cap. 1. Iona. Strabo. lib. 5.
Geograph. Dio. Siculus. lib. 3. cap. 1. Herod, in Euterpe.
For no doubt the Prophet lifted up his voice as a Trumpet, and showed them
their sins and transgressions, as the Lord had before showed unto him, that
their wickedness was come before his face, Chap. 1.2. This was a great and
wealthy city seated by the river Tygris, famous for the compass of it, and
the tops and towers where with it flourished, as sundry histories do make
mention, and yet it was not privileged from the judgments of God. This
teaches, that the sins of a nation, or people, or kingdom, when they are
grown to an hight both in the manner and measure, When sins grow general,
the judgments are general.
When sins are general and overspread a kingdom, as a Leprosy does the
body, then Gods judgments also are general: See this Genesis 6.5.7. and
18.20.21. and 19.24. Deuteronomy. 9.4.5. For the wickedness of the nations, the Lord
did drive them out from before thee: and 2. Samu. 24.15. 2 King.
21.12.13.14.15. Hos. 4.1.2.3.

The reasons. filled up the measure of the one, God may fill up the measure of
the other, Genesis 15.16.

Use 1. Seeing this is true, that God will bring desolation upon a land for
sin, then have we cause to fear, that the day of our desolation and of our
mourning is not far off. For seeing it has been proved, that we are grown
to the hight of wickedness, both in the manner by breaking all the bounds that
God has set to keep us, and also in the measure by adding sin unto sin:
then certainly in the next place what can be expected, but that our land
should mourn, and destruction come upon us, Hos. 4.1.2.
as pain upon a woman in travail? because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the Land, but by swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery they break out, and blood touches blood.
And if God destroy his own people and other nations, and root them out for
the same sins that sway and swarm among us, filling all places, and
abounding in all persons every where; what can we look for, but that we
having the same weight of sins, should also have the same weight of
judgment? God has made us to drink of as bitter judgments as ever any
nation did, only this remains, that as yet we have not drunk the dregs,
we have not yet tasted the cup of utter desolation and destruction. Now if God
have gone thus far with us, and our sins are heaped up to a full measure
pressed down and running over; why should not we fear to drink of utter
desolation, as well as any other, seeing the same sins are to be found among
us? So then we see, that the day of Gods visitation cannot be far off by his
course of Justice; and certainly it is the nearer, because all fear is so
far from us, and the land so full of security, which being added to our
former sins, will be a great means to hasten his judgments.

Secondly, and desolation and mourning upon it. It is not simply such as sin,
for there is no man that sins not daily; but such as commit sin with an
high hand, breaking all the bounds and banks that God has set unto them,
continuing in sin, and adding one sin to another. These certainly are they
that pull down destruction upon a land. It is true such persons are ready to
accuse the Ministers of God and the faithful of the land, as Jeremy was
charged to weaken the land and to hasten the desolation thereof, and to be the
troublers of the state: howbeit they may answer these as Elijah did Ahab, 1
King. 18.18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord. Is the physician the troubler of the
patient, or the disease that is within him? Is the law the cause of strife and
contention, or the malice and envy and emulation that is in men? Is the
watchman the cause of the approach of the enemy? or the armor and munition and
fortifications, the weakening of a City? No doubtless, these strengthen the
same and serve to keep him out. The Ministers of God are the physicians of the
soul to cure the diseases thereof: and the horsemen and Charets of Israel to
defend it, 2 King. 2.12. and 13.14.
and the word is the means to beat down sin, which weakneth and wastes
the land till it come to destruction.

Lastly, enemy that a State can have, that follows sin with greediness,
and multiplieth one iniquity upon another. The way therefore to prevent such
judgments is to break off our sins by true repentance; which turn upside
down kingdoms, Cities, Families, private houses, and particular persons. We
wish to have our Cities flourish, and our families prosper, and our children
to continue our names and memories after our departure: but what avails all
this, unless we set our selves to work holiness and righteousness? This is
the only way to keep our State, our Cities, our towns, our villages, our
families, and our children from mourning and misery, and to prevent the
desolation and final destruction of them. To conclude, let no man bless
himself, because wickedness overspreadeth the land, as water does the sea;
neither think that we may with more safety and security commit sin, because
the land is generally wicked: but let every soul and sinner repent him of his
sins, and not harden his heart, because of the wickedness of the times.

5. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on
sackcloth from the greatest of them, even to the least of them.

Hitherto of the preaching of Jonah: now follows the effect thereof: wherein
consider two things, both what the Ninevites did, and what God himself did.

The actions of the Ninevites concerning The people King of Nineveh.


The actions of the people are Their faith Fruits of faith.


The actions of the King are set down His example Verse 6. His proclamation,
7.8.


His proclamation is published: confirmed.


The publishing and proclaiming thereof instructs, What they must not do.
What they must do.


The actions of God what he did He saw their works that they turned. Verse 10.
He repented of the evil threatened. Verse 10.


The beginning of their conversion stood in this, that they believed the word
of God: And this helped and furthered to stir up faith in them, that they
considered they had to do with God himself, and not with the Prophet only.
Wherein consider, 2 King. 14.6.
that albeit he was sent to them with heavy tidings, as the Prophet said to
the wife of Jeroboam, Act. 7.27.
yet they did not thrust him away from them as the Israelite did Moses, Act.
7.27. they did not stretch forth their hand, saying, lay hold on him, as
Jeroboam did to the man of God, 1 King. 13.4. they did not mock him and misuse
him, as the jews did the Prophets, 2 Chro. 36.16. they did not account him a
mad fellow for his strange message, Act. 26.24.
as the Captains did one of the Children of the Prophets, 2 King. 9.11. they
did not wax wroth, and put him in a prison house, as men in a rage, as Asa
dealt with Hanani the Seer, 2 Chro, 16.10. and then bid them feed him with the
bread of affliction, and with the water of affliction, as Ahab gave charge to
the Governor of the City concerning Micaiah, 1 King 22.27. They did not put him
to death and stone him with stones, as they dealt with Zechariah at the
commandment of the King, 2 Chro. 24.31. they did not suggest to the King,
Jonah has conspired against thee in the midst of the City, the land is not
able to bear all his words; or say unto him, O thou Seer, go, fly thee away
into the Land of Judah, and there eat bread and prophecy there, but prophecy
not any more at Nineveh, for it is the house of the kingdom, as Amaziah said to
Amos, Amo. 7.10.12. Neither did they put him in the stocks, and smite him on
the mouth with the fist, as Pashur did Jeremy, and the standers by, did Paul,
Ier. 20.2. Act. 23.2. Neither did they apprehend him and throw him into a
dungeon, or accuse him, saying, This man is worthy to die, for he has
prophesied against this City, all the words that ye have heard, as the Priests
and false Prophets pleaded against Jeremy at an other time, Ier. 26.11. neither
did they drive him out of their coasts, and thrust him out of their City, as
the people of Nazareth dealt with Christ, Luke 4.29. and the Gadarens when they
had lost their Swine, Math. 8.34. Neither did they stop their ears, and gnash
on him with their teeth, and run upon him with one accord, as they served
Stephen Act. 7.54.57. Neither did they beat him; or charge and command him that
he should speak no more in the name of the Lord his God, and then let him go;
as they dealt with Peter and the other Apostles Act. 5.40. but they heard him
attentively, patiently, and readily: they accounted him not as a troubler of
the state, as the filth of the world, 1 Cor. 4.13.
and as the offscouring of all things, but they received his words as the
oracles of God, they persuaded themselves that he was sent unto them of God,
and constantly believed that those things would undoubtedly come to pass which
he had spoken. Of this faith, what it was, see more afterward, verse. 9. This
threatening for the certainty of it, is utttered in the time present: for in the
original it is word for word, is overthrown, and therefore the destruction
being so near and so certain, it was high time for them to look about them.

We learn from hence that the word preached is the ordinary means ordained of
God to work in us faith, The word preached is the instrument of faith.
as Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 15.1.2. Iam. 1.18. Examples hereof are plentiful to be
found in the Acts of the Apostles after the hearing of the word; they were
pricked in their hearts and said, What shall we do? Act. 2.37. they received
his word gladly, and were baptized, verse. 41. many of them which heard the word
believed Chap. 4.4. Cornelius is directed to Peter, who should tell him words,
whereby he and all his house should be saved, Act. 11.14. The Gentiles were
glad when they heard the word, and as many as were ordained to eternal life
believed, chap. 13.48. the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended
unto the things which were spoken of Paul, chap. 16.14. some believed and clave
unto him, chap. 17.4.12.34. and 18 9.10. The Soldiers, the Publicanes, and the
people that came out to hear the preaching of John were converted and said,
Master what shall we do? Luke 3.10.12.14.


The reasons: Cor. 1.21. If he had ordained other means, Mat. 2.7.
instruction cannot be without such as instruct us in the faith, and seek the
law at their mouths, Mal. 2.7. Thirdly, to this end and purpose God gave gifts
to men, and called them, to bear his word to his people, Ephesians. 4.11.12. the
Priestslips must preserve knowledge, Mal. 2. Lastly, our first parents were
turned from God, and drawn to unbeleefe, by hearing the voice of the old
Serpent the devil: it is therefore convenient, that the elect, by hearing the
voice of God, should be converted to the faith and return to him that calls.

Obj. 1. If this be so, and be saved? Abraham; as he gave faith to Rahab the
harlot by hearing of his works, not of his word, Ios. 2. For the holy Ghost
that teaches by inspiration supplieth the want of outward means by an inward
motion in their hearts: So that albeit they cannot have knowledge, nor
salvation by the hearing of faith, yet they may have them by an inward work
supplying the defect of the outward senses.

Secondly, These. 3.10. Math. 24.15. We must therefore answer this Objection
as the former. For deaf men and children are in this point alike, God
supplying their wantes, so that all of them that are elect are taught inwardly,
and engraffed into Christ for salvation effectually, as it is said of John the
Baptist, He shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his mothers womb.
Luke 1.15. and thus as the Spirit supplieth the want of Baptism, in like manner
it does the want of faith.

But cannot God save without preaching? to reason what he can do: for then he
tieth us to the word, and we may be well assured he will save us no otherwise.
He can preserve life without meat, as we see in Moses and Elias: but when we
have plenty of food at hand, and yet refuse to eat, we tempt God and shorten
our days, and must needs perish without using the means. As he fed Israel
with Manna in the wilderness, where they had neither seed time nor harvest:
But when once they came into the land of Canaan, a land flowing with milk and
honey, Josh. 5.12.
then the Manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of
the land, neither had they it any more, but they did eat of the fruit of the
land of Canaan: So in the times of the ruins of the Church, and desolations of
Sion, when the word is precious, he gives it food which the world knows not
of, and feeds as it were with hidden Manna, and sets up a light in their
hearts, to guide their paths in the way of peace, as it were in the darkness
of the world: but when he has sent a plentiful harvest and laborers to
gather in the corn, and when he has set up a candle upon the candlestick to
give light to all that are in the house, woe unto them that despise the
provision he has provided for them, and shut their eyes in the clear light of
the Gospel, and so sit in the shadow of death: these do no better than
murder their own souls. For they tempt God, who have the word and will not
hear it, and make a needless trial of his absolute power what in himself he
is able to do. God could have taught the Eunuch without the ministry of
Philip, Act. 8.26. and 10.4.5.
as he could have instructed Cornelius by the Angel that appeared unto him; but
the Angel directed him to Peter; to teach us that it is his Ordinance we should
submit our selves unto it, if we would attain to salvation, for that is the
wisdom of God, unless we account our selves wiser than God, and know a
nearer way to the kingdom of heaven than he has showed us. But let such as
follow their own way take heed they never come there, and so in the end,
while they profess themselves wise, prove themselves to be stark fools.

Use. Psalm. 58.5.
and will not hearken to the voice of Charmers, charming never so wisely; and
withdraw themselves from our Church Assemblies, and so forsake their own
mercy. To these we may join the cursed crew of damnable Atheists, who bind
themselves in a league of infidelity, and bar themselves of the means of
faith and salvation; let them fear, least one day they roar in hell, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; and their Elysian fields prove hellish
flames. This is Gods deep judgment upon them to revenge the contempt of his
holy word: and for this cause he sends them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie, 2 These. 2.11.12.
that they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Both those sorts refuse to join with us in the service of
God, in the word, in prayers, and in the Sacraments. Such may be compelled by
the magistrate to the exercises of religion. Recusansie and rebellion came in
together.
And the rather, because Recusancy came in with treachery and Rebellion. For
until treason began to be plotted, called to this day the rebellion in the
North, and the Bull of Pius Quintus was published, recusancy was not practiced,
nor the name heard of: but as they began together, so they have grown up and
continued together: and I am persuaded, so long as the one remains, the other
will not be forgotten. This is the sottishnes that is found in that Synagogue,
which has evermore hatched rebellion in her bosom, and showed her self an
enemy to princes and their Scepters. Hence it is, that ignorance is made the
mother of devotion. Hence it is, that Images are made laymens books: But God
has appointed his Church to be instructed in the faith, not by looking upon an
image, Non oculus spectaculo, sed animus verb^ pascendu^ est, Lactant.
but by hearing his own ordinance; not by feeding the eye with Pictures, but
the heart with the Preaching of his word. Secondly, it condemns the corrupt
practice of the Separation, who deny to our Church the name of a true Church,
and Ministers thereof to be lawful Ministers: and as they teach that our
Church is false and Antichristian, so they charge us to be false, Idolatrous,
and Antichristian ministers, no better than the Priests of Baal. These are
they that under color of zeal are revolted from us, which say, stand by thy
self, come not near to me, Esaias. 65.5.
for I am hol^e^ than thou. But I would ask the Question of them: In what
Church they had faith wrought in them? and by what Ministers, as it were by
spiritual fathers, they were begotten again to a lively hope of the heavenly
inheritance? If there be any faith or grace in any of them, as I trust there is
in many of them, howsoever they judge uncharitably of us, where had they it? or
how obtained they it, but by the Ministry of the Church of England? So that we
are a true Church, and have true ministers, even our enemies being judges. I
may therefore demand of these, as our Savior did of the chief Priests, Math.
21.25.
the baptism, of John whence is it? From heaven, or is it of men; Is our
ministry of God, or is it of men? For the hearer must confess his treacher to
be sent of God, if his teaching beget faith and repentance in him; and praise
the name of God for it: and acknowledge the blessing of God upon his labors to
be an infallible token of his lawful calling, Ier. 23.21.22. Mal. 2.46. 2 Cor.
3.1.2. On the other side, God does not convert men to himself, or establish
them in grace by false and Antichristian Ministers and means. The holy martyrs
were members of our Church.
I would likewise ask the Question of the holy Martyrs of our Church, which
accounted not their own lives precious unto them, but laid them down for the
truths sake: are these martyrs of God, or of the Devil? were they members of a
true Church, or of a false? and were they instructed in the faith by Christian
ministers, or by Antichristian? nay doubtless, they were not ashamed to
profess themselves children of our Churches, and reverenced our ministers as
their spiritual fathers, and would have accounted it no small blessing, if they
might have been suffered to hear them. Thirdly, they are reproved, who think
that above all other things the preaching of the word may best be spared, and
that the office of the Ministers is least of all useful and necessary. But is
faith necessary? is repentance of any use? is salvation out of request? If
these be gifts absolutely necessary, then must the preaching of the truth and
the publishing of the Gospel be necessary also, without which they cannot be
attained of us. Christ Jesus is the greatest gift under Heaven: after him, the
ministry of the word is the highest benefit, whereby we come to know Christ
and him crucified: I say it is the greatest benefit which God has given to the
Sons of men, Ephesians. 4.12.
Ephesians. 4. for the gathering together of the Saints, and the edification of the
Church. Whosoever therefore despises the preaching of the Word, 1 Thessalonians 4.8.
despises not man, but God, and is guilty of his own condemnation. For as our
bodies cannot live without food, so our souls prosper not without the word.
Lastly, it reproves all drowsy and careless hearers, that are a sleep when
they should hear; these exclude and shut out faith that it should not enter.
But how should God open our hearts, when we will not keep open our ears? or
how should he hear our prayers, when we will not hear his Fastours? Is it not
all one altogether to be absent, and to be thus present?

Secondly, left to recover wandering sinners, which is the hearing of the word,
and thereby to come to salvation. Secondly, it is a special blessing to live
in such places and among such people, where the word is taught, and where they
may be partakers of hearing. Happy are they that hearken to the saving doctrine
of the Gospel with a desire to understand it, and care to obey it. But woeful
and fearful is their estate that live in such barraine places, where the
dearth of the word pineth away the soul; we may say of them in deed and in
truth, Number. 13.32.
They are lands that eat up the inhabitants, thereof: and in that day shall
the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst. Thirdly it teaches, that the
sense of hearing is a great and necessary blessing of God, and therefore fitly
called the sense of understanding and of believing. True it is, God can work
without, and no doubt he does: true it is also that our other senses are good
helps of many notable things, especially the eyes are special furtherers of
knowledge. God has two books whereby he teaches us, and wherein we read his
marvelous wisdom; the one, Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.19.20 1 Cor. 1.21.
the great book of his Creatures, wherein we see his eternal power and
godhead, and learn to give him the glory: the other, is his written word
inspired of God; and i^ profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
and for instruction, in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. Fourthly, where the
word is not taught according to the Ordinance of God, there ordinarily sinners
are not converted to God. For there is no other ordinary means under heaven to
convert sinners, and to work faith in us, than the Ministry of the word. How
then can we learn what true faith and true repentance is, without the word?
Without which we must perish and be condemned. Hence it is, that Solomon says,
Where vision fail^th, Pro. 29.18.
the people perish. Behold therefore the misery of the people, who are as sheep
dispersed and scattered without a Shepherd, and without such leaders as may
show them the good and right way wherein they should walk, and so come to the
kingdom of heaven. Fifthly, all such as through negligence, carelessness,
contempt, and wilfulness refuse the hearing of the word, do cast from them
the means of their salvation, and forsake their own mercies; nay, they
renounce faith and turning to God, and account themselves unworthy of eternal
life. Such were those Jews which are spoken of, Act. 13. who resisted the
word, Act. 13.46.
railed at it, and spoke against those things that were spoken, contradicting
them and blaspheming, and thereby renouncing their part in Christ Jesus. Such
are many careless and dissolute persons, among us, little better than
Atheists, who are never touched with any love of the word, or desire of it, but
cast it behind their back, and set it after all the vanity and pleasures of
this life.

Lastly, Mar. 4.24. Luke 8.18.
it is our duty to take heed how we hear. For it stands us upon to regard
not only what we hear, but how we hear, and to look to the manner as well
as to the matter. For we may perish as well by not hearing aright, as by
hearing that which is not right: and consider that it is not enough to hear
the truth, but we must hear truly. That we may attain to this, we must
perform these several duties, to attend unto it, to mark it, to understand
it, to hold it fast, and lastly to apply it.

The first point required of us, The first duty of hearers.
is, that we attend and hearken unto it diligently. It is not sufficient to
hear. It is one thing to hear, but harkening and giving ear is another
thing. To hear requires no more but the ears of the body: to hearken
requires the ears of the mind. Hence it is, that Christ says Math. 13. He
that has ears to hear, Math. 13.9.
let him hear. Where he shows, that there is a double hearing, outward and
inward, or else he would never charge and admonish these that had ears to
hear and came to the house of God to hear, that they should be careful to
hear: showing that a man may hear, and yet if he take not heed be as a deaf
man, and do no more good than a deaf man that hears nothing; it is all one
as if he wanted ears, or were as a stock or a stone, nay it had been better
he had never heard at all, because by his hearing he heapeth up the greater
judgment and the deeper condemnation. Therefore Solomon says, Proverb. Pro.
4.20. and 8.32.34.
4. My son attend to my words, incline thine ears unto my sayings: and Chap.
8. Hearken unto me, blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my
gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. This is called the inclining of the
ear to wisdom, Pro. 2.2. Let it not then be with us as with the multitude
and the greatest sort, who suppose it to be sufficient to hear, though they do
no more; but it is required of us to listen and give ear, nay both our ears
to God. Let it be with us in performing this duty as it is with worldly minded
men, when they hear of some good bargain, or matter of gain and profit, they
raise and rouse up themselves instantly, and lift up their ears, they hearken
very diligently and carefully. Or let us deal as such persons do, who being
present and hearing some what spoken, do think that others speak of them: O
how will they bow forward and incline their bodies, how will they put their
ears near and close to them, to hear (if it be possible) what they say; yea
sometimes would give much to know what they speak. Thus let us do, we should
never hear the word, but think the Minister speaks not only to us, but of
us, and say to our own hearts, This is a word concerning me: this is for my
good and profit, this will bring to me the greatest gain: I must therefore
incline mine ear, attentively, and listen unto it duly and diligently. If any
ask what is the reason, and whence it comes, that one has an hearing ear,
and another has a dull and deaf care; the holy Scripture tells us and
testifies, Psalm. 40.6.
Psalm. 40. Sacrifice and offering thou did not require, mine ears have thou
opened. This is the eare-marke whereby we are known to be in the number of the
sheep of Christ, Ioh. 10. No man can make and frame to himself such
sanctified ears by his own wit and industry, but they must be prepared and
given to us of the Lord, and to him we must return the praise and glory.

The second duty is to mark and regard what we hear. The second duty of
hearers.
How many are there that hear and attend, yet never once mark nor regard any
thing what has been spoken and delivered: for if they did, they could not be
so ignorant and blind as they are. Life and death is set before us: life to
our salvation, if it be embraced; death to our condemnation, if it be rejected;
but the most sort regard neither the one nor the other. Hence it is, that our
Savior instructing his Disciples, warns them, that whosoever reads must
consider what he reads, Math. 24 15.
Math. 24. The palpable ignorance that abides in our assemblies springs from
this fountain, that we never weigh with our selves what we have heard, neither
call our selves to an account at any time what we have learned.

The third duty is to understand what we have heard. The third duty of hearers.
For to hear and not to understand is as if we heard not at all, or as if we
heard a strange language. Hence it is, that our Savior after his teaching
examineth his Disciples what they had learned and how they had profited, Math.
13.51.
Have ye understood all these things? Act 8.30.
they said unto him, yea Lord. So Philip said to the Eunuch, Understand thou
what thou read? 1 Cor. 14.9.11.13.14.
showing thereby, that reading and hearing, and praying, or whatsoever we do
without knowledge and understanding, is nothing worth, it is as sounding brass
or as a tinkling Cimball. And in the description of the good and saving
hearers, it is said, they hear the word and understand it, and bear fruit: so
that they cannot bring forth fruit without understanding the word. So then
right hearers are understanding hearers. How many have we that are hearers? but
how few, that we can truly say of them, they be understanding hearers? These
profit nothing, always learning, and never attaining to any sound knowledge.

The fourth duty, is to hold fast what we have heard, The fourth duty of
hearers. Pro. 2.1. 2 King. 7.8.
marked, and understood, we must lay it, nay lock it up closely and safely in
the heart as in a closet, as Pro. 2. receive my words, and hide my
Commandments within thee; we must do as the Lepers did, when they had silver
and gold and much treasure, they went and hid it, and carried it away. The word
of God is a precious treasure, the merchandise thereof is better than silver,
and the gain thereof is better than fine gold, We should therefore both hold
it fast, and hide it safe. The Apostle exhorts us, Heb. 2.1.
that we ought to give the more diligent heed to the things which we have
heard, least at any time we should let them slip from us: Revel. 3.11.
and Revel. 3.11. hold fast that which thou have, till I come, that no man take
thy crown from thee. We must commit good instructions to memory. We use not to
lay up Jewels and precious stones loosely and carelessly abroad; had we rich
treasure, we would not lay it up negligently, but keep it under lock and key:
We should not let holy and heavenly instructions slip out of our mind and
memory, but hold them fast and firm in our remembrance. This reproves such as
hear the word, but it is with such dull, deaf, and drousie ears, that it is
no sooner in at the one ear, but by and by it is out at the other. Thus it
comes to pass, that through the negligence of the hearer, the labor and
doctrine of the speaker is utterly lost. The fifth duty of the hearers.


The last duty is to apply to our selves what we have heard, a notable means
to strengthen memory, and to hold fast that which is fading and falling away.
For as a medicine, which is wholesome and healthful in it self, profits not
the sick persons that does despise and reject it, and not apply it to himself:
so the hearing of the word, and receiving of the Sacraments, are all without
fruit, if we do not apply them to our selves, and by application make them our
own. All hearing is no better than Hypocrisy without this. For it is with us
as it is at a feast: So much is ours as we receive and digest, it skilleth not
what others do, we are no way benefitted or bettered by it: So we have small
profit by that which others hear, except we apply it to our own souls. What
good has the wounded man that has a Sovereign salve and plaster, when he
lays it not unto the sore?

And proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from etc.) Hitherto of the faith
of the Ninevites: Now of their repentance, expressed by two signs of it,
proclaiming a fast, and putting on sackcloath, to make themselves thereby the
fitter to pray and entreat the Lord to spare them, and to show mercy and
compassion upon them. They come not to God with full bellies, or with meat in
their mouths, or in gay and gorgeous apparel, but in the commonest and
coursest which they had. These are the witnesses of their sorrow, yea helps
and occasions, and furtherances to more acceptable works, than they are of
themselves. For considered in themselves and in their own natures, they are
little worth, seeing bodily exercise profits little, 1 Timothy 4.8.
1 Timothy 4. But as we see that which is blunt in it self and not able to cut,
Horat. d^ art poet.
may not withstanding sharpen other things; so fasting in it self no better
than feasting, and sackcloath than silk and costly apparel, may nevertheless
further holy duties and quicken us in the persormance of them with greater
zeal. The Prophet therefore could not complain of these Ninevites, as our
Savior did of the Jews, Luke 7.32.
We have mourned to you, and ye have not wept.

Let us now come to the meaning of the words Fasting imports an abstaining
not only from meat and drink and sleep, so far as humane infirmity will
suffer, but from labor and the works of our callings, most of all from
delights, pleasures, plays, pastimes, recreations, idleness, haunting of
tippling houses, surfeiting and drunkenness, the common sins of the Land,
which have drawn down the hot wrath and heavy displeasure of Almighty God
upon us.

2. They Proclaim it, That is, they leave it not indifferent and arbitrary to
the will and pleasure and discretion of every person to do what they best
fansied, but they are bound by a Law and decree to perform it and undergo it.
For doubtless were every man left at his own liberty, whether he would serve
the Lord or not, or when to serve him, O what a decay in religion should we
find in the world in a short time! Yea touching the Lords day, though it be but
one for seven, Luke 14.23.
and God have left the rest to our selves or our lawful labors, yet if no man
should be compelled to the service of God, should we find any knowledge of God
in the land, or any faith in Christ? So backward we are in matters of our own
salvation, to which a man would think we should be so forward, as we should
need no spur of exhortation.

3. They put on sackcloth; It may be it was not sackcloth in his proper kind,
which is commonly so called, which they could not possibly in such plenty and
abundance supply themselves withal, at such a sudden, but their ordinary and
meanest attire, so that were it, that in civility and modesty they might, they
would have stripped themselves to the bare skin, thereby acknowledging and
confessing themselves unworthy of any creature to cover their nakedness. They
had sinned through their wealth and superfluity in both these, in pride and
excess. The Pampering up of back and belly are as the two daughters of the
horseleech that suck the very blood of the land, and have wasted the substance
and estates of many persons, and consumed great families. Both these lay aside
and cast away from them, yea they punish and revenge themselves of their
surfeiting and drunkenness by fasting, professing themselves unworthy to taste
one bit of bread or to drink one drop of water: and of their pride and excess
in apparel, by putting on sack cloth, acknowledging themselves unworthy to
wear any thing upon them. It is required of us to be revenged of our sins.
This the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor. 7.10.11. Godly sorrow works repentance to
salvation not to be repented of. Behold what revenge this has wrought in you.
This will show what affection we bear to our sins, when we daily strive to
mortify the deeds of the flesh. Before repentance they are so dear unto us,
and so beloved of us, that we cannot abide to be reproved of them: but when
true repentance and sorrow for sin comes, then we begin to brook and
digest not only reproof of them from others, but vengeance also upon them
from our selves: And when once we can be avenged of them, it is a plain token
we account them our utter enemies. For no man desires revenge but upon him
whom he supposes and accounts his enemy: 1 Samuel 24.19.
and no man finds his enemy, that will let him go well away. 1 King. 3, 26.
Solomon knew the right mother 1 King. 3. by her tender heart and yerning
bowels, which could not endure to see the child divided by the sword: so surely
when we cannot abide the sword of revenge to wound and slay our sins, we have
just cause to suspect our repentance, and that as yet we love our sins too
well, when we are loath to have our enemy wounded. This revenge the Apostle
calls the beating down of the body, 1 Cor. 9.27.
or the keeping it under and bringing it into subjection; and the offering up
our bodies as sacrifices to God. Romans 12.1.
Our sins must be dealt with all, as Sarah dealt with Hagar, hardly and
roughly, that she fled from her face: Genesis 16.6.
so we must handle them that they may depart from us; we must claspe them and
crush them hard, as men do nettles and other noisome plants, that they do not
sting us. But if we pamper them and use them delicately, 2 Samuel 18.5.
as David bade Ioab entreat the young man Absalom gently for his sake, they
will soon over-master us, and get the upper hand of us.

Let us make use of this point. Flagellantes; This they call penance, howbeit
it is no better than a mocke-repentance; and this revenge is a will worship,
Esaias. 1.12.
the which God never accepted: but will say unto them, Who required these
things at your hands? Ephesians. 5.29.
The Apostle teaches that no man yet never ha^ed his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church: 1 King. 18.28
none ever did the contrary, that we read of, but only the Priests of Baal,
who cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancers till the blood
gushed out upon them; and the man possessed and thereby after a sort
distracted, Mark. 5.5.
who lived in the mountains and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself
with stones. They then wander wide out of the right way, and are ignorant what
the true revenge is, neither let them look for any reward at the hands of God,
who bring sorrow upon themselves, and are executioners or tormenters of
themselves: Or what commendation of patience can arise to them, that afflict
themselves, and suffer willingly from their own hands?

Secondly, let us see wherein this revenge stands, which most properly we may
call our iniquity above all the rest, Psalm. 18.23.
and which is as the right eye or the right hand: the right eye in respect of
pleasure, the right hand in respect of profit. This right hand, and right eye
must be cut off and pulled out. Thus did Zacheus when he was converted, Luke
19. his gainful and profitable sins of wrong and oppression, being his
master sins, he shakes off and renounceth, Luke 19.8.
Behold Lord, the half of my goods, I give to the poor, and if I have taken
away any thing-from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold. This
taking of revenge was the counsel that Daniel gave to Nebucadnezzar, Dan. 4.27.
to break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquity by showing mercy
to the poor. The maine sin of Paul was persecution and wasting of the
Church: but lo, how he revenged the flesh after his Conversion; as fast as he
had destroyed and plucked down, so fast he builded up again even with both
his hands, and labored more abundantby than all the rest; yea he never
traveiled so far to persecute the faithful, but he took a thousand times
more pains to preach the faith, Act. 9. Romans 15.19.
Gal. 1.23. 1 Cor. 15.10. The great labors which he took in planting
Churches, in perils, in watchings, in weariness, 2 Cor. 11.26.27.
in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness, were nothing else, but his
revenge upon the flesh, for the pains he had taken before in persecuting.

Secondly, David in his adultery defiled the mariage-bed; in his repentance he
washed his bed with tears, Psalm. 6.6.
yea all night long he made it to swim. So the Ephesians, that had used curious
arts, when once they believed, came and confessed and showed their deeds; for
they made a sacrifice to the Lord of their Conjuring books of exceeding value,
Act. 19.19.
esteemed to be worth fifty thousand pieces of silver. And as the Israelites
had sinned grievously in offering their earings of gold to make therewith a
Calfe; so repenting of their Idolatry, Exodus 35.22.
they offered likewise gold and earings to the Tabernacle willingly, whose
heart made them willing to bring an offering to the Lord, until there was more
then enough, Exodus 36.5.

Thirdly, when with the same members and instruments of our bodies, Zachariah
the Priest sinned with his mouth in giving God the lie, whiles he believed not
the Angel sent unto him, that God would give him a son: but so soon as he
could speak (for he was stricken dumb) he glorified God with his mouth and
praised his name, Luke 1. Luke 1.64.
So the woman which is thought to have abused her eyes, her hair, his lips
to wantonness and uncleanness (for she was a greevous sinner) when she
repented, she revenged her self upon the flesh, in showing her love to Christ;
she ceased not to kiss his feet, to wash them with the tears of her eyes, and
to wipe them with the hairs of her head. O how happy were it for such, as have
used their tongues to deceit, whose mouths have been full of cursing and
blasphemy, and their throat an open sepulcher, if they would circumcise their
lips, and make their tongues their glory to glorify the name of God! that
whereas they have cursed bitterly, Ephesians. 4.29.
now they may learn to bless graciously, that our communication may be good
to the use of edifying, and minister grace unto the hearers: And such as have
had feet swift to shed blood, and to carry them to places of vanity and
impiety, of drunkenness and uncleanness, happy were it if they would take
revenge of themselves, and use their feet to carry them into the house of God,
Psalm. 122.^.
and say to the Lord, Our feet shall stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem,
Psalm. 122.2.

Fourthly,

The last point of this revenge is, when we upbraid the flesh and cast it in
the teeth with those afflictions which God sends, as the wages of sin. For
though we may not draw punishments upon our selves to mortify the flesh, yet
when God imposes them upon us for our good, we should make benefit and
advantage thereof, and insult over the flesh, and triumph over it when God
punishes it, rating and checking it as the cause of all our smart: Ah, thou
vile flesh, I may thank thee for all this pains and sorrow, I could not turn
thee, but I hope God will now tame thee: I could not convert thee, but I trust
God will now evert thee and turn thee quite out of doors: thou liftedst up thy
self aloft, but God will bring thee under, thou rebel. Thus we should join
with God, help him to whip our sins harder and oftener by taking his part,
justify him in all his dealings, drive his chasticementes home to our hearts
as the nails to the head, and impute all the causes of our afflictions to our
selves. If we would try our repentance by this revenge, and our revenge by
these few notes, alas where shall we find the repentance that is required among
the greatest number! do we mortify our beloved sins, or are they as bitter
as gall and wormwood unto us? do we turn those things, times, and place
which we have abused to sin, to be matters and witnesses of our repentance?
do we turn those members of our bodies abused to sin, to be instruments of
righteousness and holiness? or do we bridle and restrain our selves from
such things wherein we have offended? No doubtless, these are far from us,
and therefore we from repentance.

A fast, and put on sackcloth.) Thus much generally is to be observed from the
practice of the Ninevites, that revenged themselves of their excess and
superfluity by fasting and sackcloth: now we are to speak of fasting in
particular. But first of all let us set down the doctrine. We learn, Public
faster were always called and sanctified in times of danger.
This is confirmed by sundry precepts, as Levit. 16.29. This shall be a statute
for ever unto you, in the seventh mouth, on the tenth day of the month, ye
shall afflict your souls by a statute for ever. So the Prophet Joel, chap.
2.15.16. Blow the Trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,
gather the people, sanctify the Congregation, assemble the Elders, gather the
Children and those that suck the breast, etc. see how he heapeth sundry
commandments together, binding the Priests, the people, the Congregation, the
Elders, the children, the married, that is, all sorts, high and low, young and
old, one and other. The truth of this farther appears by sundry examples of
such as have gone before us in this practice. Ezra the good Scribe of the Lord,
and Nehemiah the religious governor of the people, fasted and all that were
under their charge, Ezr. 8.21 Neh. 9.1. 2 Chronicles. 20.3
So Iehoshaphat ordained a fast throughout all Judah, when the enemies upon a
sudden had broken into the borders of his kingdom: he knew no way better
how to resist them, and drive them back than this, which he found stronger
than the sword of the mighty: and so shall we find praying and fasting stronger
to withstand the infection and to call the heavy hand of God gone out against
us, and striking down many thousands of us, than all the rules and receites,
the means and medicines which the wisest Physicians can prescribe, if we
perform it aright, Exodus 17.11. 1 Samuel 7.9.10.
as Exodus 17. the sword of Joshua was not so forcible as the prayer of Moses;
for while he held up his hands Israel prevailed, and when he let down his
hands, Amalek prevailed. True it is, good means are neither to be despised nor
neglected, for that were to tempt God, and to strengthen the enemy; howbeit of
themselves they profit little, the greatest power and strength lies in prayer
which sanctifies our fasting.

Now that we may understand the doctrine of fasting aright, What we must do to
understand the doctrine of fasting aright. what a fast is.
and so be directed the better in the practice thereof, let us consider these
five points, what it is, what be the kinds thereof, the parts, the reasons,
and lastly the uses. The first point is, what it is. Fasting is an abstinence
from all meats and drinks, from even to even, commanded of God, to testify
our solemn repentance, and to make our prayers more effectual. I call this an
abstinence from all meats and drinks, as appears plainly in this Chap. Let
neither man nor beast taste any thing, let them not feed nor drink water, 2 Samuel 3.35.
verse. 7. The same speakth David, when he fasted for the murdering of Abner,
who was slain by the sword of Ioab, God do so to me and more also, if I taste
bread or ought else, til the sun be down. Many there are that pretend a
solemn fasting, when indeed they do nothing less: such dissimulation there
is with God and man. Better it were never to keep a fasting, than to observe
such a mock fast: for their fasting is eating and drinking. Let us not fast in
show, and feed in secret; neither make profession of one thing, and practice
another. I add in the description, from even to even, that is, for an whole
day. This we saw in the example of David before, who fasted till the Sun went
down. And 1 Samuel 14.24. they must not eat bread until evening. So the
Israelites having received two great losses, do humble themselves and gather
themselves together into the house of the Lord. They wept, and sat down
before the Lord, Judge. 20.16.
and fasted that day until the evening; and the next day they prevailed
against their enemies. Thus for the death of Saul and Jonathan, and the
slaughter of the people, 2 Samuel 1.12.
they likewise wept and fasted until the evening, 2 Samuel 1. because they were
fallen with the sword. And Joshua, after the discomfiture of Israel by the men
of Ai, rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord, Josh. 7.6.
until the eventide, he and the Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their
heads. Thus we see the time how long we are restrained, to keep as in a mean
between too much and too little. The next point is, that it is commanded of
God. This we saw before; and this makes a difference between humane fastes
(of which we shall speak in the next point) and this that is a Divine
institution. So then fasting is not a will worship, nor devise of man, but an
Ordinance of God. The next point is, that it serves to make profession of our
repentance, and so to be a means to work in us the greater humiliation. Hence
it is, that it is called the humbling of the soul, or an afflicting thereof,
Levit. 23.27.
Numb, 29.7. to seek of him a right way for us, Ezr. 8.21. and it was evermore
joined with prayer, 1 Samuel 7.6. Numb 29.7.
they fasted on that day, and said there, Luke 2.37.
We have sinned against the Lord: and Luke 2. it is said of Anna the
Prophetess, she departed not from the Temple, but served God with fasting and
prayers night and day. This is the life of our fasting, when we make it as the
wing of prayer, whereby more swiftly we make it fly up to heaven and pierce the
clouds, and enter into the presence of God. Therefore the last part of the
description is, that it serves to maks our prayers more earnest and
effectual, as verse. 7. Let neither man nor beast feed nor drink water, but
cry mightily unto God. For as fullness makes us more unfit, dull, heavy,
sleepy, and consequently untoward to every good work: so this abstinence
quickneth our zeal, feeling, faith, and every good work.

So then touching the nature of Fasting, Fasting has the nature of a Sabbath.
from all these points jointly considered, we learn that it has the nature of
a Sabbath, because at such time and seasons we are bound to abstain not only
from meats and drinks, but no less from our ordinary labors, profits, and
pleasures; even such as at other times are lawful, become now unlawful.
Wherefore as the Lord commands to sanctify the Sabbath, so he commands to
sanctify a fast, and threatens that whosoever shall do any work at all
therein, even on that day, Levit. 16.31. and 23.30.31.
shall be cut off from among his people, Levit. 16. Because it shall be a
Sabbath of rest, and we ought to resort at such solemn times to the house of
God, no less than we ought to do on the Sabbath, if not rather more, in
regard of the urging and pressing occasion, Judge. 20. Hereby then falls to
the ground the opinion of such as hold it neither needful nor expedient, that
the word should be preached at such times as the Church assembleth for fasting
and praying. These are not ashamed to affirm, that they have often heard and
read of the exercise of fasting and praying, but never of fasting and
preaching; as if forsooth the time were spent unprofitably that is spent that
way. These men would gladly say somewhat to maintain and countenance their
own idleness. And because the diligence of others makes their negligence to
appear the greater, they open their mouths against them and their practice
who preach the word in season and out of season according to the Commandment
of God and man, and speak all manner of evil of them. The wise Solomon
teaches, Pro. 26.16.
Pro. 26. That the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than seven men that
can render a reason. We ought to use all means whatsoever (and all little
enough, and too little) to stir up our selves to faith and repentance from
dead works: but the preaching of the word is the principal and special
means to work these in us: and what is what is all our fasting without true
repentance? doubtless there is no life in it, and therefore at such times the
word should be taught, to make the rest of the works more lively. Besides, we
have showed, that it has the nature of a Sabbath day. Whatsoever therefore
they were forbidden on the Sabbath, was likewise forbidden on the day of
fasting; and whatsoeven they were then Commanded to do, ought likewise to be
done and practiced on this day. But the Apostle teaches, Act. 15.21.
that Moses has in every City them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogue every Sabbath day. So then, besides that every day of fasting was a
Sabbath day, we see that after Moses was read he was also preached: but he was
read in their assemblies on the days of their fasting, Neh 9.13. there he
shows how they spent that day: one fourth part they read in the book of the
Lord their God, an other fourth part they spent in prayer and confessing their
sins to God, and by all likelihood, the other two parts were spent in
preaching after they had read the Lecture of the Law: which is not expressed,
because he had so lately and largely spoken thereof in the former chapter. And
seeing they spent not the residne of the day idly, but in some holy exercise
together, and neither in reading, nor in praying, how should it be spent but in
preaching and hearing the word of the Lord? Thus Anna served the Lord in the
Temple with prayer and fasting, where without all question was the preaching of
the word, as well as praying and reading. It is a desperate cause that has
nothing to pretend. It is objected, that the preaching of the word at such
times is never expressed, neither urged by Commandment; nor Commended by
example. But we must consider the usual manner of the Scripture, by one part
of the worship of God to understand the whole. For sometimes there is mention
of fasting, but not at all of prayer, Ester. 4. and often elsewhere. What then,
shall we collect and conclude from hence that they prayed not to God, nor once
lifted up their hearts to him? The brute beasts may keep such a fast, and
therefore more must be understood then is named. Esaias. 56.7. Math. 21.13.
So the Temple was called the house of prayer; we never read it called the
house of preaching: and yet it serves no less for the one then for the other.
But these men conceive and imagine, there is some time wherein the preaching of
the word is unseasonable. Lastly if the preaching of the word were used in
times of holy feasting and solemn thanksgiving to be rendered unto God for some
extraordinary blessings or deliverances received as in the Passover, and the
like: why should not the same exercise be much rather taken up, when the times
of holy fasting are sanctified? that as at the one we might be stirred up to
praise God for his mercies, so at the other we might be moved to fear his
judgments ready to fall upo^us.

The second point is the kinds and sorts of fasting. This we must learn, The
several sorts of fasts.
to the end we may know of what fast the Prophet speaks. For all fastes are
not of one nature, neither undertaken for one and the same cause. There is a
fast prescribed by the Physician, to restore health, 1 Samuel 14.24.
Such was the fast commanded by Saul, who had no religious respect therein, but
aimed at this, to spare no time from pursuing his enemies. Such was Paul's fast
and of the rest that were in the ship with him, Act. 27.33.
Act. 27. they had no leisure to take meat in time of the storm and tempest,
every hour fearing shipwreck, and standing in jeopardy of their lives. Luke
21.34.
Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness: Romans 13.13.
and of the Apostle, Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in riotting and
drunkenness, There is an other fast of necessity, which is a forced and
constrained fast, which God often sends as a chasticement when he breaks
the staff of bread, Leuit. 26.26.
Deuteronomy. 28.23.
when he makes the heavens as brass, and the earth as iron, when he
destroys the labors of the husbandmen, when the field is wasted, the corn
blasted, the grass withered, the vines dried, and the land mourueth, Joel, 2.
Because we will not take up a voluntary fast that he would, he forces us to
take up a fast which we would not; because the earth forbeareth her fruits, we
must forbear our food, Aquinat, jeiunium jeiunij
and therefore it is not unfitly called, a fast of a fast. Howbeit even in this
God in judgment remembers mercy. We have heard many complain and cry out in
their necessities, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? Math. 6.31.
and wherewithal shall we be clothed? Nevertheless, we have rather heard what
famine is, then felt it in truth; we know not what this judgment means,
neither have tried what the sharp weapon of necessity brings with it. The
Lord has rather threatened, than executed it; and touched us with his little
finger, than laid his whole hand upon us: and smitten us with the back of the
sword rather than turned the edge toward us. For what, I pray you, have we ever
suffered, in comparison of the judgments of God upon his own people Israel?
as in the days of Ahab when it rained not on the earth by the spa^e of three
years and six months: 1 King. 17.1. Iam. 5.17.
and in the siege of Samaria, when an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces
of silver, and the fourth part of a Kab of Doves doung for five pieces of
silver: 2 King. 6.25.
nay more than all this, when the fruit of the field failed, Levit. 26.29.
Deuteronomy. 28.53. etc.
they did eat the fruit of their own bodies, even the flesh of their sons and
of their daughters, in the straightness wherewith their enemies did distress
them: yea, oftentimes fell out in the shifting and dividing of that loathsome
meat, as Jeremy notes in the Lament. Lam. 4.10. 2 King. 6.28.29. Joseph
debello Iudeor.
The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children, they were
their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. O how gracious and
merciful has God been to us, that we know none of all these things! Nay, we
have been so far from having a woeful and wretched experience of these
things, that more among us have destroyed themselves through surfeiting and
drunkenness and wantonness, than have dyed through want: more have perished by
riot, excess, and superfluity, than through penury and necessity. This comes
to pass through the abuse of our long peace, and the contempt of the Gospel.
The Gospel brings peace, peace brings plenty, plenty breadeth prodigality,
and prodigality brings penury: and therefore Moses charge the Israelites,
when they should enter into goodly cities which they builded not, Deuteronomy.
6.10.11.12.
houses full of all good things which they filled not, wells dug which they
dug not, vineyards and Olive trees which they planted not, then they must
beware least they forget the Lord their God. For if ever we forget God, it is
when we are full, that is, when we have greatest cause to remember him. Besides
the former kinds, there is likewise a fast from sin: this is a spiritual
abstinence, a sacrifice which especially pleases God, consisting in the
holiness of our lives, which we must keep all the days of our lives. Of this
the Prophet speaks, Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, Esaias 58.6, 7. Zach. 7.5.6.
etc.
to let the oppressed go free, to deal thy breed to the hungry, and that thou
hide not thy self from thine own flesh? This fast we must all keep, and that
at all times. Moses, at the publication of the Law; one of Elias, at the
restitution of the Law; another of Christ Jesus our Savior at his inauguration
and entrance into his office. This the Church of Rome after an apish imitation
has taken up: and that which he did once only in all his life, as if they
meant to go beyond him, they make annual or yearly. He abstained from all
meats and drinks, they celebrate a counterfeit fasting, which may better be
called a feasting.

This fasting has two parts: one outward, The parts of fasting both outward
and inward.
the other inward, helped forward by the outward. The outward is called a
bodily exercise, which is an abstinence for a time from the profits and
pleasures of this life, thereby to make us apter and fitter to the inward
virtues. These are either general belonging to all, as abstinence from food
both meat and drink, so far as humane infirmity suffers: provided if we
cannot, that we do it sparingly, privately, without giving offense, and
without pretending a necessity where there is none. Be not deceived, God will
not be mocked. If he enable us to abstain, and we do disable our selves; if
we make show of fasting, and do nothing less, he will find us out, and we
shall bear our condemnation whosoever we be. For better it were not to fast at
all, then thus to dissemble and play the notable hypocrites with God and man. I
leave such therefore to the judgment of God, and the check of their own
conscience. But as we say commonly, necessity has no law, where God inableth
not to bear out this hard exercise, let them in the fear of God take some
short refreshing. For these outward exercises were instituted to make us fitter
to better duties, not to make us unfitter: that the flesh should be tamed, not
killed: Dometur caro, sed non interimatur, Hierony.
above ordinary custom, but not beyond the nature of man. But besides this
abstinence from food, it is as necessary that we abstain from bravery in
apparel, Exodus 33.4. Ester. 5.1. and 4.1. and from the works and labors of
our daily callings, much more therefore from pleasures and pastimes, and from
excessive measure of sleeping, 2 Samuel 12.16. Joel. 1.13. that we may have no
occasions or allurements to rejoice in the flesh, and so to withdraw and
withhold us from the solemn worship of God. We have such among us as will
seem willing and more forward then many of their fellows, and would account
themselves wronged to be accounted contemners of holy things; who
notwithstanding when they should make preparation to so high and holy a work,
are busy about their own works, or, which is all one, about their masters:
and when they should use meditation after praying and preaching ended, they
run every one after the lusts of his own heart. I can learn no otherwise
out of the Law of God, but these may as lawfully follow their labors upon the
Sabbath, as upon the day of fasting: let these look in what School they have
learned farther liberty. Ezod 20.8. Joel. 2.15. Levit. 16.29.30.31.
For the same Lord that says Sanctify the Lords day, says also Sanctify a
fast: he that charge not to do any work on the Sabbath, charge likewise
to do no work at all on the day of fasting: he that has restrained son and
daughter, man servant, maid servant, and the stranger that is within the gates
from labor on the Sabbath, has also forbbidden to every one all manner of
work, whether it be one of your own Country, or a stranger that soiourneth
among you. Finally he that has called the seventh day a Sabbath, has also
entitled the day of Fast a Sabbath of rest by a statute for ever. If then we
be ashamed to follow the works of our hands, and the course of our ordinary
business upon the Lords day, we ought also to be afraid to give up our selves
to the labors of our callings upon our fast day, which ought with no less
religion to be observed then the other. But hereof more afterward. These are
common abstinences belonging to all: there is one proper to the married couple,
that they abstain from the otherwise lawful company one of an other, Heb.
13.4.
and the bed otherwise pronounced to be undefiled. The Prophet enioyneth the
bridegroom to go forth of his Chamber, Joel. 2.16.
and the bride out of her closet; who notwithstanding might justly, if there
were any, challenge the greatest privilege. The wise man teaching, that to
every thing there is a season, Eccl. 3.5.
and a time to every purpose under the heaven, mentions a time to embrace,
and a time to refrain from embracing. And the Apostle prescribes that they
withdraw themselves with mutual consent for a time, 1 Cor. 7.5.
that they may give themselves to fasting and prayer. True it is Solomon says,
Eccl. 4.9.
that two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their
labor: but all this holy time of separation, one is better then two, and he
has a better reward for his labor. It is the Apostles Precept, not to defraud
one an other, Piaefraudes and licita.
but now defrauding is both lawful and laudable. This and all the other
outward observations, howsoever they may seem childish, or at least of small
importance to the natural and carnal man, because the Lord is a Spirit, Ioh.
4.24.
and will be worshipped in spirit and truth; and being in their own nature
indifferent, neither good nor evil, they can make us neither better nor worse.
Nevertheless, The use and benefit of the outward parts.
these outward parts have their singular use and benefit, and that in three
respects: for first, they are the ordinances of God who has commanded them,
and therefore they are not lightly to be esteemed by the judgment of the
senses or outward man, that can go no farther then to the ceremony it self;
but according to the Scripture and institution of God, which teaches that God
will bless his own ordinances, and thereby work his own will, being
undertaken in a lively faith, and in his holy fear. What may seem more simple
and unsufficient to throw down the strong walls of Jericho then the trumpets
of Rams horns, Josh. 6.4, 5.
and the shout of the people with a loud voice? yet because this was Gods own
ordinance, it prevailed. What may seem more weak, then the washing of Naaman
in the waters of Jordan, 2 Ring. 5.12.
to cleanse his Leprosy? were not Abana and Pharphar, the rivers of Damascus as
good? Yet was it Gods appointment to heal him thereby. John 9.6. Exodus 15.25.
2 King. 2.21.
Christ our Savior made spittle and clay to annoint the eyes of the blind,
and bad him go to wash in the poole of Siloam: a man might have thought this
would rather have put out his eyes, then restored his sight; Yet he went, and
washed, and received sight. God oftentimes works by weak means, and
sometimes by contrary, that the glory may not be of men, 2 Cor. 4.7. Exodus
14.28.31. Josh. 6.21. Judge. 7.4. Dan. 3. Ion. 2.
as he conveieth heavenly treasures in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God. So then it is the manner of God to work sometimes
without means, sometimes by weak means, sometimes against means, and
sometimes above means, as pleases him. 1 Cor. 9.25.
and every one that striveth for mastery, though it be to obtain a corruptible
Crown, is temperate in all things, that may disable them to perform the same
with praise and commendation: and shall we think that the children of God, by
abstaining from such things as he has interdicted them, shall not have a
singular fruit and benefit toward the obtaining of an incorruptible crown?
Lastly, the mouths of the enemies are hereby stopped, if there were no other
profit. For they challenge the Gospel to be a doctrine of liberty and
licentiousness in eating and drinking, and that it cannot stand with the
practice of fasting: why then should we not strive to stop the mouths of
such as watch for our halting, and take away all occasions from such as seek
occasions to speak evil of our doctrine and profession?

Hitherto of the outward parts, the inward follow. Romans 14.17.
For the kingdom of God stands not in these outward things, it is not meat
and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: and
therefore except we bring with us more then the external exercises before
mentioned, our fasting may be matched with the fasting of the beasts of
Nineveh, for both they did eat nothing, and they were covered with sackcloth:
and if we do no more, what privilege have we above them? Wherefore we must
consider the inward virtues helped forward and furthered by the outward and
bodily exercises, as it is in the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Joel. 1.13. and 2.17. Math. 9.15. 1 Samuel 7.6.
The inward parts and manner of fasting, consists in four things,
humiliation, repentance, prayer, and confidence. The first is humiliation,
never more necessary then at such times, which consists in the sight of our
sins, in the feeling of our misery, in a bewayling of our vile estate, and an
humble and particular confession of all known sins, without any reservation
of any one. 2 Samuel 12.22. Gen 21.17. Psalm. 147.9. and 109.27.28. and 145.15.16.
We must pour out the inward mourning of the heart witnessed and signified by
the outward tears of the eyes. If this be wailing and lamentation be found in
us, certainly he which heard the moan and mourning wrung from Ismael and
Hagar in their extremity, he which hears the cry of the young Ravens, and the
roaring of the Lions that call upon him, will much rather hear the sorrowful
lamentation of his own dear children which they make unto him in their
misery. This humiliation answers with good proportion and agreement to the
outward parts: for thereby we confess our selves unworthy of food, of rest, of
apparel, of life it self, or of any help and comfort of this life.

The second part is repentance. The former penitency or humiliation and
compunction of heart is the groundworke and foundation of true repentance, and
makes way for it as the needle does for the thread. This consists in
avoiding evil, and in doing good. This abstaining from evil is signified by
our abstinence from food, and it is the chief end of fasting. For what is our
forbearing from meats and drinks, if we do not fast from sin, but drink in
iniquity as water, like the fishes of the sea? Esaias. 1.13. and 58.4.
This was it that caused the Lord so often to reject the fastes of the Jews,
because they filled themselves with all wickedness, they fasted for strife and
debate. To abstain from sustenance, and not to abstain from sin, is the
Devils fast, it pleases him, but not God. If then we desire to approve our
fasting to him, let us practice the works of piety toward God, and that in the
sincerity of a good conscience as in the sight of God; and likewise the works
of Charity toward our brethren, forbearing one another and forgiving one
another, remitting debtes to the poorest sort that are no way able to pay, and
especially in bestowing alms upon such as want relief and fustenance. Esaias.
58.3.6.7. Zach. 7.9.10.
At least let us bestow so much as is spared by our abstinence that day, least
under a pretense of godliness we practice miserableness, like those that
allow of this exercise to pinch the bellies of their laboring servants. Hence
it is that Christ Jesus joined fasting and alms together in precept; Math.
6.23.16. Act. 10.30.31
and we must join them both together in practice, like Cornelius. He that does
not thus repent, does not truly repent. If every man's fasting were measured by
the line of his repenting, Iona. 3.8.
I fear the greatest number of those that abstain from food, would be found
to do nothing less then repent of their offenses.

The third part is prayer, Joel. 2.17.
that the Lord prescribed a platform of prayer to the Priests, the Ministers
of the Lord in the solemn assemblies of sanctifying a fast, Spare thy people,
O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach: that the heathen should rule
over them: wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God?
These Ninevites, having but a short warning, and a little light of knowledge
knew thus much: for they proclaimed a fast, that neither man, nor beast should
either eat or drink: but they added with all, and cry mightily unto God,
verse. 8. Luk 2.37. Math. 17.21. Act. 10.30. 1 Cor. 7.5.
Thus did Anna serve God with fastings and prayers, not with fasting alone,
neither with prayers alone, but with both of them jointly together. Neither is
it ordinary prayer only that should be conceived at such times, but as the
occasion of the Assembly is extraordinary, so ought our prayers to be. Thus
therefore ought every one to rouse up himself to be fervent in prayer, and as
faithful remembrancers of the Lord to give him no rest until he hear us and
grant our requests. This prayer consists partly in confessing our special
sins that have brought his judgments, craving pardon of them and beseeching
him to turn away his wrath and heavy displeasure from us, and partly in asking
such things as are needful for us.

The several sorts of a religious fast, The several reasons and causes of
public and private fastes.
which a man undertaketh to make his soul and body the fitter to pray more
fervently to God, are these two, private and public; to these I will join the
several causes and reasons wherefore they have been taken in hand, which vary
according to several occasions. The private is which we sanctify in secret
and before God, for such causes as our own Consciences bear record unto us.
Math. 6.18.
Of this sort our savior speaks Mat. 6. We may not appear unto men to fast,
but unto our Father which is in secret; and the Father which sees in secret
shall reward us openly. This David practiced, what time his child was stricken
with mortal sickness, because in the sickness of the child he did consider
the wrath and displeasure of God against himself, for the remooving whereof he
fasted, 2 Samuel 12.22.
mourned, and prayed, and never gave over, day nor night, until such time as
he saw Gods will fulfilled by taking away the life of the child. 1 Samuel 1.10.
So did Hannah the wife of Elcanah, she wept and did eat nothing, but in the
bitterness of heart she prayed to the Lord. The causes of private fasts.
This is and has been undertaken, when a man becomes an humble and earnest
suter for the pardon of some great and gross sin, that lies heavy upon the
conscience. Sometimes for the preventing of some sin, whereunto a man feels
himself to be tempted, Zach. 3.2. 1 Cor. 10.13.
that God would rebuke Satan; even that the Lord, who has promised to assist
his children with sufficient grace, would rebuke him, and not suffer us to be
tempted above the strength that he has given us, but make a way to escape,
that we may be able to bear it. Sometimes to obtain some special blessing
which we want. Sometimes to turn away some judgment which we fear, or is
already fallen upon our selves and our families. Sometimes to subdue the flesh
to the spirit; and such like.

The other sort is the public Fast, The public fasts.
which is openly commanded, and publicly practiced. Of this the Scripture
speaks evidently in this place, 2 Chro. 20.3. Ezr. 8.21. Joel 2.15, 16.
and oftentimes elsewhere: which is done when a whole congregation or several
congregations assemble together to perform the forenamed duties of
humiliation, and to remove some public calamity, as the sword, famine,
pestilence, invasion of enemies and such like. as a fire ready to fall upon his
people and to consume them. For this cause did Iehoshaphat proclaim a solemn
fast, and joined it with prayer, saying, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
In us is no strength to stand against this great multitude that comes
against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. The second
cause is the angry face of God punishing, Joshua and the Elders of Israel, when
they saw the wrath of God kindled against them, and the chosen men of Israel
smitten down, Josh. 7.8.
and the Canaanites to prevail against them, to cry out, O Lord, what shall I
say, when Israel turns their backs before their enemies? And when the people
were smitten by the children of Benjamin with a grievous slaughter, they went
up and came to the house of the Lord, and wept and sat there before the Lord,
Judge. 20.26.
and fasted that day until the even. Jonah the Prophet cried out against them,
Chap. 1.2.
because their wickedness was come before the Lord. This is so urgent a cause,
that it prevailed with Ahab, who by the instigation of wicked Iezabel sold
himself to work wickedness; for when he heard the fearful threatening
denounced against him by the Prophet and against his house, he rent his
garments, put on sackcloth, fasted, 1 King. 21.27.
and humbled himself, whereby he obtained a respit of the judgment: a
temporal reward for a temporal repentance. The fourth cause is the calamity
and misery of the neighbor Churches lying under the Cross, Psalm. 80.13.
when the boar out of the wood does waste them, and the wild beast of the
field devour them; to witness our communion of Saints, and to show a fellow
feeling of their sighs and sorrows, that they also may do the like for us.
This seems to be the cause of the assembly of the Congregation at Antioch,
they labored mightily in prayer and fasting for the people of God dispersed
among the Gentiles, Act. 13.2.5.
and specially for the poor Saints at Jerusalem persecuted through the cruelty
of Herod Act. 12. The last cause why the Churches assembled in this manner,
was, to crave a blessing from God, when they did enterprise or execute any
special work which highly co^cerned the church or common wealth. Act. 13.3.
When the Church did lay their hands on Paul and Barrabas, they fasted and
prayed, and commended them to the grace of God, that he would prosper their
ministry. These were the reasons of such solemn assemblies. And are not the
same causes found among us? Yes doubtless, all of them press us to the
practice of this duty, and call upon us for humiliation to move the Lord to
show mercy in these days of trouble and heaviness. Are not dangers threatened
on every side, nay are they not already inflicted upon us? Has not the Lord a
controversy against us for our common sins? has not iniquity the upper
hand, and is not godliness trodden under foot? And as for the miseries and
desolations of the neighboring Churches, are they not in pain like a woman in
travail and bring forth nothing but wind? Psalm. 79.1.2.3.4.
may we not say, The heathen are come into thine inheritance, thine holy Temple
have they defiled, and shed the blood of thy Saints like water; that they are
become a reproach to their enemies, a scorn and derision to them that are
round about them, who say, where is their God? Lastly, we enterprise great
things, how can we look for a blessing, if we crave it not with fasting and
prayer? doubtless this is the cause why we have no better success in our
endeavors, because we trust in our multitudes, munition, policies, and seek
not aright the God of heaven.

Let us come to the uses. Levit. 16. Levit. 16.29. Zach. 7.5.
This shall be a statute for ever unto you, in the seventh month, on the tenth
day of the moxeth, ye shall afflict your souls, etc. and it had sundry legal
rites and facrifices annexed unto it. But may we not say the like of the
Sabbath? is it to be holden wholly ceremonial, and not to be observed as
moral, because the day is changed, and all the rites abolished together with
the strict rest? No doubtless, there remains a Sabbath and holy day of rest
for the people of God to the end of the world, or else religion would soon
perish out of the earth. So we may say touching fasting, true it is, we find no
settled time in the new Testament appointed and set apart to fast by the
ordinance of Christ; nevertheless, because the causes of fasting remain,
which we noted before, as great a necessity lies upon us, as ever lay upon the
Jews, when the like occasions shall be offered unto us, that were offered unto
them. Now where the causes of the institution remain, there the things
themselves must continue: but the causes of the institution remain, therefore
fasting it self must continue. Be sides, when our Savior was blamed by the
Pharisees Disciples and the Disciples of John, because his disciples fasted
not, does he exempt them utterly from it and discharge them from such practice
as impertinent unto them? No doubtless, he only shows the unfitness of the
present time, Math. 9.15.
but lays a commandment upon them to do it afterward, then shall they fast.
And they performed it accordingly, Act. 13.

Secondly, it reproves the Popish fasting, Paul sometime did to the men of
Athens, Act. 17.22.
I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. And indeed here is
one mystery of iniquity. The chief points of religion remain in the Church of
Rome, howbeit in name only, not in nature: in show, not in substance: in
appearance, not in truth: I may say therefore of them as John does to the Angel
of the Church in Sardis, I know thy works, Revel. 3.1.
that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead. They have the name of
Christ, of justification, of the Scripture, of prayer, of faith, of the
Sacraments, of repentance: but they have set up a mock-Christ, they have
overthrown his humanity, and destroyed all his Offices: they believe
justification, but it is by their own works: they receive faith, but it is
nothing but a believing the word to be true, which also the Devils do: they
admit repentance, but it is nothing else but penance and corporal
chasticement: they acknowledge the Scriptures, but they have patched their
Apochryphal additions unto them and their own Traditions, as unwritten
verities, to be of equal authority with them: they use prayer, but it is in an
unknown tongue: they have the Sacraments, but one of them they have defiled,
the other they have destroyed, and turned it into the idolatrous and
blasphemous Mass. And herein lies the depth of Satan. For if he should
utterly have abolished these fundamental points of religion, and not have
broched lies in hypocrisy, all men would soon have espied the treachery. The
like I might say of fasting. What the Popish fast is, What the Popish fast is.
I will describe out of their own writers: It is an abstinence from flesh
only, and the things that come from it, according to the order of the Church,
upon set and certain times appointed to make satisfaction for our sins, to
merit the grace of Christ, and to obtain everlasting life. Can light and
darkness be more contrary one to the other, then these things are to the
truth? But this I have handled else where; Comment upon Esther.
albeit the bare allegation be a sufficient confutation of this vanity.

Lastly, it behooves us to meet the Lord by prayer and fasting, as the Church
in all ages has usually done in times of danger. It is the Counsel of the
Prophet, when the Lord comes out as an armed man against his people, to seek
reconciliation and atonement with him, Amos. 4.12.
This will I do to thee, O Israel, and because I will do this unto thee,
prepare to meet thy God O Israel. We are not stronger than he, Psalm. 24.8.
who is the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle, Exodus 15.3.
as a man of War, and therefore we are not able to encounter him. Remember
the words of our Savior, Luke 14. Luke 14.31.32.
What king going to make war against another king, sits not down first
and consulteth, whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that comes
against him with twenty thousand? or else, while the other is yet a great way
off, he sends an Embassage, and desires conditions of peace. The Lord is
come out already against us, and has his twenty thousand in battle array, and
has smitten down many thousands of us. We cannot now say, he is yet a great
way off; there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun among the
people, Numb. 16.46
and yet who almost lays it to his heart? Act. 12.20.
O that there were that wisdom in us which was in the men of Tire and Sidon,
when they knew that Herod was displeased with them; they came with one accord
and desired peace, because their country was nourished by the kings country.
We know, we feel the Lord is highly displeased with us, and that we have
provoked him to anger; why do we then delay the time, and send not out to him
an embassage of prayer and repentance, and offer conditions of peace? This we
must do many ways, first accuse and endite our selves as guilty before him,
like poor prisoners standing at the the bar, and holding up our hands.
Secondly, Confess our sins, that have procured his heavy displeasure.
Thirdly, Let us vow to forsake them: this must evermore be joined with
confession, Pro. 28. Fourthly, Give no rest to our own souls, till we be
reconciled to God, and restored to his favor again, and he have called in his
judgments against us. Lastly, Ephesians. 4.22.23.
let us lead a new life, cast off the old man, and be renewed in the spirit of
our mind: without this all our meetings and assemblies are nothing worth, yea
our prayers and fastings are turned into sin. Neither circumcision avayleth
any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, old things are passed away,
behold all things are made new.

6. For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and
he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.
Hitherto of the solemn repentance of the Ninevites from the highest to the
lowest: now consider the actions of the King both in his own person, and in
his proclamation. Behold a wicked city turned from her wickedness in the
turning of an hand. Jonah no sooner proclaimed destruction, but the King sent
out his Proclamation: he no sooner heard of wrath denounced from the throne of
God, but he presently arose from his own throne: when he heard how they had
all covered the whole land with their sins, he covered himself with
sackcloth, he laid aside his royal robes, and clad himself with repentance as
with a robe. See then the outward means of their repentance, the word of the
Prophet. Jonah preached judgment through the City, this could not long be
hidden from the King: and hence arose their turning to God.

This teaches, Repentance is wrought by the preaching of the word in the
hearts of men.
that God works repentance and the conversion of a sinner by the Preaching of
the Word. The author and giver is God, or else we never have it; but the means
and instrument by which he works it, is the ministry of the Word. The
Apostle Paul exhorts the servant of the Lord to instruct those that oppose
themselves, 2 Timothy 2.25.
if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the
truth. Iam. 1.18.
An other Apostle confirms the same, Of his own will he begat us with the
word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. And
we have a third witness of another Apostle, We are borne anew, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 1. Pet. 1.23.
by the word of God which lives and abides forever.

Reasons. First the word is quick and livelie, Heb. 4.12.
and enters even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the hearts,
Heb. 4. Howbeit not from any inherent power in it self, nor from the mouth of
him that Preaches it (for he can give it no force, Gal. 2.8.
nor set any edge upon it) but from the power of God, as Gal. 2. He that
wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same
was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.

Secondly, Jonah preached, and the Ninevites believed? This also the Apostle
teaches, Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. So then these three
stand thus in order, the word, faith, and repentance. How shall they hear,
says the same Apostle, and in the same place, without a Preacher? The
Ninevites heard Jonah before they believed, and they believed his preaching
before they repented: if they had not heard the Prophet, they had never
believed; and if they had never believed, they had not to turned the Lord. NO
man therefore can be converted, except he have believed.

Thirdly, the conversion of a sinner is as I may say, only miracle of the
Gospel. It is usual with the Lord to shadow his miracles by outward means,
Pro. 25.2.
that he might conceal his own works, as Pro. 25. The glory of God is to
conceal a thing secret. Nay in this, many miracles on an heap concur
together. Is it not a miracle in the body to open the eyes of the blind, Math.
10.8. and 11.5. Act. 26.18. 2 Cor. 7.1. Ephesians. 2.1.5.
to restore hearing to the deaf, to raise the dead, to cleanse the Lepers? The
penitent person has received all these in his soul; his eyes are opened, his
ears are boared, he is cleansed from his filthiness, and restored to life; for
being naturally borne dead in sins and trespasses, he is quickened; O how
great a change and alteration is this!

But here a question may be asked, Romans 3.20. Gal. 3.24.
It serves to bring us to the knowledge of our sins and miseries, and
thereby fitteth us to receive grace and mercy, like eating salues that make way
for curing medicines, or like the sharp needle that makes way for the thread.
But it is the Gospel that has the promise of pardon and forgiveness, and
works repentance from dead works, and therefore it is a fruit of the Gospel.
The Law knows no remission of sins, but is a letter that condemns; it
promises no mercy, but threatens the curse against the transgressors, Gal.
3.13.

Use. Hos. 2.21.22.
and the earth hears the corn, and the corn the people, they will not feed
thereof as base food, but look for Manna and bread from heaven: are not such
worthy to perish? Hence it is, that Abraham is brought in, Luke 16.31.
answering the rich man that would have the dead sent to his brethren to
reclaim them, and bring them to repentance: If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. How
vainly then and idly do they prattle, who, to disgrace the Ministry of the
word, and the high ordinance of God to teach man by man, allege, that they
know not whether men speak the truth, because all men are liars, and they are
not able to try their doctrine: but if they should hear the Lord himself
speak or an Angel from heaven, they would believe. Judge. 6.2^ and 13.22. Genesis
16.2. Esaias. 6.3.
These men neither know their own weakness, nor the power of God. Not their
own weakness, that are not able to endure the glory of him that speaks
from heaven; nay this was the common voice of such as heard an Angel, We shall
surely die, alas, because I have seen an Angel of the Lord face to face: not
the power of God, because he is infinite, the Angels cover their faces before
him, the heavens are not clean in his sight, the earth trembles when he
shows his glory. When the Israelites saw the lightnings and heard the noise
of the thunder and sound of the Trumpet waxing louder and louder in the mount,
Exodus 20.18.19.
so that Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake: they said unto
Moses, Speak thou unto us and we will hear: Heb. 12.21.
but let not God speak unto us, lest we die: Deuteronomy. 5.25.26.28.29.
If we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall die: for who
is thereof all flesh that has heard the voice of the living God and lived?
This they spoke, and the Lord said, They have well spoken all that they have
spoken. O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and
keep my Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their
Children for ever. If this were wisdom in them to call for Moses to speak to
them and not God; what a foolish choice do they make, that call for God to
speak to them, and not Moses? But of this also else where.

Secondly, their case is fearful and dangerous, that are without the word,
there is no vision, and therefore the people must needs perish, Pro. 29.18.
There the sheep are without a shepherd, See examples, Exodus 32.1. 2 King.
12.2.
and none to have compassion upon them, Math. 9.36. Neither is their state any
better, who, albeit they are not without it, yet regard it not, but despise it
in their hearts. These are both alike, saving that the latter is worser and
more fearful then the former. The one are without the ordinary means, the
other without the use of the means, and therefore without hope to come to
repentance. It was a fearful judgment when our Savior commanded the twelve,
saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, Math. 10.5.
and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not. And when the Apostles went
through the Cities to preach the Gospel, Act. 16.6.7.
they were forbidden by the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia: and
afterward when they assaied to go into Bithynia, the Spirit suffered them not.
Was not this in effect as much as if the Lord had said, give them no bread, let
them be famished: I will not have these converted, and consequently saved? He
that takes away the means of life, it is plain he would not have that man
live. Woe then to all such retchlesse and careless persons as set light by
this high ordinance of God, that neither have it nor desire it; but doubly
wretched are they that despise it, and wish in their hearts to be without it.
Can these persuade themselves they have attained to repentance? What, without
the means? but such is the necessity of repentance, that without it we must
perish for ever. I may therefore say to such as the Apostle does to the Jews,
Well spoke the holy Ghost unto our fathers, Esaias. 6.9. Act. 28.26.
Go unto this people and say, hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand:
and seeing ye shall see and not perceive; for the heart of this people is waxed
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed,
least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them.

Thirdly, knew their own happiness) to whomsoever God has vouchsafed the
preaching of the Gospel. It is a manifest proof he has a people there, whom
he would have converted. For as he showed the Disciples to whom they should not
go, Math. 10.6. Act. 18.9.10.
so he sent them to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Thus also he spoke
to Paul. Act. 18. Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace, for I am
with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee, for I have much people in
this City: showing thereby, that he continued his word among them a long time,
because he had much people there whom he meant to save. So likewise wheresoever
God sends his word, and gives gifts to his Ministers in some measure (for
who is sufficient for these things?) 2 Cor. 2.16.
and a conscience to Preach the word truly, diligently, and faithfully; it is a
sign he favors and loves them and will bless them, that he would have
them converted and saved. Not that every one that hears, believes; The word
is sometimes sen^ for other ends then repentance.
or that comes to the word, repents of his sins; for the word is
sometimes sent for other end: first to make them inexcusable, that have the
light, yet shut their eyes: that hear the sound, yet stop their ears. Ioh.
15.22.
Therefore our Savior said to his hearers, Ioh. 15. If I had not come, and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their
sin. Secondly, to harden them, and so to increase their judgment and just
condemnation. For it shall go worse with them than with the Turks and
infidels, nay than with Sodom and Gomorrha that were overthrown with fire and
brimstone from heaven. Ezekiel. 3.6.
Hence it is that the Lord says to the Prophet, Thou art not sent to a people
of a strange speech and of an hard language: surely if I had sent thee to them,
they would have hearkened: unto thee. And when our Savior upbraided the Cities
wherein most of his mighty works were done, he shows that if such had been
in Tire and Sidon, Math. 11.21.
they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. Thirdly to justify
the Lord, and to show that he is just and holy in all his ways, Ezekiel. 2.5.
and that it might appear, he desires not the destruction of a sinner, as
Ezekiel. 2. whether they will hear, or whether they will for bear (for they are
a rebellious house) they shall know that there has bin a Prophet among them.
But God opens the hearts and ears of such as he will convert and call
effectually. We must acknowledge this mercy of God that has sent his Gospel
among us, and walk worthy of this benefit for diverse causes, that we may have
comfort in our own hearts and assurance of our calling thereby, by the holy
and sanctified use of the means: that we may thereby be provoked to
thankfulness to Almighty God, who as he raineth upon one field and not upon
another, and the place whereupon it rained not withered away, so he causes the
Gospel to be preached upon one place and not upon another, and where it was
not preached, they perished: that we may leave it as a Jewel to our posterity,
which doubtless will be the best portion and possession we can conveigh to
them: and that it be not removed and taken away from us and given to a nation
that will bring forth the fruits thereof, better fruits than we have done.

Lastly, Iam. 1.19.
The Apostle S. James brancheth out this point into three duties, Chap. 1. My
beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to
wrath. Swift to hear, that is, take all occasions and opportunities, that we
may entertain and embrace the truth. Slow to speak against the truth
delivered and preached unto us, slow to cross and contradict it, to resist it
and reason against it. Slow to wrath, that is, not to be ready to be offended,
nor easily provoked, when our sins are reprooved. But for the most part it
goes quite contrary with us, we are slow to hear, dull to hearken: swift to
speak against the truth, and soon moved to wrath against such as are the
teachers. Touching the first, It is our duty to be swift to hear.
we must learn to take all occasions to hear the word, and to attend unto it
in season and out of season. This is required of the Minister to take all
occasions, 2 Timothy 4.2. Eccl. 11.6.
in season and out of season to be instant in preaching the Gospel, as Eccl.
11. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest,
for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether
they both shall be a like good. We must be faithful in our places, and as we
love the great Shepherd, so we should feed his sheep; we know not what time
it may please the Lord to give them repentance to come out of the snare of
Satan, of whom they are taken captive. Let us then sow morning and evening; and
let the people have the early and the latter rain. Be it we have here no good
success, we shall find a reward else where. Only let us do our duty, and
watch all occasions to do good, leaving the success to God. So must it be
with the hearers, they must take all occasions to hear the word, to learn it,
to understand it, to receive it, and to practice it: and wherefore? Ioh. 15.1.
because we know not at what time the husbandman will make the seed of the word
to grow and fructify in our hearts. Wherefore they are to be reproved that
accuse the Lord of hard dealing (like the evil servant in the Gospel, when
the fault was in himself) and lay all the blame upon him that they are not
converted, saying, a mountain. Ecclesiastes before rehearsed; the sower must
sow his seed in the morning and in the evening; so they that are hearers must
hear in the morning and hearken in the evening; and the rather, because they
know not whether this or that shall prosper, and bring forth fruit unto
repentance and salvation. Will we not cease or give over to plow our land, but
till it in the morning and afternoon; and shall we not think the furrows of
our hearts have as much need to be stricken? Has the earth need of the early
and latter rain, and are not we as barren and dry, wanting the morning and
evening shewres to make our souls fruitful? It may well be, when we pursued
and sought after with greediness our worldly business or our carnal
pleasures; if we had followed the calling of God, and waited at the posts of
his house, if we had been as careful and eager to hear, as we are foolish
and mad to follow our vanities, we might have obtained and received faith and
repentance long ago. Shall we then be so Profane as to bring the Lord to
dance our attendance, and to give us his grace when we our selves list, and to
bestow it upon us at our leisure and pleasure? In all worldly business we know
we must take opportunity while it is offered: we can say that tide and time
tarryeth no man, and that happily we may never have the same occasion offered
us again: why then are we not as wise for spiritual and heavenly things, as
we are for earthly? and for the life to come as for this present life? Remember
this, if we remember nothing else, that Jacob obtained the blessing while Esau
was in hunting, Genesis 27. So might we happily obtain faith and repentance,
while we are hunting after our pleasures, or profits, and while we sit idle, or
lie sleeping in our houses, or worse occupied than thus, and will not vouchsafe
to come and hearken unto his word. Never therefore wickedly accuse the Lord for
not giving to thee the graces of faith and repentance; but come home and enter
into thy self, and learn to accuse thine own wicked and profane heart, who
do not so much as thou have in thine own power, to wit, to come to the
house of God, and to hear and attend. Let us do these things diligently, and
we may look for his blessing, Math. 13.12.
for whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance.
Besides, God is bound to no man, the wind blows freely where it list, and
may he not do with his own as pleases him? or who can complain against him?
True it is, God is able to convert us, and to give us to believe without the
means of his word, because he is not tied thereunto; but he has tied us, and
left us no other way, Luke 16.29.31. 1 Cor. 1.21. Romans 10.14.
He will by the preaching of the word save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. and
how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10. The Lord fed Israel his
people with quails in the wilderness, and gave them bread from heaven; but
when he had brought them into Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey,
where they had corn and harvest in due season, the Manna ceased, Josh. 5.12.
he fed them no longer from heaven.; So then this is the first point we must
mark and practice, we must be swft to hear with reverence, with Conscience,
and with diligence, and use all the means we can to attain to regeneration.
Touching the second point, It is our duty to be slow to speak.
as we must be swift to hear, so we must be slow to speak, not slow or
backward to speak of the word, to confer one with another, and to sit and
reason of the ways of the Lord; but slow to speak against it, to quarrel with
it, to gainesay it, and resist it, as the manner of many is, who have dull
ears, but nimble tongues; they are slow to hear, but quick to speak, and
reject what they have heard, quite contrary to the Apostles commandment. These
men will question oftentimes with their companions as carnal as themselves,
but seldom or never will once confer with the Minister, who is most able to
resolve them, and most willing to instruct them; which argues they are
possessed with a spirit of contradiction, and have no desire to be instructed.
The third point is slow to wrath; It is our duty to be slow to wrath.
and to be offended when we hear our special sins touched, and our
corruptions ripped up to the quick. These are like the hearers of Stephen,
Act. 7.54.57.58.
Act. 7. when they heard somewhat that pleased them not, their hearts brast
with anger, and they guashed upon him with their teeth, they cried out with a
loud voice, stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord. Our
hearers happly will not use these gestures, but they will practice worse; they
will laugh at us, and that not closely in their sleeves, as we say, but openly
in our faces: an evident argument of the contempt not of our persons so much as
of the word of God it self. Gal. 4.16.
But what? are we therefore become your enemies, because we tell you the truth?
These never came to any degree of repentance or regenetation: Iam. 1.20.
for the wrath of man cannot accomplish the righteousness of God, Ia^. 1. He
that will reprove others with fruit, must ree his mind from fury and
hastiness; so must hearers likewise, if they will hear with profit. For as
surgeons, Chrysostom. advers. Gentes.
that go about to cut off rotten members, do not fill themselves with anger or
choler when they go about their cure, but then specially endeavor to quiet
their minds from such unruly passions, least happly such distemper might
hinder their art: so should reproovers be free from wrath, least it should
hinder them from doing that good which otherwise they might do. In like manner
such as are hearers and reprooved, that it may be as a precious oil that shall
not break their head, Psalm. 141.5.
when they come into the house of God to hear his word which is able to save
their souls, must lay aside all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness,
and put on the spirit of meekness to receive the word ingrafted in us: neiter
must be offended at the word it self, when it speaks not as they would have it.

Word came to the King, he rose from his throne, etc.) All these gestures of
the King, he rose, he laid aside, he covered, he sat down in ashes, do
declare his forwardness, and all of them are amplified by the circumstance of
time, so soon as the word of God preached by Jonah came unto him. This
teaches us, that repentance must be present and speedy, Repentance must be
speedy
For if the King and the rest of the Ninevites had done so, they had been
utterly overthrown for not repenting. The Prophet exhorts to hear the voice
of the Lord, while it is called to day, Psalm. Psalm. 95.7. Heb. 3.13. and 4.7.
Esaias. 55.6.
95. and the Apostle, exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest
any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. Hereunto
tends the precept, Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while
he is near, Esaias. 55.

And no marveill. For first, Math. 23.32.34.35. Romans 2.5.6.
making our selves twofold more the children of hell, as Math. 23.32.34.35.
and Romans 2.5.6. This delaying is no better then a dallying with God, and either
repentance follows in the end, or we never repent at all. If repentance do
ever follow and be at the last performed, which is the best we can jmagine, it
will breed more matter of bitter sorrow and anguish that we have been so
simple or so senseless. If it follow not, what can we be but sons of
perdition as Judas was? and as we have filled up the measure of our sins, so
we bring upon our own heads the fullness and fierceness of his judgments.

Secondly, in one place or among one people, but is translated from Parish to
Parish, nay from Kingdom to Kingdom, from one nation to an other people, as
God oftentimes threatens both Jews and Gentiles, Math. 21.43. Romans 11.20.21
22.

Thirdly, Math. 13.12.
from him shall be taken away even that that he has. Secondly, because sin
takes the deeper root, the longer the tree grows, the root is deeper, and
spreads further, so that it will be the more hardly transplanted and removed,
Ier. 13.23.
as Ier. 13. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then
may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil.

This reproves first of all the corruption of such as live in the continual
sound of the word, Luke 16.8.
as the Children of this world. Such are they that will leave sin, when the
weakness of age, the infirmities of sickness, and the approaching of death do
hinder them from following the same. In this case we may thank, not them, but
their want of strength to pursue after the same. For what thank is it, to
renounce the world, when we are leaving it, and weary of it? then sin leaves
us, The dangers of procrastination.
rather than we sin. Let us therefore consider the dangers of
Procrastination: First Satan is most hardly cast out, when he has a long time
kept possession. We see this in the man that was possessed of a child by a
dumb spirit, how hardly was he removed and dispossed? the Disciples, when they
saw him foming and gnashing with his teeth, could do nothing: and when our
Savior rebuked him and charged him to come out, the spirit cried and rent him
sore, and he was as one dead, Mar. 9.26.
in so much that many said, he is dead. When a man has had long possession of
an house, and can prescribe for many years, will he easily let go his hold,
and suffer himself to be disentred? so it is with sin, when it has long
dwelt in the heart, like a man in his house, it is hardly cast out. Nay, we our
selves grow unwilling to leave the pleasures of sin, by continuance in the
chains and snares of Satan, as it was with the bond-servant, that said
plainly, I love my Master, I will not go out free, Exodus 21.5.
and so serves him for ever: so when we grow in love with sin and have
served it long as our Master, we regard not to be free, but desire to be kept
in bondage for ever. Eccles. 12.5.
and a burden too hard to be borne, when the Grassehopper will be a burden. When
we are hardly able to put off or on our apparel, how shall we put off sin,
and put on righteousness? Fourthly, Iam. 4.14. Psalm. 90.9.6.12.
it is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away,
or we spend our years as a tale that is told; in the morning it florisheth,
and grows up, in the evening it is cut down: and therefore we may be called
hence suddenly, to teach us to learn so to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom. Esau did. This is a deep, yet just judgment of
God, that they who have had deaf ears to God in their health, should be made
deaf by him; that they shall hear no word of comfort: and stricken dumb by
him, that they shall not be able to speak to him, or if they open their
mouths, he will not hear them when they call upon him.

Secondly, Genesis 19.17.
and observe the Counsel of the Angel to Lot, Escape for thy life, look not
behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain, least thou be consumed. Let
us make the present day, 2 Cor. 6.2.
the day of our repentance; now is the accepted time, now is the day of
Salvation. He gives no man liberty until the morrow. The wise man says,
Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth. We may not say to our poor neighbor that is like to our selves, Pro.
3.28.
Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give: and shall we dare make such a
sleevelesse answer to the eternal God, Revel. 3.20. Gant. 5.2.
when he stands at the door and knocks, that we should open unto him, Go
thy way, and come again hereafter, I am not now at leisure? And may we not say
to such loyterers, as our Savior does to such as he sent to labor in his
vineyard, Why stand ye here all the day idle? Especially considering that we
have sundry motives to stir us up not to delay the time, seeing we know not
what shall be on the morrow, Iam. 4.14. First, it is a just thing with God to
contemn that man dying, that despised him living. He that calls not upon God
in his prosperity, will God hear his cry, Job. 27.9.
when trouble comes upon him* The best way to kill a Serpent is to bruise his
head, and when it is young: so the safest and surest way to withstand sin and
Satan will be in the beginning, not the latter and of our days; in health, not
in sickness; in life, not in death; betimes, not when it is too late. See this
in the foolish Virgins, that lingered their time of repentance: but when the
season was past, they cried again and again, Lord, Math. 25.11.12.
Lord, open unto us: And what answer did they receive? Verily, I say unto you,
I know you not: Luke 13.24.
verifying the saying of our Savior, Many, I say unto you, will strive to
enter in, and shall not be able, because doubtless they strive when it is too
late. Secondly, we must look for a time when there will be judgment without
mercy; now is the time of mercy without judgment. Now are the days of grace,
now is the time of turning and repenting; when this time is gone and past,
there will come a day of blackness and utter darkness, when there is no
place, nor time of turning. For as the day of death takes us, the day fo
judgment shall find us, as we see in Caine, Esau, Judas, the rich man in the
Gospel, and such like. Thirdly, the hour of death, to which the greatest sort
post over their repentance, has many hindrances accompanying it, that the
sick man cannot freely think of the state of his soul, neither call to
remembrance his sins that he has committed.

Lastly, The manifold impediments of true repentance.
when he sees us sliding from him, and resolved to leave sin. As then they
that were bidden and called to the feast, had all of them their excuses, so
such as are stirred up to repentance, make not that have which they ought, but
are wise to their own hurt, and become the greatest enemies to their own
souls. Let us therefore see their reasons, or rather pretenses which they use
to hinder their return into the right way. First they allege that repentance
is full of difficulty, a way hedged with thorns, hard and painful. Be it so;
the harder the work is, the more excellent it is. But what is the hardness of
the work in respect of the greatness of the wages and reward? Besides, this
yoke of Christ is easy and this burden is light, because the often practice
thereof will make it so familiar unto us, that we shall take pleasure and
delight in it, because we shall have God to put under his hand and assist us in
the practice thereof; because such virtue proceeds from the death of Christ,
Romans 6.6.
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin; and we have him after a
sort to draw in the yoke with us: and because God powers sweet and secret
consolation into the hearts of such as resolve to turn to him, whereby they
find that peace of Conscience which passes all understanding. Ezekiel. 18.32. and
33.11. Psalm. 103. 1 Timothy 2.4. But these men do abuse them, and build upon a
weak foundation: they dream of a God made all of mercy, and forget his
justice, which is to set up an Idol in their hearts: they dwell so much upon
the promises of the Gospel, that they cast from them the curses of the law.
These are like to the Spider that gathers poison out of the sweetest flowers.
The goodness of God is published and Proclaimed so often for the comfort of
the weak, not for the encouragement of the wicked; to raise up the penitent,
not to hearten or harden the obstinate: it is bread for the Children to eat,
not for dogs to devour. To conclude, Nah. 1.3.
let us remember that as the Lord is slow to anger, so he is great in power,
and will not surely clear the wicked.

The third impediment is contrary to the former, Caine, despairing of Gods
goodness, as if it were less than his sins. Thus also Judas perished, who
saw his sin in the glass of the Law, but could not lay hold on Gods mercy,
and therefore died without hope, Satan has two deceitful glasses.
and brast asunder through despair. Thus does Satan show forth two false
glasses to deceive the sight of sinners: before sin is committed, he shows
them his mercies greater than they are, and his justice less than it is: but
after the committing thereof, he makes his mercies to appear lesser, and his
justice greater than indeed it is. But he is a liar from the beginning, and the
father of lies, trust him not, believe him not; the contrary to that which he
speaks is commonly true. God has mercy in store for all that do repent from
the bottom of their hearts, Ezekiel. 18.21.22.
and has promised to put all their sins out of his remembrance. To deny the
infiniteness of his mercy is to deny him to be God. Remember the examples of
old, how he has dealt with penitent sinners, with Rahab the harlot, with
Manasses the King, with Peter that denied him, with Paul that persecuted him,
with such as crucified the Son of God and delivered him into the hands of
murderers; Luke 7.38.
with that woman which washed the feet of Christ with tears, and wiped them
with the hairs of her head. To conclude, let us call to mind the description
of the name and nature of God, The Lord the Lord, strong, merciful and
gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in truth, Exodus 33.6.7.
reserving mercy for thousands, for giving iniquity, transgression and sins.
The next impediment is the cares of this life, them as fishes are with an
hook, Luke 14.17. Math. 13.22. Luke 12.19. 2 Timothy 4.10. and as corn is choked
with thorns, Luke 8. For as full hands are able to hold and receive nothing,
no not the purest gold when they are full of earth or clay before, so it is
with our hearts, when they are forestalled and fore-possessed with the world,
they cannot recive the least measure of grace. Let us therefore set before us
evermore the Counsel and Commandment of our Savior, Math. 6.33. 1 Timothy 4.8.
and 6.17.
First seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. Esaias 6.10. Whereas all outward things fall
out alike to the righteous and to the wicked, to the clean and to the
unclean, to the good and to the sinner, Eccl. 9.2.

He arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered etc.) The
next point to be considered is the beginning of this wonderful conversion from
the highest to the lowest. The beginning was from the King himself, Ier. 13.18.
and from him proceeded to the people. As the head gives life to the rest of
the members, and one wheel gives motion unto others: so the action and
forwardness of the King, Great men should be forwardest in all godliness and
be examples to others of lower places.
stirred up all the people to fasting and prayer by his example. Hereby we
learn that superiors and men of high place must by their practice give good
example to others. It behooves them whom God has placed in authority, and
lifted up their heads above their brethren, to give good example to others, and
go in and out before them in that which is good and holy. The more high,
worthy, and excellent their calling is, the more zealous and forward they
should be in Godliness, and thankfulness to him that has exalted them. The
Prophet Joel begins first with the Elders or Ancients, and from them
descends to all the inhabitants of the land, when he exhorts all persons to
repentance. Joel. 1.2. Hag. 1.1. and 2.2.21.
This we see in the Prophet Haggai, he begins with Zerubbabel the governor,
and then with the people. The cause why the Gospel so much flourished and
prospered in Thessalonica is rendered, because the chief men were most forward,
and received the word with all readiness of mind, Act. 17. Act. 17.11.


And there is great cause why it should be so. Jeroboam set up Idolatry, and
thereby made Israel to sin. Lips. in polit.
For as we have light or darkness from the Sun, so we have vice or virtue
from superiors. And as the high and tall Cedars of Libanus, while they stand
fast well rooted in the earth, are a shield and defense to the lower shrubbes
that are underneath them: but if they fall down they bear down all that are
within their reach: so su^ch as are of higher estate and calling, so long as
they continue firm in the fear of God, and in the ways of godliness, are as
notable proppes and pillars to such as cast their eyes upon them, and great
means to draw on others by their authority and example: but when once they
fall away and give themselves to wicked ways, they walk not in that way
alone, but are an occasion of falling to many others by their followers and
inferiors. Secondly, Claudian. Componttur orbis regis ad exemplum, etc.
True it is, we should live by the precepts of God, rather than by the
practices of men: but for the most part we see it otherwise. Hence it is, that
Solomon says, Pro. 29.12. If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are
wicked.

Thirdly, Psalm. 75.6.7.
nor from the West, but God puts down one and sets up another) and he
will straightly enquire not only how just and civil, Ezekiel. 18.4. 1 Samuel 2.13.
but how holy and religious their government has been. True it is, the soul
that sins shall die the death, yet their blood shall be required at the
hands of all them that have not done their duty to bring them to God, but been
a means to draw them and drive them from God.

Fourthly,

First of all, Sam. 2.7. unmindfull that he makes them inherit the throne of
Glory, unmindfull that they are as a City set upon an hill to be seen a far
off, and unmindfull of the great account which they are to make at the great
day of account (for to whom much is given, of him the more shall be required)
do give themselves over to all manner of evil, as if their authority were a
privilege or sanctuary for impiety, and thereby draw others into the same
excess of riot, until both they and their followers perish, as it is noted of
Theudas and Judas, Act. 5.36.37.
who drew away much people after them, but they were destroyed, and such as
obeyed them brought to naught. We see by common experience that the infection
and contagion of sin creeps clos^ly, and proceeds sometimes from the
lowest to the highest, as it were from the foot to the head: how much more
easily and strongly from the highest to the lowest, as it were from the head to
the foot? We see sometime sin spreads from the wife to the husband, 1 King
11.3. 1 King. 11.3.
Solomon's outlandsh women witness this truth: for in his old age he fell to
Idolatry through entisement of his wives that drew away his heart Ahab is said
to do evil in the sight of the Lord: what was the cause? 1 King. 16.30.31.
as if it had been a light thing to walk in the sins of Iehoram, he took
to wife lezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians. But what
followed? he went and served Baal, and worshipped him. The like I might say of
Ietroram, he walked in the way of the Kings of Israel, that is, in evil ways,
for bad was the best of them: and what was the reason? The daughter of Ahab was
his wife, and he did evil in the sight of the Lord. 2 King. 8.18.
Sometimes sin ascends from the Counselors to the King, as well as from
the wife to the husband; as 1 King. 12. for Rehoboam, following the advice of
the young men, answered the people roughly and rigourously: 1 King. 12.20 and
11.13.
but what followed? the revolting of the rest of the tribes, so that there was
none that followed the house of David but the tribe of Judah only. The like we
read, 1 Chro. 19.3.4. Sometimes likewise it ascends from the children to the
fathers, Gea. 13.7.8.
yea from the servants to their Masters, who make them of bad to be much worse.
Thus it commonly falls out, howbeit then the waters run as it were against
the stream. But much more does sin prevail, when the waters run with the
stream, and heavy things fall downward, when from men of higher places it
rowleth upon such as stand in lower ground. For they draw their inferiors by
their countenance, they allure them by their rewards, they discourage them by
their threatenings, they terrify them by their punishments, they embolden them
by their connivence, they charge and command them by their authority.

Secondly, Psalm. 133.2.3.
as Psalm. 133. Like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon
the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments: as
the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the Mountains of Sion:
so when once God has rained the sweet shewres of his word, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
when his doctrine has dropped as the rain, and his speech distilled as the
dew upon the hearts of such as are in eminent places, the fruit hereof is
communicated quickly to such as stand beneath and abide in an inferior
condition, who look upon such as are set above them, as the eyes of servants
look unto the hands of their Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the
hands of her Mistress. We are charged all to xhort and admonish one another,
and to be helpers to the faith one of an other; but a double charge lies upon
the heads of all Heads and Superiors, to stir them up that are under them by
word and by example. As Abimelech taking an axe in his hand and cutting down a
bough, took it and laid it on his shoulders, and said unto the people, Judge.
9.48. and 7.17.
What ye have seen me do, make haste and do as I have done, Judge. 9. and as
Gideon the Captain of the Lords host, dividing his men into companies, said
unto them, Look on me, and do likewise; and behold when I come to the side of
the camp, it shall be that as I do, so shall ye do: So the forwardness of
great men ought to be such, as they should call others by their example, and
say, look upon me, make haste and do as I have done, as ye have seen me to
do. Thus they ought to persuade themselves, that either by their Godliness
they are means to bring others to God, or by their evil they are means to
drive them from him. A good meditation for all Superiors.
O that this were thoroughly ingrafted in the hearts of all the rulers of this
world, that upon this ground they would thus reason with themselves, Is it true
that I have a share and portion in the actions of every one under my
jurisdiction, either in his goodness or wickedness? then surely I have great
need to look narrowly into mine own ways, to be a pattern and president of
godliness unto others. Thus should the Minister, that has charge of men's
souls, and must give an account for them to the great shepherd of the
sheep, reason with himself: thus also ought the Master of the family, the
father of children, and generally all superiors to reason with themselves and
so make good use of this duty. But alas, we see every where the contrary
practice! for every man almost looks upon the pleasure and case, the gain
and profit that may be gotten in his calling, and follows after them with
greediness, never considering what offense they give to God and man, neither
regarding what multitudes of souls they draw after them to hell.

Lastly, prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1.2.
supplications, intercessions and giving of thanks for all that are in
authority, that under them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. Ier. 29.7.
So the Prophet charge the Captives of the people, Ier. 29.7. Seek the peace
of the City, whither I have caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray
unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace. but where
they may serve for greatest wages, where they may make most gain, profit, and
worldly commodity; where they find most liberty, and where they may speak as
they list, do as they list, and live as they list. Nay they affect and
prefer above all other the houses of profane persons, where themselves may
live as profanely also, without fear of God, or man, and without check and
controlment, that it may be said, like master, like servant; which
notwithstanding is the common, but corrupt custom of the common sort, who have
more care to provide for the body, than for the soul. But they have chosen the
better part, who are carried with a desire and love of godliness, where they
may learn the best things that shall not be taken from them, remembering that,
1 Timothy 6.6. 1 Timothy 6.6.
Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has. True it is,
there may be one Lot in Sodom, one Joseph in Pharaohs house, one Rahab in
Jericho, one Paul in the ship, and one Obadiah in Ahabs Court, but this is very
rare, and falls out seldom. For where the heads of the family be profane,
what shall ye see in the rest of the household, but Profaneness,
Worldliness, Wantonness, Drunkenness, brawling and contention? Where they be
lukewarm, it may be observed that their children and servants (for the most
part) that attend upon them are Neuters, neither fish nor flesh, neither hot
nor cold; such care not which end go forward: where they be faithful and
zealous, zeal will oftentimes be found in the lowest servant, that looks to
the door, Act. 12.5.14.
as we see in Rhoda, who rejoiced to hear Peter's voice and was glad to carry
that news, when he was brought out of prison, for whom prayer had been made
by the Church without ceasing, to God.

7 And he caused it to be Proclaimed and published through Nineveh (by the
decree of the King and his Nobles) saying, Let neither man nor beast, heard nor
flock, taste any thing: let them not feed nor drink water.

8 But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God:
yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is
in their hands.

The example and precedence of the King has been considered in the former
verse. His repentance was the repentance of all the rest, and his humiliation
was the laying of the threatening to heart by all the rest: For they followed
his example, and he knew that repentance was the only means to appease the
wrath of God. Now touching the Kings edict, he consulteth with his Council or
Nobles, and jointly together they publish a decree; the sum whereof is, that
there should be fasting and prayer, 1 King. 12.6. 2 Samuel 16.23.
declared by the reason verse. 9. Who can tell if God will turn from his fierce
wrath, that we perish not? Here are sundry points offered, that might be
handled, that the King had his Council, without whose advise and direction he
would do nothing. This has ever been the manner of Princes, to have their
wise Council about them, in regard of the waightinesse of their charge. Two
eyes see more then one, and two ears hear more then one. In this respect
Solomon teaches, that two are better then one, and so have a greater fruit of
their labors. Besides, the dangers are greater, if they err and go astray,
their errors are oftentimes irrevocable, and had I wist comes too late. But
because this better fitteth another place, I will pass it over. And touching
fasting it self, I have spoken of it before, and therefore I pass that also.
Only it may seem strange that the commandment runs indifferently to man
and beast, that they must be covered with sackcloth and fast, and that man and
beast must cry mightily unto God. For some may say, (seeing these things may
seem strange) what have beasts to do with repenting and turning to God? have
they, or can they sin? The good Angels, the Devils, the beasts cannot
repent. Why the bruit beasts are commanded to fast.
The elect Angels need it not, the Devils cannot, the beasts are not capable
of it. This then was not commanded for the beasts sake, but to stir up the
Ninevites themselves the more, when they should hear the crying of children,
the neyghing of horses, the lowing of bullockes, the bleating of sheep, all
making lamentation, and all sending up their cries to heaven, themselves might
be provoked to double their own mourning who were the causes of all the other.
The common danger it self might seem all-sufficient to provoke the people to
this humiliation: but besides this, they had the example of the King and his
Council, the force of an edict or proclamation, yea the very sight and hearing
of the beasts put them in mind of their duty. We must use all occasions to
stir up our selves to repentance.
Thus they must take all occasions to stir up themselves to turn every one
from his evil ways. This teaches, that we have all need to use all means
and take all occasions to stir up our selves and one another to repentance
and amendment of life: and all little enough, yea too little. Hereunto come the
many warnings and jnvitations to godliness found every where in the word of
God, as do charger us to remember, to take heed, to come, to look to our
selves, and such like, Deuteronomy. 4.23. Luke 11.34. Psalm. 34.11. And no marueil.

For we have need to be often put in remembrance of our duties Exodus 20.8.
Deuteronomy. 9.7. Eccl. 12.1. 1 Timothy and 3.1. and 4.9. and 6.17. and 2 Timothy 4.1. What
mean these so often caveats and Commandments, but to teach us that we have
great need to be stirred up to all good things?

Secondly, Job 11.12.
that man by nature is compared to a wild Asses colt, Job. 11. Vain man would
be wise, though man be borne like a wild Asses colt, that is, untamed and
untractable: and Ier, Ier. 2 24.
2. to a wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her
pleasure.

Thirdly, creep up on all four, 1 Samuel 14.13.
as Jonathan and his armourbearer did to the garrison of the Philistims. This
is that which the wise Solomon teaches, Pro. 15.24.
The way of l fe is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.
Hence it is also, Psalm. 15.1. Phil. 3.19. Col. 3.1.
that the Rrophet David compares heaven to an high hill, Psalm 15.1. We should
clime and get up nearer and nearer unto it every day. So our Savior teaches,
that the way to life is narrow, Math. 7.14.
and the gate strait: it is not wide and broad as the path that tends to
death, and therefore much striving and struggling, much fighting and wrestling
is needful for us, Math. 11.12.
that the kingdom of heaven may suffer violence, and the violent take it by
force. The way is only one that leads to life, and we must make straight
steps unto it; but the by-pathes and crooked lanes, and cross turnings that
tend to death, are many, nay infinite.

This instructs us to admonish one an other, provoke to love and to good
works, to exhort one an other, and so much the more, Heb. 10.24.25.
because we see the day approaching. This the Saints have practiced, and thus
the Prophet foretells it should be in times of the Gospel under the kingdom
of Christ, Esaias, 2. Esaias. 2.3. Mic. 4.^.
many people shall go and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; he will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths. So the Apostle charge us to exhort one an other, to
reprove, and comfort. We see in the things of this life how ready men are to
help one another, and to do good to the body: nay we are commanded to show
our love and compassion to the beast, yea of our enemy, Exodus 23.5.
If he lie down under his burden, will thou forbear to lift him up, thou
shall surely help him up: how much more then should we do good to the soul
which is more precious than the body, and further him in the matters of
salvation, which are of more worth a thousand times, than a temporal
possession? Especially this duty is to be performed by parents and masters,
that are bound by a nearer and straiter band to their families than others are,
and so are charged with the same in a double respect. and generally it is
required of all to keep watch and ward over others for their good. For they
that are truly religious must approve themselves to be so by seeking to draw
others thereunto. Where true religion possesses the heart of a man, The
properties of true religion.
there also cannot but be a desire kindled and inflamed to bring others to it
also. This is not only as a good tree that brings forth good fruit, but it
is also as a fire, which having matter to work upon, will send forth light and
heat to comfort and refresh others. And who is he that knows and considers
from what misery he is delivered, and to what freedom from sin and Satan he
is brought, that can be so unthankful to God, and so merciless and
hard-hearted to his brethren, as to rest contented in his own happiness, and
be altogether careless to give glory to God for his happiness, Cant 1.4. Iam.
5.19.20.
and to testify his love to his neighbor, and desire to pull him out of the
state of damnation, and make him partaker of the inheritance in the heavenly
places! We see in the examples of the Disciples, how diligent they were, so
soon as they were brought to Christ, to persuade and draw others to the
knowledge and fear of God. When Andrew was brought to Christ, he never rested
till he had found his brother Simon, Ioh. 1.41.42.
and said unto him, We have found the Messiah, and he brought him to Jesus: and
when the Lord Jesus had called Philip, and willed him to follow him, Philip
finds Nathaniel and said, We have found him, verse. 45.46.
of whom Moses and the Prophets did write, come and see him. The like also we
see afterward in the woman of Samaria, when once Christ had touched her heart,
and given her to drink of the fountain of living waters springing up into
everlasting life, she could not rest her self contented therewith to be
partaker of so great a benefit alone, Ioh 4.29.
but she lest her waterpot, and ran into the City, and called them out to
taste of those waters whereof she had drunk. Indeed he asked of her, but he
gave unto her waters of life. Let us be therefore like to those Lepers, who,
being almost affamished and ready to dye, and finding a rich booty, meat and
drink, silver and gold in great abundance, would not, nay could not keep such
a benefit long to themselves, but they accused themselves and reproved one
another, 2 King. 7.9.
saying, We do not well, this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our
peace; if we tarry till the morning, some mischief will come upon us, now
therefore come that we may tell it abroad. So when God in great mercy has
opened himself unto us, which is better than to find silver and gold, should
we then hide his mercy, as the unfaithful servant did his talent, and not
rather put it out to the exchangers, Math. 25.27.
that the Lord at his coming might receive his own with usury? And should we
not say with those Lepers, This day is a day of good tidings, and should we
hold our peace, and not communicate this good to others? This is the charge
that the Lord laid upon Peter, Luke 22. I have prayed for thee, Luke 22.32.
that thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren. Thus the sheepheards, after the Angels were departed into heaven,
encouraged one another to see the thing that was come to pass, and to make
that known abroad in the City, which the Lord had made known to them in the
field, Luke 2, 1.5.

Secondly, The first reproof.
as too heavy a burden, from their own shoulders, and lay it upon the
Ministers of the word, and it is posted over from one to another, as Adam laid
the blame upon the woman, and the woman upon the Serpent: whereas every private
man ought to be a mean according to his calling to persuade others to the
hearing of the word, that they might be saved. If every one would persuade
himself that it is his duty to persuade others, then would the Church be
enlarged, the Gospel be more generally entertained, and the places of our
assemblies be better replenished. But we will not learn this lesson, or at
least we will not practice it. This is a general fault among us all, if we
come to the house of God our selves, we think we have done enough, and many
will not do so much; whereas in the mean season we neglect the rest of our
families, never considering that our children and our servants must keep the
Sabbath as well as our selves, not remembering that we must give an account to
God for them; what they do when they are in the house of prayer, that they do
not abuse themselves, the holy place of Gods worship, and hinder the
edification of others, that they do not turn the house of God into a
playhouse, and his service into a may game. And if any proceed so far to have
an eye to their families, we must know that God has given yet a farther charge
even of our neighbors, except we will be like to wicked Caine, who said, Gen
4.9.
Am I my brothers keeper? As he dealt cruelly toward his brothers body, so do
we unmercifully to his soul, when we shake and shift from us all care thereof,
as if we were not made keepers one of another. There is a mercy to be showed
the soul, as well as the body. If a man should escape the hands of thieves, and
be brought out of danger, ought he not to give warning to others that trauail
that way to look to themselves? and if he do not, is he not guilty of the loss
he sustaineth? So it is in this case. And certainly when we see the coldness
and backwardnes of all persons, we should sharpen and whet up one another, Pro
27.17.
according to the precept of Solomon, Iron sharpneth iron, so a man sharpneth
the countenance of his friend: and say, Come neighbor, come friend, let us go
to the house of God, let us go to the Sermon, there we shall hear that will
do us good, and be to our souls health: I have found much comfort and benefit
by being there, and so I doubt not, you may. If it be to sporting and playing,
to a drunken feast, or to a profane meeting, we see how ready men are not only
to call their neighbors to go with them but also if they were not there with
them, to set it out to the full at their return, as largely as they can. And
does not God look for as great care for the soul and salvation of our
brethren? But some will say, Pro. 18.13.
and look well to my self. I answer, or rather let Solomon answer, He that
answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame unto him.
Again, be it, 2 Cor. 2.13.
it were so; that which is said to the Minister, belongs to all, We are the
sweet savor to God in them that perish. Let it be with us as it was with
Peter, Luke 5.5.
he said, Master, we have toyled all the night, and have taken nothing:
nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net. Thus ought we much rather
to fish for men's souls, and leave the success to God. God sent his Prophets
to the people, and tells them before hand, they will not hearken unto them,
yet they went and obeyed, Ezekiel. 3. Math. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
than we can imagine. For as the Apostle says, All men have not faith, so all
men have not a love to religion, they must be persuaded and provoked to it. As
then the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.16. 1 Pet. 3.1.
What know thou, O husband, whether thou shall save thy wife! or what
know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband! So may I extend it
farther, and say, what know thou O man, whether God has ordained thee to be
the means to convert thy neighbor, thy kinsman, thy acquaintance, and
familiar friend that is contrary minded? at least use the means, and then thou
have delivered thine own soul, whereas otherwise thou may be guilty of his
blood. Never say therefore thou shall loose thy labor, God that commands
this duty, Dan. 12.3.
will reward thy service and labor of love, as Dan. 12. They that turn many
to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever. And if ever it shall
please God to open their eyes, to see their own misery, 1 Samuel 25.328.33.
it will be with them as it was with David toward Abigail, who had advised him
well, and kept him from doing evil, who said to her, Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advise, and
blessed be thou, etc. Neither can there be a better property of a good
neighbor, than to wish well and to do good to the soul: and if any desire to
be accounted a good neighbor in the sight of God and man, let him show it this
way.

Secondly, The second reproof.
it reproves all such as are come to this pass, that they cannot abide to be
admonished, much less reproved, but are like to the Israelite, Exodus 2. when
Moses reproved him for smiting his fellow, and put them both in mind, that they
were brethren: he that thus did the wrong thrust him away, Exodus 2.13. Act
7.27. Genesis 19.9.
saying, who made thee a ruler and a judge over us? or like the men of Sodom,
Genesis 19. This fellow came in to soiourne with us, and he will needs be a
judge. But let such remember the saying of Solomon, Rebuke a wise man, Pro 9.8.
and he will love thee. If God require it as a duty at the hands of every one,
to exhort, to admonish, and to rebuke; he requires it by the rule of relation,
that others suffer the word of exhortation and admonition: Psalm. 141.5.
and Psalm. 141. the Prophet says, Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be
a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil which shall
not break my head. Therefore it is no matter of unkindnesse.

Thirdly, The third reproof.
it reproves such as being pressed to this duty, do it indeed sometimes, but
it is never in love or in the spirit of meekness, but in rage and choler, or
else it is in a taunting, disgracing, and deriding manner, and afterward when
the passion is past, they are hail fellow well met with them. This kind of
reproof seeldome or never does any good, it is so sharp and biting. So then
to conclude this point, reproof must not be too cold neither to hot and
hasty. As Physic that is ministered, if it be too cold, it never works: but
if too hot, that it be ready to skald the mouth, the patient will never suffet
it to descend into the stomach, but both of them instead of doing Good, do
hurt: so it is in the matter of reproof; which is the Physic of the soul to
cure the diseases thereof, when it is seasoned with wisdom and discretion,
and the golden mean observed between too much and too little: but if it be
given too cold, Aurea mediocritas, Horat. lib. ^. Ode 10. 1 Samuel 2.24.
we can look for no benefit to come thereof, as we see in the practice of Eli
toward his sons, 1 Samuel 2. on the other side if it be applied too hot, as
the Disciples would have dealt with the Samaritans, Luke 9.54.
to call down fire from heaven to consume them at once, no man will suffer it
to go down into the bowels of the belly, but distasteth the reproof and the
reprover.

Thirdly, they that would be means to bring others to repentance or to
godliness, Luke 4.23.
Physician, heal thy self. If we would do any good with our reprooving, and
seek the amendment of such as go astray, we must first cast the beam out of
our own eye, Math. 7.5.
and then we shall see clearly to cast out the mote out of our brothers eyes.
Hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans 2.21.
Thou that teach an other, teach thou not thy self? etc. Such therefore
as go about to persuade others to a love of the truth, and of the house of God
where the truth is published, must give an example to others, and be a pattern
and president thereof themselves, and so lead them the way. Thus the Prophet
fortelleth the people should do under the Gospel, Zach. 8.21.
Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts,
I will go also: as if they should say, Come friends, come neighbors, let us
go to the house of God, to pray, to hear his word, to sanctify his Sabbaths,
to learn his ways, and I will go with you, I will bear you company. Thus
also does the Prophet David Psalm. 111. as appears in the title, compared with
the beginning of the Psalm, Praise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with my
whole heart: otherwise, we shall be like the Statues in the high way, which
point the way to others, but never remove out of their place themselves, or
like our common ringers, who help to bring others into the Church, and then
depart themselves.

Lastly, Let us break their bands, Psalm. 2.3.
and cast their cords from us, but stoop down our necks to the yoke of God,
and submit our selves to discipline even from our youth. The Apostle Saint
Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.12.
I will not be negligent to put you in mind of these things, though ye have
knowledge, and be established in the truth already. This answers the
Objection of some men, that boast they are able to admonish themselves, and
they know those things already sufficiently: for albeit they to whom Peter
wrote, were well grounded and established in the present truth, yet he would
not cease diligently to admonish them. And the Apostle Paul, though he were
persuaded of the Romans, that they were full of goodness, Romans 15.14.
filled with knowledge, and able to admonish one another; yet was he bold by
writing to put them in mind of these things, Phil 3.1.
and it did not grieve him to write the same things to the Philippians, because
he knew that for them it was a sure and safe thing. So that such as are best
furnished and well stored with good knowledge, with grace and goodness,
oftentimes find they have need to be whet up and put forward: and if such as
are most forward and furnished, need the spurs to be clapped to their sides,
much more others that are children in knowledge, backward in good things, rude
and raw in the doctrine which is according to godliness.

8. Let man and be^st be covered with sackcloth, and cry, etc.) Here we have
the sum and effect of the Kings Proclamation, that as the danger was common
to all, which hung over their heads, so the means must be common to turn away
the judgment, Prayer and fasting ^ust go together.
us, that fasting and prayer must be joined and go hand in hand together. The
truth of this appears by sundry examples in the old and new Testament, as
Judge. 20 23. 2 Chro. 20.3.6. Math. 17.21. Luke 2.37. 1 Cor. 7.5. Joel. 2.15.17.

The reasons are evident: for first, Math. 19.6.
Whatsoever God has coupled together, no man must put asunder. This is a
general rule belonging to all Gods ordinances which he has united. Secondly,
fasting considered in it self is an outward ceremony, and cannot touch the
conscience, neither does the kingdom of God consist therein, Romans 14.17. 1 Timothy 4.8.
but it is a bodily exercise that severed from the spiritual profits little,
1 Timothy 4.8. Romans 14.17. Thirdly the Conjunction of these is the right and ready
mea^es to turn away the wrath of God from us, as Ezr. 8. I Proclaimed a fast,
that we might humble our selves before our God, Ezr. 8.21.23.
and seek of him a right way for us and for our children, and for all our
substance. Fourthly, to make our prayers more available and effectual, and
that the Lord might be entreated of us, Ezra. 8.23.

The use hereof is first,

Secondly, Ezr. 8.23.
as he did from these Ninevites. This we see how the Lord performed, Ezr. 8. We
fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us. Where we see
fasting and praying joined together, and this benefit they found thereby, this
was the success, they obtained a blessing, the Lord was entreated of them. If
we practice these as we are commanded, we have his promise of mercy. If he be
not entreated, it is because we seek him not aright, neither are sufficiently
humbled before him, but provoke him more by our fasting, then we did before,
and so add sin unto us. O how great are our provocations of the Almighty, when
his ordinances sanctified to withdraw his wrath, shall be means to draw it
farther upon us! and how far do our evil works kindle his indignation
against us and increase his plagues, and cause him to double his strokes upon
us, when our best actions performed amiss, serve for no other end, but to
turn us farther out of his favor, and to keep his mercies from us! so that
we deserve justly a new plague for our fasting, if God were not gracious unto
us. For what are our meetings in many places for the most part, but a
mocke-fast, as if we meant to despite God to his face, or as if we met together
according to every man's fancy, and not warranted by public authority, nor
urged by our own necessity? Some are feasting, while others are fasting. Some
keep it indeed as they do keep the Sabbath, neither resting from their
labors, not attending the worship of God, and so they make conscience of
neither. Some come sweating and blowing into the house of God, from their own
works, without any preparation of themselves, or consideration of the work of
God: where about they go. Some are only fore-noone men; some again only
afternoon way. Some begin, when others have half ended: others end when
some have half begun. Others come to Church betimes, but they bring the
Devil at their elbowes, that lulleth them fast asleep: so as they learn
nothing, and serve as Ciphers only to fill up a place; for being present they
were as good be absent, nay better be absent, because they should less
dishonor God, show less contempt of the word, and give less scandal to their
brethren. Call you this a fasting to the Lord? Call you this an afflicting of
our selves? or of our souls? Call you this a solemn repentance? Nay where is
he almost that once minds amendment of life, or calls his sins to
remembrance, or who says to the eternal God, the Lord of heaven and earth,
the King of Kings, as that servant said to his Lord and Master an earthly King,
Genesis 41.9.
I call to mind my faults this day? See then the causes why we are not heard!
We use the means, but God regards us not, as Iam. 4. Iam. 4.3.
Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, and we do not perform them
aright. Behold then the true cause why Gods judgments often continue and his
hand is stretched out still; we remain still in our sins. We fast from food,
but we fast not from our offenses. We abstain from the pleasures of the things
of this life, Heb. 11.25.
but we abstain not from the pleasures of sin which are but for a season.
What should it profit to put on sackcloth upon the body, and not to put off the
pride of heart? to abridge out selves of natural sleep, and to be spiritually
asleep in sin? to put off our best apparel, and not to cast off the old man
which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts? Moses and the Prophets, and the
people of God, when his hand was heavy upon them by famine, or pestilence, or
the sword, they fasted and prayed, and the plague ceased: why is it not so with
us? we have fasted, but our plague continues: is God changed, or is there any
alteration in the Almighty?

But to pass this over, that God should cease his hand presently, when we
increase our sins daily? Is it not just with him, to multiply his judgments
upon us, when we multiply sin upon sin? or should we look to have him repent
of the evil, when we will not repent of our evil? We should doubtless see an
other manner of success and blessing of God upon our praying and fasting, and
humiliation: if we did as the people of God were wont to do, we should speed
as they were wont to do, the Lord would deal with us as he dealt with them:
but forasmuch as we be not like to them in the one, no marvaill if we be not
like them in the other.

Lastly, Dan. 9.3.7.8.
of our fathers, of our Princes, of our people, and of our whole land. For all
our fasting is nothing worth without this. Fasting is no part of Gods worship,
but only joined to prayer to be an help unto it, or as a wing to mount is up
toward heaven, and make it ascend into the presence of God. Prayer is avaylable
without fasting, because it is a lifting up of the heart to him: but fasting
never without prayer, because it goes not beyond the outward man. Prayer is a
spiritual exercise of our faith, wherein, as in an acceptable sacrifice, God
delights; but fasting is a bodily exercise, which in it self pleases not
God, who is a Spirit, Ioh. 4.24.
and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth. God being of a
spiritual nature requires a spiritual service and agreeable to his nature.

And cry mightily unto God.) This is the life, and the very quintessence of all
the great abstinence before commanded. For what had it availed to cover
themselves with sackcloth and ashes, and to abstain from food, had they not
used prayer to God to crave mercy and forgiveness at his hands? Yea, this is
the end of private or public fastes, that we should call upon God the more
fervently and effectually. They are not prescribed (as has been showed) as
parts of Gods service, for whether we eat, we are never the worse; or whether
we abstain, we are not at all the better, in respect of any religion or
holiness that consists in them, but only as they are means to further us
in his service. Now in these words, we must observe three things, the matter,
the manner, and the object: that is, their prayer, their zeal, and the person
to whom they prayed: their prayer is noted by their crying: their zeal by
doing it mightily; the person to whom they prayed, unto God. Let us consider
these in order. The first is the matter, they prayed, they cried; the end is
that thereby God might turn away from his fierce wrath. Prayer is a means to
remove Gods judgments.
This is as it were the tongue or voice of repentance. The prayer of this
people was more worth a thousand times, than the crying of the beasts, and the
loud noise of men, women, and children. They cried, they cried mightily, they
cried to God. This the heathen by the light of nature have confessed. The
Mariners acknowledged this to be the only means to obtain mercy at the hands
of God, Ion. 1.6.
and to remoove his judgment, when they were like to perish. So did Pharaoh,
he was glad to fly to it in his misery and calamity, Exodus 8.28.
Pray for me and for my people to the Lord, that this plague may depart. So it
was with Jeroboam, little better than the former, 1 King. 13.6.
1 King. 13. So it was with Simon the forcerer; they all thought it was the
readiest way to remove his judgments from falling upon them. Behold sundry
examples of this truth in traveilers, in captives, in sick men, in seamen,
and sundry other troubles, of which the Prophet says, They cried unto the Lord
in their troubles, Psalm. 107.6.13 19.28. Amos. 7.2.3 4.5.6.
and he delivered them out of their distresses. We see this oftentimes in Moses
the servant of the Lord, when he prayed for the Israelites, Exodus 32. Numb. 14.
Yea so forcible were his prayers with God, that they after a sort tied up his
hands, that he could not smite, but said, Exodus 32.10.
Let me alone, that I may destroy them. So Genesis 19. he said to Let, I can do
nothing, till thou art gone: and Exodus 17. Genesis 19.22.
the prayer of Moses prevailed more for the overthrow and destruction of the
Amalekites, than the sword of Joshua and the people.

The reasons are, Math. 7. Psalm. 50. We do not beat the air, nor build upon
the sand, our labor in the fire, Psalm. 50.15.
when we pray unto him, but we lay a sure foundation upon the certain rock of
his promise, Math. 7.7.
which shall never fail us, who has said, Ask, and ye shall receive.
Secondly, cry up to heaven, pierce the clouds, Genesis 18.20. and 4.10.
come into Gods presence, and call for vengance, Genesis 18. Our prayers cry to
God for mercy, and drown the noise of our sins, that the cry of them cannot
be heard, though they cry never so loud. Thirdly, we obtain not, Iam. 4. We
ask and receive not, Iam. 4.3.
we seek and find not, but the cause is not in God, the fault is in our selves.

Use. 1. This reproves such as pray not at all, could do us good without a
sanctifying of the creature to our use; Psalm. 14.4.
whereas he can take away the staff of bread, whenever it pleases him. All
these should be motives to move us to paryer. Romans 10.13.
The Prophet makes this the note of Atheistes, they call not upon the Lord. If
a man should be waighed in this balance, alas how many would be found to
light, and if whosoever would be saved must call upon the name of the Lord, how
many are there, that stand not in the state of salvation: because they know not
what prayer means, it is a stranger to them, and they unto it.

Secondly, Math 6.8 9.
that it rather opens them wider: for as much as therefore we ought to be
encouraged in prayer, because our heavenly father knows whereof we have need:

Thirdly, continue in prayer, and supplication without ceasing, and never give
over, to be his remembrancers: such prayer evermore has mercy joined with it.
This does our Savior teach, Luke 11 8. and 18.1.5. Math. 15.22.24.26.
I mean this perseverance by sundry parables of the poor widow, and of the
unjust, judge, Luke 18. of the friend that did lend three Loves, Luke 11. and
by the example of the woman of Canaan who followed our Savior, and would not
give him over, till she had obtained, Math. 15. And the rather ought we to do
so, because sometimes God will prove our faith, patience, obedience and
constancy: sometimes, to make us more earnest in prayer, for we are to dull and
cold, and must be stirred up: sometimes, to teach us the value and price of the
graces of his spirit; because such as are soon and easily obtained are
oftentimes dispiced, or at least less regarded, and not so carefully
preserved: sometimes, to make us more watchful and heedfull, that we might not
easily loose them, when we have them. The Prophts themselves complain
oftentimes, that God hears them not, that they have called day and night, and
are weary of their crying. Wherefore? not that he will not hear; much less
that he cannot hear; but that his mercy might the more appear: for the
greater our necessity is, the more is his power and mercy seen: sometimes he
delayeth us, Judge. 7.2
to teach us to renounce all confidence in the flesh, as Judge. 7. the Lord said
to Gideon, The people that are with thee, are to many for me to give the
Midianites into their hands; least Israel make their vaunt against me and say,
mine hand has saved me: so would it be with us, if we had always helps at
hand, 2 Cor. 1.9.10
and 2 Cor. 1.9.10. that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which
raises the dead. Lastly sometimes we are differred, that our danger being the
greater wherein we are, his glory might be the greater in our deliverance. As
the skill of the Phyfition is most seen in most desperate diseases, and of the
Surgeon in the deepest wounds: for what great knowledge in his art does he
show in curing the scratch of a pin, or a little razing of the skin? so the
power of God is most of al seen, in delivering of us from troubles and
dangers, wherein we have lienand languished, a long time, and from thence also
arises his glory.

Lastly, it is our duty to give thanks to God, Psalm. 50. I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me. Call upon me: but our deliverances cannot make us
remember the latter clause, thou shall glorify me. We are ready with the
Lepers to opon our mouths for mercy, but our mouths are soon shut when we
should give him the glory, Luke 17.12.
and we quickly forget his goodness with the same Lepers. There is no trial
of our selves by prayer in our wants, for it is often forced, not free:
wrested, not voluntary: but rather by our thankesgiving: whether we make
conscience of our duties to God, or not. Forced prayer is no prayer. As he
loves a cheerful giver, so he loves a cheerful prayer. O how often was the
Prophet David in praising God! how does he provoke his own heart not to forget
his benefits! and others, O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
Psalm. 116.12.103. and 107.8
and for his wonderful works to the children of men!

Cry mightliy.) Hitherto of the first point, the matter or substance of the
Kings commandment they must all zeal. The pray, Prayer must ^e seruent.
the manner of their pray, mightily, this notes their danger was certain, and
in a manner present, therefore their prayer must not be cold. Hence we must
observe, that it is not enough to pray, but prayer must be earnest and fervent.
Hereunto comes the double and trebled commandment of Christ, to ask, to
seek, to knock, which repetition imports and imposes upon us this
fervency. True it is, that prayer joined with fasting ought to be earnest too
fold; but though it go alone without fasting, yet it must not go alone without
fervency of spirit. The Apostle James speaking of ordinary prayer teaches,
that the prayer of a righteous man prevail^th much, Iam. 5.16.17.
if it b^forment, not otherwise. This he proves by the example of Elias, ^e
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the
space of three years and six m^^^th^, etc. And least any should pretend, that
he was a great Prophet and in high favor with God, no marveil therefore if his
prayer prevailed, who raised the dead to life, and brought fire from heaven, as
also he obtained that the heaven should be as brass and the earth as jron; but
all cannot be like to him, every Christian cannot be an other Elias; besides
his prayer was extraordinary. The Apostle answers, that notwithstanding his
great graces, yet he was a man subject to the same passions and infirmities
that others are, and yet God heard him. And true it is, his prayer was
extraordinary in regard of the manner; we cannot pray that the heaven should
not give rain, nor the clouds senddown their shewres because we have not that
spirit which he had; but we must have the spirit of Sanctification to pray
^erve^tly, as he did, or else we shall never be heard as he was

The reasons, what we hear^, Mar. 4.24. Mark. 4.24. Luke 8.18.
but likewise how we hear, Luke 8.18. so we must look to our selves, that we
pray, and what we pray; but withal how we pray, seeing we must fail neither
in the one, Cor. 8. are lukewarm shall be sp^^ed on^ of his mouth, Rev. 3.16.
R^^. 3. Such are they that ca^e not which ^^dge for w^rd, whether they obtain
or not obtain. These are dead prayers, without life, as of dead men without
breath.

This reproves such, ^ Ier. 47.10.
but go away empty: as Ier. 48. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully: such do most of all deceive themselves. These are they that draw
nigh to God with their mouths, and honor him with their lips, but their
hearts are far removed from him: Causes of cold prayers.
in vain do such worship him, Math. 15. If any desire to know what are the
causes of such could and livelesse prayers, Heb. 4.2.
for our prayers do not profit, because they are not mixed with faith in them,
that make them, as the Apostle speaks of hearing the Gospel, Heb. 4. For
faith is the life of every part of Gods worship. Thirdly, Ephesians. 5.5.
from whence our help comes. A covetous man, which is a worshipper of Images,
can never make a fervent prayer, he is so taken in the snare of his own
substance; whereby he is drowned in perdition and destruction: the friendship of
this world is enmity with God; Iam. 4.4.
so whosoever will be a friend of the world makes himself the enemy of God,
Iam. 4. 1 Cor. 15.32.
let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. 1. Cor. 15. But our hope is
not in this life only; but we must look to the recompense of reward, and cast
a sure and steadfast ancre in heaven. Lastly, to lie in some known sin. to
cleanse us from our secret sins. Psalm. 19.12.


Secondly, learn from hence: Math. 6.7.
for the heathen think to be heard for their much babbling: neither are they
accepted; because they are cunningly and curiously compiled; as if we were
Orators; not Christians; pleaded at the bar for our f^e; not showed the fruit
of our faith: sought to please the ears of ignorant men; not to pierce the
ears of the eternal God. The Apostle would not preach to men in the entising
words of men's wisdom, 1 Cor 2.4.
but in demonstration of the spirit and power: and shall we dare to speak unto
God in a flourishing and foolish style, to tickle the ear, as if we meant to
show our skill in Rhetoric, rather then commend our suites to God? That which
gives a grace to our prayers, is the spirit of zeal; without this they are as
sounding brass, they can profit us nothing, neither ascend to the presence of
God.

Lastly, zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14.
There is an ignorant zeal, Ioh. 16.2. Gal. 1.14. there is an idolatrous
zeal; Phil. 3.6.
such was theirs that cut and mangled themselves till the blood gushed out,
Act. 26.11.
1 King. 18.28. and that would burn their children in fire, and offer them in
honor of their devilish gods, Ier. 7.31. here is an hypocritical zeal,
such as was in the Pharisees, that did compass sea and land to make one a
proselite, that is, one of their own sect, Math. 23.13. There is a zeal more
damnable and vile than all the rest, of such, who contrary to their own
conscience and knowledge, do violently resist, and maliciously oppose
themselves against the Gospel and the professors thereof; this was in the
cursed and proud Pharisees that opposed themselves against our Savior, and
committed the sin against the holy Ghost, which shall before given neither in
this life nor in the life to come, Math, Math. 12.32.
12.32. That our zeal therefore may be good, Rules to be observed to make our
zeal good.
first the matter must be good, Gal. 4.18. our zeal is good, if the thing be
good; otherwise if the matter be evil, the more earnest it is, more sinful it
is: his indeed rather choler then zeal. Luke 6.42. against this rule do all
hypocrites offend. Thirdly, Math. 23.23. Such do err herein that are hot and
hasty in matters of ceremony, but altogether cold in matter of substance: these
neglect the body, and catch after the shadow; they strain at a gnat and
swallow a Camel, Math. 23, 24. Fourthly, Ier, 4.14. Iam. 4.8. that so the
outside may be clean also, Math. 23.26. Math 23.4.
We must be more strict and precise to our selves then to others, and give more
liberty to them then we will take to our selves. Let not us be as the Pharisees,
who bound heavy burdens and grievous to be borne and laid them upon other men's
shoulders, but themselves will not move them with one of their fingers, Math.
23.4. Let us rather follow the example of Abraham, Genesis 14.23.24. and of the
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 4.12. 1 Thessalonians 2.9. with 1 Cor. 9.6.14. 1 Timothy 5.18 Sixthly
true zeal condemns, Math. 16.23. Gal. 3.^. Job. 29.8.9. But many offend and
are partial against this rule, and are afraid of the face of the mighty.
Seventhly, Moses, though he were as meek as a lain be in his own cause, the
meekest upon the face of the earth, Numb. 12.3. but in case of Idolatry and
worshipping the golden calfe, his wrath waxed hot: he cast the Tables out of
his hands, he brake them in pieces, he burnt the Calfe in the fire, he ground
it to powder, and being strewed upon the water, he made the Israelites drink
of it, Exodus 32.19.20. This is otherwise in the greatest number, who practice
the quite contrary. They are as hot as fire in their own private matters, but
as cold as ice in things pertaining to the honor and glory of God. Let a
servant offend his Master in the least trifle, and neglect his business any
way, how is he moved and his rage kindled? but, if he transgress the
Commandment of God and neglect his worship, he is never touched or troubled at
it, Ma^h. 15.6.^
he never reproves him for it: what is this; but to make the commandment of
God of none effect by their tradition? Gal. 6.1.2. being humbled in our selves
for those sins which we espy and censure in others. It is noted of Christ our
Savior, when the Pharisees murmured because he would heal on the Sabbath day,
Mark. 3.5.
that he looked angerly about him, and yet he sorrowed for the hardness of
their hearts. Here anger and sorrow meet together, and so they ought to do in
us.

Cry unto God.) Hitherto of the second point, the manner of their prayer; they
cried mightily: now we come to the third point: the object of prayer, to God,
that is, the true God. Ion. 1.5.
The Mariners mentioned in the first Chapter cried every man to his God, but
none of them to the true God, Prayer must be made to God only.
that prayer must be directed unto the true God only, Genesis 4.26. Psalm. 50.15.
and 107.6. Math. 6.9. Dan. 9.4. 2 Chro. 20.6. Act. 8.22.

The reasons are apparently drawn from the nature of God. For first he only
is able to hear and to help. Ier. 23.24. Esaias. 66.1.
that none can hide himself in secret places that he shall not see him; he
fills heaven and earth, the heaven being his throne, and the earth his foot
stool, Esaias. 66.1. Fourthly, the prayer of faith, Iam. 5.15. We believe only
in God, therefore we must pray only to him. The Apostle therefore having
showed, that whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans
10.13.14.
he adds, but how shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?

First of all; Math. 6. The contrary practice has neither Precept, nor example
nor promise, nor threatening against any that refuse it, nor punishment upon any
that has neglected the performance thereof. Thus the Prophet speaks, Thou,
Esaias. 63.16.
O Lord, art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us. David freely
confesses, Psalm. 63.25.
that he had none in heaven but God and none upon earth that he desired beside
him. The Church of Rome has gotten more knowledge then ever this Prophet had,
and they are not ashamed to profess that they have ^no in heaven then God, and
other mediators in whom they put their trust besides him. Such lie under an
heavy curse: Ier. 17.5. and ^ 17.
for cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
whose heart departs from the Lord. What do these but forsake God the
fountain of living waters, and hew out to themselves broken cisternes that can
hold no water. Into both these mischeifes the Romish Synagogue falls by
praying to Saints and Angels. If the blessed virgin, the Apostles and Saints in
heaven did know, what these Idolaters and Saint-worshippers do to them on
earth, doubtless they would abhor this detestable derogation from the glory
of God, as much as Paul and Barnabas did the peoples offering to do sacrifice
to them, Act. 14.14.
nay much more as their knowledge (being glorified) was greater, and their
zeal of Gods glory more fervent then before, in the days of their flesh.

Secondly, Pharaoh, Jeroboam, Simon Magus, and some others, but we must pray
our selves. We must learn this knowledge. As Parents will not have their
children require others to request them to grant such things as they want, but
will accustom them to come boldly themselves: so it is with our heavenly
Father. He will not have us to depend upon others to speak unto him for us,
but he will have us come to his throne our selves, with such reverence and
boldness as behooves children to come to their fathers. Secondly we ought not
to pray in company only, for that many times is hypocrisy. The greatest sort
rest in coming to the Church, in hearing the Word, in receiving the
Sacraments, in being present at the prayers of the Church, and in doing as
others do; but over and above this we must pray in secret between God and our
selves, that he which sees in secret may reward us openly. He that never
prayed but in company, never prayed in sincerity. If we have the spirit of
supplication, we must sequester our selves from others, for private meditation:
as our Savior both instructed others; and practiced himself. Math 6.6.
Touching others, he wills us to enter into our Closet, and shut the door,
Math. 6. and to pray to our father in secret. Luke 6.12.
And touching himself. He went out into a Mountain to pray; and continued all
night in prayer: and was oftentimes a^one by himself, as we showed before.

Lastly, come often to Gods throne, as children do to their father, accounting
it a necessary duty, Iam. 5.13.
not arbitrary or left at our liberty, as Iam. 5. Is any among you afflicted?
let him pray. Neither let any man pretend the difficulty. The more hard it is,
the more excellent, and the greater labor should we employ to be able to do
it. If an earthly Prince should make Proclamation among the lowest and meanest
sort of his subjectes, that whosoever would come to beg such a manor at his
hands, and put up his petition for it, showing his case and laying open his
poverty: there is none so simple or so shallow but he would find words and
matter enough to plead for himself. Why then are we not so wise for the soul,
as we are for the body? for the life to come, as for this present life? for
heaven, as we are for the earth? for eternal things, as we are temporal? Let
us therefore draw near to God, and he will draw near unto us: he is more ready
to hear then we are to speak; to grant then we are to ask; to open then we
are to knock: True it is, he is often found before we seek after him, and when
we ask one blessing he is ready to grant many; yea more then we desire: and we
make an end of asking before he does of granting, Genesis 18. yet if we enjoy the
things of this life when we refuse to pray for them, and resolve not once to
open our mouths unto him, all such blessings are turned into curses, as he
threatens, Mal. 2.2.

Yea, let them turn every one from their evil ways.) It was not enough for
these Ninevites to pray, to pray fervently, to pray unto God, but they must
turn every one from his evil way. This is necessary to be annexed as a
companion to the former. For as fasting is nothing worth without prayer, so
prayer is nothing worth without repentance. No prayer accepted but of the
righteous. Psalm. 145.19.
but the prayer of the penitent, and of such as walk before him in holiness
and righteousness. The Prophet teaches, that he will fulfill the desires of
them that fear him, 1 Timothy 28.
he will hear their prayers also, and save them: as if he should say, theirs
and no others. The Apostle wills, that men pray every where, lifting up holy
hands, without wrath and doubting. Iam. 5.16.
Thus also another teaches, that the prayers of a righteous man avails much.
If then it be not the prayer of a righteous man, it is not the prayer of faith,
and without faith it is unpossible to please God, Heb 11.6.

The reasons are many that show the causes wherefore God regards not a wicked
man's prayer. Ioh. 9.31.
For first God hears no sinners, Ioh. 9 but if any be a worshipper of God and
does his will, him he hears. Secondly, sin separeteth from God, and
divides between him and us, Esaias. 59.2. 2 King. 4.40
and defiles all our prayers. This the Prophet teaches, Your iniquities have
separated you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he
will not hear. As then the children of the Prophets, having gathered wild
gourds, cried out, there is death in the pot: so when we mingled our prayer
with the sour herbs of iniquity; Gen 4.5. Mal 1.8. and 3.3.
God had no respect to the person of Caine, because he was of that evil one
and came in hypocrisy into his presence, and therefore he accepted not his
offering; but unto Ab^l and Tit. 1.15.
to his offering he had respect: so the Apostle teaches, that to the pure all
things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbeeving, is nothing pure,
but even their mind and conscience is defiled.

To apply these things to our selves: our hearts to wickedness, the Lord will
not hear us, Psalm. 66. Psalm 66.18.
nay the more we pray, the more we sin, if we be impenitent. Therefore the
prayers of such are abominable as Solomon teaches in many places. He assures
us, that the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Pro 15.29.
and 28.^.
but the prayer of the upright is his delight: and after, the Lord is far
from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous: and chap. 28. he
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abomination. Albeit such may and do often cry in his ears with a loud voice,
Ezekiel. 8.18.
yet he will not hear them, Ezekiel. The wicked therefore are out of hope of
obtaining for their comfort the things that they pray for: nay they farther
provoke God to the confusion of their faces by their mock-prayers: This
answers an objection which the wicked may make: God has commanded us to
pray, and has promised to hear us: God never commanded a wicked man to pray.
he never made promise, nor half a promise, nor piece of a promise to a wicked
man's prayer, so long as he continues so. Search the whole book of God, and
tell me where the Commandment or promise is to be found? I can produce a
thousand curses against the soul of the ungodly, and where he expres^y
threatens he will not hear them, and that his prayer is abominable: but I
cannot find either Commandment for the ungodly to pray, or comfort for them
that they shall be heard and helped in their prayer. He that brings his gift
to the Altar and there remembers his brother has ought against him, Math.
5.23.24.
must leave his gift before it and go his way to be first reconciled to his
brother: and ought not they when they come to pray before the Lord, the
searcher of all hearts, and remember the Lord has a controversy against them,
leave his worship for a time and go first to be reconciled to him, and that
much more, before they presume to call upon him with their wicked hearts? How
many are there, that think it enough to come to the house of prayer, as if
there were some virtue or inherent holiness in the place! but be not deceived,
when we tread in the Lords Courts, if we leave not our sins behind us, we
were better leave our selves behind also: forasmuch as he that makes prayer
without repentance, is as if he mingled wholesome meat with rank poison.

Secondly, with him, then all the world of the ungodly: Heb. 11.38.
These are such as the Apostle speaks off, Heb. 11. The world was not worthy
of them. They are the favorites of the king of heaven, the King of Kings, and
have free access to him at all times, which no man can have to earthly
Princes. How great an honor is it in Princes Courts to have an easy entrance
to come into their presence, and to be in their favor, that they hold out
their golden Septer unto them! but how much grearer dignity is it to have
recourse to the Almighty, and whenever we will to put up our petitions before
him with assurance to be heard? As therefore we have benefit by the prayers of
the faithful whom God accepts; so we are bound to love them by whom we have
such benefit.

Lastly, Act. 8. Repent of wickedness, and pray unto God. What had his
repentance availed him without prayer, or his prayer without repentance? as
therefore both are commanded, so both of them must be practiced of us.

Let them turn every one.) Repentance belongs to the natural man, who must
turn to God.
Repentance is showed to belong to all of them. These men were mere carnal
and natural men, such as were not regenerate by the Spirit of God. This
teaches us, to whom repentance belongs, that the natural man, not yet
called, must repent and turn unto God. True it is, the regenerate must repent
also, because he has many corruptions remaining in him, and he sins daily:
the image of God, in which man was created, was lost in a little space; yet to
repair it again perfectly, requires the whole time of man's life: as houses
may be overturned in an instant, (as the house that fell upon Jobs children,
Job. 1.19.) which are long in building again. The regenerate man therefore
must still exercise repentance; howbeit properly this is renewed repentance,
rather then the first act of repentance: and a proceeding in it unto
perfection, then the first beginning of our conversion. The point then to be
considered in this example is that the natural man has need of repentance.
Math. 3.2.
This John the Baptist preached, Act. 2.23.38.
Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand. Thus Peter exhorted the Jews, that
with wicked hands had taken and crucified the Lord of life, to repent and to be
baptized in his name. 2 Timothy 2.25.
So the man of God is charged to instruct with meekness the contrary minded,
if God peradventure will g^ve them repentance.

The reasons hereof are plain. Ioh. 3.5.
except he be borne again. It is as unpossible for a man unregenerate to
possess the joys of heaven, as it is for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle: The penitent person has the gate of the kingdom set wide open to him,
but no other. For such as have not the spirit of God are none of his. Secondly
such are nothing else but a lump of sin; no one part good in them, their
consciences are impure, Tit. 1. Repentance is the life of a sinner: without
this we are as a dead man that can stir neither hand nor foot Ephesians. 2.1. By
nature we bear the image of Satan, and are more like to him then any child is
to his father, or can be. Let us come to the uses.

This teaches us that this present life is the time of our repentance.
Ninevites to think of repentance, when desolation had come upon them as a
whirlewind, as it fell out with the old world, and the men of So^ome. We are
here travailers, when once our journey is at an end by death, there is no place
of turning from our evil ways. While it is day we may work Ioh. 9. There is
no working in the night, when death takes us away. The day of judgment is
called the day of the Lord, because then he takes an account, Romans 2.6. 2 Cor.
5.10.
and pays men their wages, Romans 2.6. and gives them their reward according
to their works: for we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. Hence it is that the Apostle
exhorts us to hear his voice to day, not at our own leisure or pleasure. To
day is Gods voice: to morrow is the Devils language: to day, is Gods
persuasion: to morrow, is the Devils persuasion. We know that Manna was
gathered upon the six days, but none the Sabbath, the day of rest from our
labors: so upon the six days, of our life the heavenly Manna of faith in
Christ and of repentance from dead works may be gathered, but when the day
comes that we must rest from our labors, faith and repentance are ceased.
True it is, some went out to seek Manna upon the Sabbath, but they found none:
so the foolish virgins sought oil for their lamps, but they found none, Math.
25. The life to come is the time of recompense, not of repentance: of wages,
not of working: of judgment not of judging of our selves. Luke 16.15. Math.
5.20.
and albeit it be highly esteemed among men, it is abominable in the sight of
God. And therefore to such our Savior says, Except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the Scr^bes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the kingdom of heaven, Math. 5. But it may be objected upon the
words of the Evangelist. Luke 15.7.
There shall be more joy in heaven over one sinner that converteth, then over
ninety and nine just persons that need no amendment of life: where our Savior
speaks as though some were so righteous, that it was needless and
superfluous for them to repent. as other: as an house well repaired, will not
need, so much repairing, as that which has been let run to decay and was
never repaired. For our Savior having expressed the joy conceived by finding
of the lost groate and the stray sheep, he enlarges it by an unequal
comparison, wherein it is compared with the joy which is conceived for them
that are now righteous and already converted, as it were the greater with the
loss. True it is some understand the words as spoken of the Angels, who need
no returning to God, because they never turned from him: others, of the Scribes
and Pharisees Hypocrites, Luke 18.9.
who thought themselves righteous men and despised others, of whom our Savior
says, Math. 9.12.13.
The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick: and again, I am not
come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Howbeit the first
interpretation seems to me to be most proper and natural according best with
the words of our Savior in other places.

Lastly, borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 1 Pet.
1.23.
by the word of God which lives and abides for ever. It is a common thing for
every one to boast of repentance, but how came they to attain unto it? for
they regard not the word, the law they account too bitter a Pill to swallow and
the Gospel or grace of God they turn into wantonness. It is the voice of our
Savior, Except ye repent, Luke 13.3.5.
ye shall all likewise perish: but if the repentance of every one ware measured
by their conscience to the word, I fear we should not have much repentance
found among us. When the Prophet had threatened Nebuchad-nezzar, Dan. 4.25.27
that he should be driven from men, and have his dwelling with the beasts of
the field, he counseled him to break off his sins by righteousness, and
his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, as the means and ready way to
lengthen his tranquillity: so may I say to all natural men, that have their
dwelling, shall I say, with the beasts? nay with the Devil and his Angels, who
rule in them: let my counsel be acceptable to you, hearken to the word, be
swift to hear it, let it dwell plentifully in you, and be doers and practisers
of it, that ye may feel the power of it being converted by it, and so glorify
God in the day of your visitation.

Turn every one from his evil ways.) Here is the substance of the Kings
Proclamation, wherein one thing is expressed, and under it an other is
comprehended. For it is ^o: only required of us to turn from evil,
Repentance stands in turning from our evil ways to God.
This teaches the nature of true repentance, that it stands in turning from
our evil ways to God. For the better understanding of this point, we must
observe, why it is called a turning, and what manner of turning repentance is.
The Metaphor of turning is drawn from a traveiler in the way, who missing the
path and going astray, has no remedy but he must come back again, and
return into the right way, if ever he intend to attain the end of his
journey. This unproper speech is very proper to express the nature of
repentance because we are all traveylers toward heaven, we are all gone far
out of the way, like sheep going a stray from the fold, therefore we must
turn back again, and as we were going to hell, so we must turn our feet
toward heaven: and as we have turned our backs to God, so we must set our
faces toward him. This is repentance. And touching the manner of turning, we
must observe there are four sorts, of substance, of quantity, of place, of
quality. Change of substance, is when one substance is changed into an other,
as Lots wife was turned into a Pillar of salt, Genesis 19. Genesis 19.26. Exodus 4.3.
Ioh. 2.9.
The rod into a Serpent and the Serpent into a rod, Exodus 4.3.4. And water
into wine at the feast in Canna of Galilee, Ioh. 2. But repentance is not such
a change, because before and after repentance our substance is the same; we
have the same bodies, and the same souls. Change of quantity is either by
increasing or diminishing, as when Christ fed five thousand men with five
loaves and two fishes, Math. 14.15. and 15.32.
and four thousand with seven loaves and a few little fishes: but repentance
is not such a change by increasing from few sins to more, or from lesser to
greater; neither contrary wise a diminishing from more to few, or from greater
to lesser, but rather this is a turning from one sin to another: whereas true
repentance is a turning from all sin to God in our whole life. Change of
place or local mutation, when we pass out of one place into another, as Peter
out of prison into a place of liberty Act. 12. But repentance is not such a
change, because a sinner may change his soil, and not his soul: he may go
from place to place, yea from Country to Country and change air, yet not let
go one of his sins: as a sick man does, he may change his chair, and his
Chamber, and be carried from bed to bed, but this cannot free him from his
sickness and restore him to his former health: so it is with sin. Change in
quality, is, when things change from once condition to another, as when the
leper was cleansed, or the dead raised. Such a change is repentance, when new
qualities or properties or put into the soul and body, when they are altered
from unrighteousness to righteousness, from all sin to the living God. In
this the nature of true repentance consists, as Hos. 6.1. and 14.2. Ezekiel.
18.30.32. and 36.26. Ier. 4.1. Luke 1. Act. 26.20. in which places repentance
is expounded to be a turning to God and a doing of works meet for amendment
of life. In this turning observe these particulars, first, it is a turning of
the whole man, both of soul and body, both of the outward man and the inward,
Iam. 4. Secondly, it must be constant and continued, not flitting or starting
back like a deceitful bow, or vanishing like the morning dew, Hos. 6.4.
Thirdly, It must be a turning from all sin to God, for one known sin wherein
we live without resistance separateth from God as well as many, Dev^. 30.2.
Ier. 4.4.

This appears first because the word here used imports that we are gone out
of our way; in the broad way that brings to destruction: Math. 7.13.
we make as though we would go to God, Math. 7. Secondly, we were made
according to the image of God in holiness and true righteousness, Ephesians. 4. and
had fellowship with God: man delighting in his Creator, and the Creator in his
creature: but sin has turned all upside down: man had no sooner fallen and
transgressed, Genesis 3.8.10.
but he fled from the presence of God, as an evil servant from his Master, or
a malefactor from the judge for fear of punishment, and was afraid of his
coming into the Garden. Thus we became the children of wrath, Ephesians. Ephesians. 2.3
and 4.18.
2.3. But when once we have grace to repent, then we begin to repair and
recover the image of God, and to be reconciled to him again. Repentance
therefore is as a miracle of the Gospel, the quickening of a dead man, and the
raising of him up from death to life, or as the reedifying and repayring of a
royal Palace that was fairly builded, but foully battered and decayed. The
image of God is as a fair Palace, the transgression of man is as the ruin
thereof: repentance is nothing else but a raising again of that image, which is
to be done all the days of our life. This is in a manner a miraculous work in
regard of the greatness of our fall, that in regard of our spiritual estate
which we recover, we may say as Math. 11.5. Math. 11.5.
The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the leaprs are cleansed, the
deaf hear, and the dead are raised up to life. Happy are we if this
spiritual miracle be wrought upon us.

Let us apply these things to our selves. First, The first reproof.
that many men are greatly deceived both in the doctrine and practice of
repentance; in the doctrine, because they think that to be, which is not
repentance: and in the practice: because they persuade themselves that they
have it, when indeed they want it. Some are so silly and sotish, that they
presume they need it not, and that it belongs not at all to them, no more
then physic to a whole or sonnd man, or a plaster to him that has neither
wound nor hurt: like the young man in the Gospel, Math. 19.20.
All this have I done from my youth up, what lack I yet? or like such as
suppose Christ came not to call them, but other notorious sinners. Others
slight and slubber over this matter with a little sorrow and sighing with Esau,
Ahab, and Judas, and if they live and have leisure to say, Lord, have mercy
upon us; like those that in the end of the world shall say, Lord, Lord, open
unto us; they think they shall undoubtedly be saved, never remembering the
words of our Savior, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Math. 7.21.
Lord shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
father which is in heaven. Secondly, The second reproof.
it condemns all wretched and profane persons, that lie wallowing and
weltering in their sins, like Swine in the mire, or dogs in their vomit;
who as they were once, so they are still. They were horrible swearers and
common blasphemers, so they are still. They were scoffers and scorners,
mockers, and deriders of all good things, and all good men, so they are still,
they are no changelings. They were contemners of Gods word, and prophaners of
his holy Sabboths, so they are still. They were drunkards and filthy livers,
ignorant and blind in matters of faith and religion, so they are still. Are
these humble and repentant sinners? do these turn to God? where you saw them
long a go, and where you left them twenty or thirty years a go, there you
shall be sure to find them, never a whit changed, unless happily from evil
to worse. But let such mark how it has been with other penitents, and in
them behold themselves as in aglasse, I mean Paul, the woman of Samaria,
Lydia, the jaylour, Zacheus, the Jews that crucified Christ the Lord of life.
Let him that talks of Repentance, boasts of it, and chalengeth it to
himself even for his own assurance, show the like fruits in himself: for it
works such a change and alteration, that both our selves and others may
discern it as easily, as light from darkness. So then as the Apostle says,
Show me thy faith by thy works: Iam. 2.18.
so may I say, show me thy repentance by thy change? For what shall it profit a
man to say he has repentance, when he has no friutes? can such a repentance
comfort him? The third reproof.
Thirdly, it condemns civil men that remain in the state of nature, and
glory in their outward virtues, that they are always the same, but these glory
in their own shame. These cannot say they are become new creatures, they
cannot say they were ever borne again: yet without the new birth they cannot
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ioh 3.3.
They cannot say, Old things are passed away, 2 Cor 5.17.
behold all things are made new; yet no other are in Christ, and made members
of his body. Such civil men, that content themselves with civil honesty, and
have nothing, wherein to rejoice but nature, stand as yet in a dangerous and
damnable estate, neither can they come out of it, until they begin to deny
themselves, and to loath and detest even these outward virtues, forsamuch as
the trust and confidence in them is no better then a self deceiving.

Secondly, it serves for information in other truths. to call sinners to
repentance; Math. 9.13.
he says sinners without exception. This we see in Manasses, a Sorcerer, an
Idolater, a murderer, and almost what not? yet he humbled himself, and
obtained mercy according as he prayed, 2 Chr. 33. 2 Chro. 33.19
Paul confesses that he was sometimes a blasphemer, and a persecutour, and an
oppressor, yet he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly in unbeleefe. 1 Timothy 1.13.
1 Timothy 1. The conspirators against Christ and his kingdom are called to
kiss, that is, Psalm. 2.12.
to embrace and obey him and his doctrine; and accordingly they which shed his
blood by murdering of him did drink his blood by believing him, Act. 2. Act.
2.37.
A singular comfort for such as feel the burden of their sins lying heavy
upon their consciences, that they go mourning all the day long, and cannot
lift up their heads to God, unto such the Lord speaks, Esaias. 1. Come, let us
reason together, Esaias. 1.16.
if ye will wash and cleanse your hearts, though your sins were as red as
crimsin, they shall be made white as wool. And Christ our Savior calls such
as are heavy laden, Math. 11.28.
and promises to give them rest, Math. 11. Sin often brings us to the
brimme or border of hell, but it cannot bring us so low, but Christ Jesus is
able to bring us back and to raise us up again by repentance. Secondly, there
in no sin so small and little, though it seem in our eyes as a more, but it
is able to bring to hell, and therefore craveth repentance. The world of
natural men judges, that repentance is proper to none but to heinous and
hideous sins, as murder, theft, perjury, treason, rebellion, whordome, and
such like, and that if they be free from the outward act of these, they
justify themselves like the Pharisee, and think repentance belongs not to
them: as for others, if they have any, they hope to be dispensed with all. It
is nothing so with Gods children, they have been touched to the heart for such
sins as the world takes no notice off and never sticks at, as for the
evil which appears in their best works, that they cannot do them as they
would, but infirmities creep upon them and defile them; not only for
committing evil, but for omitting good things: Rev. 2.4.5.
the Church of Ephesus is called to repentance for leaving their first love;
they watch over their idle thoughts, and idle words; Gen 6.5.
remembering that every imagination of the heart is only evil continually; and
the threatening of Christ, that for every idle word that men shall speak, Math.
12.36.
they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment: David's heart was
smitten for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment privily, 1 Samuel 24.4.
1 Samuel 24. Every thing is laid to heart of Gods children, which he has
softened by the touch of his holy spirit by giving unto them an heart of flesh:
they will be troubled for the least sins, accounting no sin little, which
is committed against so great a God, which offends so holy a law, which
deserves eternal death as the just wages thereof, and brought Christ Jesus
from the bosom of his Father to suffer death for them: and lastly they are
grieved and touched to the quick: because they increase not in grace according
to the good means and occasions that God has given, knowing that the more is
given and committed unto them, the more is required at their hands and the
streighter shall their account be.

Lastly, Luke 9.53.
as it is said of our Savior that his face was as though he would go to
Jerusalem: Phil. 3.20.
So our conversation must be in heaven, and our whole life a traveling
thither, and a wandering in the wilderness of this world, until we be brought
into the true Canaan that is above. But if the hearts of all were tried by this
rule, it would show how little repentance is in the world, when in all our
thoughts, works, and employments we are carried wholly downward, which way
will bring us to hell in the end: forasmuch as we have profane hearts, not
savauring the things that are of God like profane Esau. Secondly, we grow
every day better and better, when once we are truly turned unto God. True it
is, repentance takes not away all failing and falling, neither freeth us from
all sliding and slipping of the foot, and albeit we stumble and fall, we walk
not from God, but toward him and rise again. The penitent person is like to a
man that walks up an high hill, though he have many falls and slips, yet still
he is said to go up the hill, because his face is toward the top of the hill: nay
his falls make him more wary and heedfull; so it is with the faithful, he may
take a fall, The faithful make profit by their falls.
and with the fall defile himself, yet he takes profit by it, and becomes
more circumspect and every fall helps him one step toward the kingdom of
heaven. Thirdly, mark how repentance changes us, and alters our hearts from
time to time, how sin weakneth, decays, and dies in us; on the other side
how grace and Godliness increase and strengthen in us, Philem. 10.11
and how we grow in love with righteousness that we may say as Paul does of.
Onesimus once unprofitable, now profitable; and of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified. But if we find no steps, no degrees or proceedings in good things,
we may justly suspect our selves, that we are not yet truly turned. This is a
certain and infallible rule, repentance and continuance in sin in our old
wicked courses cannot possibly stand together.

Lastly, whether it have wrought a through change in us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23 2 Cor.
7.1.
that our spirit, and soul, and body be presented blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Many content themselves to give the half turn, like
Agrippa, Act. 26. These turn up and down as the door upon the hinges, so
these are here and there, but it is in their sin, and are as far from God
as before. Or they turn from sin, as Lots wife did go out of Sodom, she
went forward for a while, but she had an eye still looking back toward
Sodom. Or else they turn as the wheel that ever is in motion, but at night
it abides where it was before: for they are ever the same men, their turning
is without turning, they are always the same without any change.

9 Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, thas we perish not. In these words we have the reason, wherefore they
fasted, prayed, and repented. It is not a speech of infidelity, for then it
should not be said before, they believed; and doubtless they would here have
concluded, God will not return though we return to him; and he will not
repent of the evil threatened, though we repent of our evil practices: and if
they had fallen into utter desperation, they would not have cried at all unto
God, much less mightily, as they are commanded to do.

This verse contains three things, feeling, fear, and faith. First a feeling
or sense of sin. Secondly, a fear of judgment. Thirdly, hope of
deliverance. It is to be supposed, that albeit they doubted of the issue of the
sentence, as a thunderbolt thrown out against them, yet not of the favor of
God toward them, neither of his receiving of them, to mercy in the next life;
albeit they should perish according to the flesh, yet their souls should be
saved in the day of the Lord. For if they had been overthrown and destroyed,
though it had been with fire and brimstone from heaven as Sodom and Gomorrah
were; yet had it been no argument of their eternal condemnation and dying out
of Gods favor: because punishment suffered cannot prove a man to be rejected,
no more then it did Moses, who never came into the land of promise: because he
had provoked God to wrath, Numb. 20.12.
and sanctify him not in the eyes of the children of Israel. Besides, no man
can be eternally condemned, which has truly repented; he may be chastised, but
he cannot be accursed. So then, here was faith and fear mingled together in
the same persons as it were wine and water in one vessel. A true faith, but a
little and weak faith which they found and felt in themselves, like the father
of the possessed, who professed his faith, but withal confessed the weakness
of his faith, Mark. 9. Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbeleefe. Mark. 9.24.
Math. 6.30. and 8.26 and 14.31. Romans 4.19. 2 Cor. 10.15. Romans 4.20 Col. 1.23
and 2.7.5. Heb. 10.27. Act. 6.5.8.
There are degrees of faith, a little faith, a doubting faith, a weak faith;
the Apostle also speaks of an increasing faith, 2 Cor. 10 We read of a strong
faith, Romans 4.20. of growing in faith, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. Or of abounding in faith,
2 Cor. 8.7. of a faith grounded and settled, Col. 1.23. rooted, built up and
established, chap. 2.7. of the stedfastnes of faith, 5. of the assurance of
faith. Heb. 10.22. and of the fullness of faith, Act. 6.5.8. But whatsoever
titles it has, the strongest faith and deepest rooted is mingled with
doubtfulnesse, like the air overcast with clouds, or a ship beaten with
storms and tempests, Luke 22. Such was the faith of these Ninevites,
doubting, but not despairing: shaken, but not cast down: tossed with waves,
but not suffering shipwreck: because as they feared his judgments, so they
hoped for his mercies, and believed that their sins were pardonable, which is
the first step and degree of faith. This was in the Prodigal son, when he
resolved to go to his father, Luke 15.18.
and confess he had sinned against heaven and against him, and was no more
worthy to be called his son, when as yet he felt not his offenses already
pardoned. This was in the Ninevites in this place, The meaning of the words.
they conceive a good hope of God albeit he threatened them, and believe that
his wrath may be appeased, when they say, Who can tell if God will return? and
therefore some doubting was joined with it, as, Joel. 2.14.
Joel. 2.14. Who knows if he will return and leave a blessing behind him? 2 Samuel 12.22.
and 2 Samuel 12.22. Who can tell whether God will have mercy on me, that the
child may live? So likewise Ester. Ester. 4.14.
4.14. Who knows whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as
this? So then this phrase is used in matters not fully certain and manifest
unto them, but in such as are doubtful. God will repent; the question may be
asked, how repentance can agree to God, Tit. 1.2.
who is by nature unchangable and cannot lie, Tit. 1.2! Especially considering
we find Scripture to affirm, 1 Samuel 15.29.
The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is not a man that he
should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29 yet before it was said, it repented him that he had
set up Saul to be king? how are these things to be reconciled? I Answer,
Anthropopatheja, which is an attributing or ascribing unto God, the parts,
properties, passions, and affections of men, the more lively to represent the
things spoken off before our eyes. So then, it is a borrowed speech from men,
in God it is a change of his work, not of his will, as Genesis Genesis 6.6.
6. it repented God that he had made man, that is, he purposed to destroy man
whom before he had made. From hence we learn, where true faith is to apprehend
and believe the truth and certainty of Gods threatenings, Faithworketh a fear
of Gods judgments.
Faith works fear, and fear often works faith. This we see in these
Ninevites; they believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and therefore they feared
the dreadful sentence published and pronounced against them. This appears in
the commendation of the faith of Noah, Heb 11.7. Heb. 11.7.
He being endued with a justifying and saving faith, is also touched with fear
and reverence at the consideration of Gods judgments to come. So it was with
Iehoshaphat, he believed the Prophets; 2 Chro. 20.3.
and therefore he feared and set his heart to seek the Lord, 2 Cor. 20. See
the further practice of this in Hezekiah, Ier. Ier. 26.18.19.
26. Micah the Morashite prophesied and spoke to all the people of Judah, Thus
says the Lord of hosts, Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem
shall become heaps: did Hezekiah the king of Judah, and all Judah put him to
death? did he not fear the Lord and besought the Lord, and the Lord repented
him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? 2 King. 22.19.
The like we see in Josiah, 2 King. 22. when he heard the plagues and curses
that should come upon Jerusalem, his heart was tender, he trembled himself
before God; and when he heard the words against that place, he rent his
clothes and wept before him. The reasons are evident.

First, God has coupled both these together, Amos. 3. Amos. 3.6.
Can a trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Secondly,
faith makes things unseene to be seen, Heb. 11.1. Heb. 11.1.1^.
For it is the evidence of things me sinne^s Moses by faith saw him that is
invisible, verse. 27. and Noah ^aw the worlds destruction as present, though it
(...) an hundred and twenty years before it came, and (...) it.

But it may be objected, the faithful is not afraid of any evil ^idings, for
his heart is fixed, and believes in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7. and therefore faith
expels all fear: I answer, the words of the Psalm teach the contrary,
Blessed is the man that fears God: and therefore to cl^^re this
seeming-contradiction, we must observe a twofold fear; as also care, a
distrustful fear, and an awefull or reverent fear. The distrustful fear
argues want of faith in God: the awefull fear makes us seek to God and to
fly to his mercy. But where the true faith is, it expels and drives out
distrust, Psalm. 133.18. and 147.11.
and therefore the Prophet joins these two together, Psalm. 133 The eye of the
Lord is upon them that fear him, that trust in his mercy: and 147.11. the Lord
delights in them that fear him, that hope in his mercy.

Behold the true cause, Math. 24.37.
as Christ our Savior shows, that iniquity should abound in the last days,
and men mind nothing else but their profits and pleasures, as they did when the
flood came and swept them all away at once: disobedience to the word proceeding
from infidelity was the cause of that cause. 1 Thessalonians 5.
For when they shall say, peace, peace sudden, destruction shall come upon
them, as pains upon a woman in travail, and they shall not escape. These
shall make a mock of the last judgment, and never fear it, until they feel
it. These may be sent to school to Ahab, to Judas, the son of perdition, nay
to the Devils themselves: for they have not so much faith as Ahab had, 1 King.
21.27. not so much as Judas had, Luke 18.8.
Math. 27.3.5. not so much as the Devils, Iam. 2.19. who believe and tremble
where as the ungodly believe not, and therefore tremble not: but they would, if
they believed only so much as the Devils do. How then can prophaine persons
escape the torments of Hell, who come far short of these that are already in
hell? and how fearful an estate is it to be condemned of such, as be
condemned themselves?

Secondly, see the difference between Gods children, Hic ubiopus est none
verentur: illic, ubt nihil opus est, the verentur. Terent. Andr. act. 4. seen 1.
When Gods judgments are threatened, and men warned to take heed and look to
themselves, they do fear least of all who have most cause, and whom they most
nearly concern, and they on the other side most of all, whom they concern.
We see this in the old world evidently and expressly: for whom did the
threatening of the drowning and destruction thereof most nearly touch and
concern? Doubtless the disobedient world of the ungodly. But they feared
least, nay nothing at all; they ran on in their worldly and wicked courses,
till the flood came and swept them away. Whom did the threatening least of all
concern, as being in least danger to be drowned? Surely Noah, and his family,
for whom the Arc was prepeared: but they feared most of all. Nay Gods children
oftentimes fear for the wicked, Psalm. 119.53.136.158.
when they fear not for themselves, as Psalm. 119.53.136.158. as they pray for
them, when they pray not for themselves, and desire their conversion, when they
mind nothing less. The Prophet was greeved for them, when they were not
greeved for themselves. 2 Cor. 12.21.
So it is said by the Apostle, God will humble me among you, and I shall
bewail many which have sinned, and have not repented of the sins committed:
the more sorry he was for them, the less sorry they were for themselves. These
are like drunken men that dread nothing, because all their wit is gone to
discern of danger; or like little children, that fear not the fire till they
be burned, Pro. 20.11.
nor the candle till they be singed with it. As Pro. 20.11. even a child is
known by his doings, whether his work be pure and whether it be right.

Lastly, it behooves us to examine our own hearts, The trials of a true faith.
whether we have true faith or not. But how shall we try and prove our selves?
2 Samuel 6.6.7.9.
This appears in David, when the Lord in his anger smote Vzzah for his
error, that he died by the Ark of God, because he put forth his hand and
took hold of it when the Oxen shook it, be feared God exceedingly that day.
What? did he nor fear the Lord before? Yes doubtless; but exceedingly at that
time, when he saw a visible example of his wrath before his eyes: and this also
made him say, Psalm 19.120
my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgment. This
the Evangelist shows Act. 5. when Ananias and Sapph^ra were suddenly
smittendown with sudden death, Act. 5.11.
fear came upon the whole Church, and upon all th^se that heard of it. If it
be the property of the child of God to tremble at his word, Esaias. 66.2.
Esaias. 66. as the heart of Iosi^h melted for fear at the hearing of the Ia^v,
2 King. 22. Because a reproof enters more into a wise man, then an hundred
stripes into a Fool, Pro. 17. Pro. 17.10.
how much more at his rods, at his scourges, and at the drawing and shaking of
his glittering sword, when his hand lays hold on judgment? like the child at
the sight of his fathers rod? So the Prophet, Hab. 3.2 16.
when he heard of the judgments of the Lord, was afraid, his belly trembled,
his lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into his bones, and he
trembled in himself. This fear of Gods anger is a work of grace in the
heart. Thirdly, 2 Cor. 5.7.
when he seems to go from his own word, or against his word, even deny
himself, this is assuredly a true faith. Thus it was with Abrahram; when the
Lord bad him kill his son, his only son, even Isaac, the son of promise,
by whom he looked to have issue, in number as the Stars of heaven, and as the
sand by the Seashore, he accounted that God was able to raise him up even from
the dead from whence also he received him in a figure. So it was with Job, H.
b. 1.29.
we must believe that God will save us, even when he seems to go about to
destroy us, Job. 13.15. Thus we are taught to believe that he loves us, when
he chasteneth us and frowneth upon us, and makes little show of love toward
us: we must believe that he remembers us, when he seems to forget us, Esaias.
49.4.15.16. And touching his threatenings, we must believe them before they
come. The threatenings of God are manifold and evident, The soul that sins,
Ezekiel. 18.5. Psalm. 68.21.
shall die the death, Ezekiel. 18.5. and Psalm. 68. The Lord will wound the head of
his enemies, and the hairy scalpe of every one that goes on obstinately in his
sins. But because we see it not presently, instantly, and immediately
performed, the ungodly put far from them the evil day, and they live merrily
and pleasantly, thereby seeming to escape the scourge here, Eccl. 8.11.
as Eccl. 8. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
These think God will be better then his word, and that these threatenings are
spoken only to fray and affright men, as scare-crowes do birds; to keep them
in awe, not to bring them to ruin and destruction. What are these but
infidels, who cannot believe, that God will do that which they see him not to
do presently? Here then is the work of faith to believe that which may seem
to carry no likelihood of coming to pass: remembering what Solomon says
Though the wicked live an hundred years, and pass them all over in pleasure,
yet I know it shall not go well with the wicked, Eccl. 8.13.
neither shall he prolong his days which are as a shadow because he fears
not before God. The heathen do account it a point of man's misery above all
other creatures, that he alone is vexed with care and fear for the future: but
I account it a point of man's excellency and eminency above other creatures and
of true Christians above other men, that they are not all for the present, but
have their eyes in their fore head to foresee and so to prevent evils to come,
as Eccl. 2. The wise man's eyes are in his head, Eccl. 2.14.
but the fool walks in darkness. The natural man sees with one eye, to
wit the carnal eye of natural reason, that can pierce no farther then the
light of nature reaches: but Christian men have together with it the
spiritual eye of faith also to foresee evils to come, such as sense and reason
are not able to apprehend. Bernard in Psalm. Quihabitat. Sermon. 1.
There are four sorts of men in this case to be considered of us, some hope,
but fear not: others fear, but hope not: some neither hope nor fear: others
both hope and fear. The first sort is of those that hope, but fear not: these
run through thick and thin, and stand at nothing; they fear not when
there is cause, but they presume without cause. These hope for his mercy, but
they fear not his wrath: they have their eyes fastened upon his mercy, but they
shut them upon his wrath, least they should look upon it; and thereby take
liberty to sin without any remorse of conscience, or of repentance from dead
works. We have infinite examples both written and unwritten of such persons,
and therefore the Prophet David prays to God to keep his servant from
presumptuous sins, least they have dominion over him. Psalm. 19.13.
This faith is no faith, but a fancy, or rather a frenzy. These set up an idol
instead of God, made all of mercy, that is, an other kind of God, then he has
described himself to be in his word, Exodus 20 and 34 he will by no means
clear the wicked, Exodus 34.7.
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children and upon the childrens
children unto the third and to the fourth generation. Wherefore all mercy and
no fear, is all fancy and no faith. An other sort is of such as fear, but
hope not at all. These are contrary to the former. They fear his judgments too
much, but they hope in his mercies too little, as Caine, Saul, Achitaphel,
Judas, and such like, who had no more hope then the Devils have, and so come to
be swallowed up in the deep gulf of desperation. The third sort neither hope
nor fear, neither hope in his mercy, neither fear his justice. It is al one
with such which end goforward, whether God be offended, or not, whether he be
pleased or displeased. These are like the Laodiceans, neither hot nor cold,
but luke warm, whom God will spew out of his mouth, Revel 3.16.
Rev. 3. These are seiled in their lees, or dregs of their sins, that say in
their hearts, the Lord will do neither good nor evil. Zeph. 1.12.
These are Epicures or Atheists that make God sit idle in heaven, and do
nothing. The Fourth and last sort are such as both hope and fear also. In the
first sort reigns presumption, in the second desperation, in the third
profanation, in the last religion. These so hope in his mercy, that they stand
in fear of his wrath, as Noah, David, Josiah, and sundry others. Such must we
be, to regard both of his mercy and judgment. We must not be any of the former
sinners, neither presumptuous, nor desperate, nor profane, but fearful of
his wrath, and yet confident in his mercy.

10 And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God
repented of the evil that he had said, that he would do unto them, and he did
it not. Hitherto we have heard what the Ninevites did: Knowledge is of
Apprehension, Heb. 4 13 Approbation, Psalm 1.6. Math. 7.23.
here we are to consider what the Lord did, he saw their works, and repented of
the evil which he had denounced. Let us first mark the meaning of the words,
and consider them in order as they lie.

He saw). First, he not only beheld what they did, but he approved their
works, Chap. 1.2.
and conceives a liking of the service they performed, as Genesis 1.31. and 4.4.
Lam. 3.6. But does not the Lord see the wicked and their works? could it come
up before him? For answer unto this we must understand, that he is said to have
a two fold eye; the eye of knowledge, and the eye of alowance. He sees all
persons, and all things good and evil with the eye of his knowledge, that
nothing can be hid from him: for he that formed the eye, shall not he see? the
night, Psalm. 94.9. and 139.11.
and the light are both a like with him: but he sees not all things in this
manner with the eye of his alowance, liking, loving, and approving* In this
sense, he did not look upon Caine and upon his offering, but upon Abel and his
offering, to whom he had respect. Their works). First, their faith, their
conversion from their evil ways, their fasting and prayer, how they cried
mightily unto him.

God repented of the evil.) First, God is after a sort transformed and
transfigured into our nature, as we sometimes read of his eyes, ears, hands,
heart, feet, nostrils and other bodily members: not that he is so indeed, not
that he has these parts, but the Scripture speaks after our capacity and
understanding, as they do that speak to children; we are not ignorant, what
use, office, and property these several parts have in our selves; and we
conceive not how a man should see without eyes, or hear without ears, or
walk without feet, or work without hands, and to teach us therefore that God
sees, hears, works, and understands all things, those parts are ascribed
unto him, by which we see, hear, work, walk and understand: But properly
repentance is not in God (as we have noted before) but the effect is,
Repentance not properly in god.
which is nothing else but the undoing of a work which he had formerly done.
So then the Ninevites turned, and God turned: they turned from their evil, and
God from his evil. Howbeit these evils differ the one from the other; for
theirs is criminal; his penal: God knows whatsoever we do, and approoveth
of that which is good.
From hence we may observe two points, which, because they have affinity one
with an other, we will consider together namely, that God sees, knows, and
hears whatsoever we do, speak, or think; yea he acknowledges aloweth,
Whatsoever we do, and approoveth of that which is good. Psalm 139.2.3.4. and
33.13.14.
praises, and commends good things in whomsoever they are. Touching the
first branch, the Prophet says Psalm. 139. Thou understand my fitting, my
rising, my thoughts afar off, there is not a word in my tongue, but thou
know it wholly, thou possessest my reins, my bones are not hid from thee:
and 33.13.14. The Lord looks from heaven he beholds all the sons of men
from the place of his habitation, he looks upon all the inhabitants of the
earth. And touching the second branch, to wit, the approoving of of that which
is good, Moses declares, when Israel offered their submission to the ordinary
ministry, being ready to hear from his mouth all the words of the Lord, he
gave this testimony and commendation of them, Devt. 5.28.29
I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken,
they have will said, O that there were such an heart in them, Math. 8.10. and
15.28. and 26.13.
that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments always, etc. Thus Christ
our Savior commends the faith of the Centurion, Math. 8. of the Cananitish
woman, Chap. 15. and of the woman that anointed his feet with precious
ointment, I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, there shall this which she has done be told for a memorial of
her, chap. 26.

Let us see both these branches confirmed unto us. Reasons of the first branch.
Touching the first, it is great brutishness and folly not to know that God
knows all things. Idol, which has eyes and feeth not, ears and hearth not,
Psalm. 115.5.6 and 94.89.10.
and an heart and understands not. Hereunto came the words of the Prophet,
Understand ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise? he
that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not
see? he that teaches man knowledge shall not he know? All things have sight,
hearing, knowledge, and understanding from him, therefore he must hear,
perceive, and see, forasmuch as that which causes a man to be so, is it self
much more so. Secondly, Psalm. 139.7.8.9. etc.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I fly from thy presence?
If I ascend up into heaven, or make my bed in the grave, or take the wings of
the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, thou art there, etc.
Touching the second, Reasons of the second branch
he approoveth every good work, for who is it, every good and perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights. And as he must work
it before we can have it, Iam. 1.17.
so he must strengthen that which he has wrought in us. Secondly, Heb. 10.35.
as also it serves to draw on others by our example, as we also ought by the
examples of others.

The uses follow, and first of the first branch. And first, Heb. 4.13.
all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whrm we have to do;
Genesis 39.9.
because he searches all hearts: and say with Joseph, How can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God? Enoch walked before God and pleased him,
that he had his power and presence evermore before his eyes, Genesis 5.24. in Heb.
11. and Genesis 17.1. On the other side, this is a maine cause of all wicked
nesse, profaneness, and ungodliness among men, to be persuaded that God
seeeth us not, Psalm. 94. They prate and speak heard things, Psalm. 94.4.5.6.7.
they smite thy people and spoil thy heritage, flay the widow, and murder the
fatherless what is the cause? where is the reason? they say, the Lord shall
not see neither will the God of Jacob regard it. It is near to Atheism to
have such a blasphemous thought, as to jmagine that we can hide our counsels
and devises from the Lord, Esaias. 29.15.
as Esaias. 29 Woe unto them that seek deep to hid our counsel from the Lord,
and their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us? and whoknoweth
us? True it is, men will not speak thus prophanly with the tongue, for then all
men would condemn them, and cry shame of them as unworthy to live upon the
earth; but what should we look to their words, when we may look upon their
deeds? or what shall it avail them to hide their counsels, when they lay open
their conuersations? to keep their mouths silent, when their lives proclaim,
they think there is no God? Happy are we, if we have the Lord ever before us,
and have our eyes upon him as we know that his eyes are upon us (as the eye of
the Master upon the servant) to give to every man according to his works.

Secondly, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7
seeing it is a righteous thing with God torecompence tribulation to them that
trouble you; and to you who are troubled rest, when the Lord Iesas shall be
revealed from heaven. The Lord sees the afflictions of his servants, and will
regard and revenge them and get glory to his great name in the confusion of
their enemies. When the children of Israel were oppressed by the Egyptians, and
afflicted with sore burdens, the Lord comfort them with this, I have seen,
I have seen the affliction of my people, Exodus 3.7.9.
which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, Act. 7.34.
and am come down to deliver them. He considers the cruelty and injury of
the enemy, as 2 Chro. 16. 1 Chro. 16.9.
the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth to show
himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him. It
is strange to see the folly of men abusing the essential properties of God, as
were easy to show in our several state and condition of life, sometimes
abridging them and cutting them too short, and sometimes enlarging them and
stretching them too far. See this in the consideration of the power of God,
how we err two ways. In time of adversity, we contract it and make it to
little, as if he could not do so much as he had promised, and we cannot believe
more then we see, Numb. 11.4.13.21.22.23 Psalm. 78.19.
neither can look beyond the ordinary means, as Numb. 11. with Psalm 78. they
spoke against God, saying, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? Yea
Moses himself spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Whence should I have flesh to
give unto all this people? whereunto the Lord answers by way of reproof, Is
the Lords hand waxed short? thou shall see now, whether my word shall come to
pass unto thee, or not. So in the seige of Samaria, a noble person, on whose
hand the king leaned, answered the man of God, who had prophesied of great
plenty, If the Lord would, make window: in heaven, 2 King. 7.2.
might this thing be? but when men live in peace and plenty, how many do extend
his power too far, and encourage themselves in the excess of all
ungodliness and propha esse of life; because he is able to pardon their
sins, though they be never so great, and there upon harden their hearts, and
gather that they need not make conscience of any thing. Thus upon a firm
foundation, they build a false conclusion. The like we may say of the presence
of God. When we have all that heart can desire, that we prosper in the world
and increase in riches, we dream we must needs be highly in Gods favor, and
that he is present with us with his grace: but when we are plagued and
chastened every morning, how do we presently conceive that he is departed far
from us? that he has forgotten to here us, and will remember us no more?
E^ccl. 9.
but no man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them, and if
sin do not separate between us and our God, Esaias. 59.1.2.
his hand is not shortened that he cannot save, neither his ear heavy that he
cannot hear.

Lastly, Ismael did at Isaac, Genesis 21.9. as Michal did at David, 2 Samuel 6.20.
Nay, there be some so fowle-mouthed, and corrupt hearted, if they can find
nothing whereby to defame them, Maledeme loquuntur; sed mal^, Sen.
but in their own crew and companions, because therein they have oftentimes,
themselves a great and principal hand, and therefore they see the discrediting
of them tends to their own reproach. be the least civil virtue break out of
the ungodly, that they after a sort stumble upon them, accidentally rather then
purposely, and that but once, or if it be only a shadow of virtue appear in
any of their fellows; O how they praise and applaud them! they light up a
candle to see them, and they blow a trumpet for men to hear of them. In all
which they show themselves contrary to God; for he passes over the frailties
and infirmities of such as fear him and have given their hearts unto him,
though sometimes they stumble and fall, as we see in Job. Job. 42. Iam. 5.11. 1
King. 15.5. Math. 13.31.8 and 25.23. and 12.20.
42.8. Iam. 5.11. and in David, 1 King. 15.5. and wheresoever he sees any
grace to grow, though it be as little as agraine of mustardsecd, if he increase
but two talentes, or bring forth only thirty fold, if they be but as the
smoking flax, or as the bruised reed, he accepts it, makes much of it, and
highly commends it. On the other side, he hates and abhors wickedness,
as he loves righteousness, and albeit the ungodly have the glory and applause
of the world, because the world will love his own, yet will he bring upon them
shame and perpetual contempt.

And God repented of the evil that he had said) Albeit the threatening against
this city expressed no condition, God is merciful to all p^nitent sinners.
as we have already declared, yet we see in this place by the issue and event,
that it included it. As the threatening denounced was very fearful, so the
fruit of their repentance was as joyful. This teaches, that God is merciful
and gracious to all penitent sinners; he turns their mourning into mirth, and
all their heaviness into laughter. All such as truly repent them of their
sins, shall find pardon and forgiveness at his hands, as Ezekiel. 18. Ezekiel.
18.21.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep
all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live
and shall not die. Thus in sundry places we are cummanded to turn to God, and
then he promises to turnt to us, and to save us, Joel. 2, 12.13. Ier. 31.18.
Lam. 5.21. Hereunto come sundry examples of Manasses, 2 Chro. 33. of Paul, Act.
9. of the Jews that crucified the Lord of life, Act. 2. The like I might say
of sundry others.

The reasons, Nosinne is unpardonable, if the sinner could repent, no not the
sin against the holy Ghost. Secondly, Gods mercy is above all his works, he
knows whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust: he is slow to
anger and of great kindness, Psalm. 103. Thirdly, he has showed some mercy in
a temporal deliverance for a temporal repentance, 2 King. 21.27.
as we see in Ahab, who obtained the respite of punishent, when he had but an
outward humiliation, 2 King. 21. if wicked Ahab, who did sell himself to work
wickedness in the sight to the Lord, repenting with fasting and sackcloth, God
deferred his judgment threatened; how much more shall true repentance obtain
the love and favor of God, and blot out all our offenses out of his sight?

From hence arise sundry uses. treasure up unto themselves wrath against the
day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render
to every man according to his deeds. And therefore the Apostle says, Unto them
that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness
shall be indignation and wrath, Revel. 2.5.
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. Woe then to all such as lie in sin and please
not God, they fill up their sins always, and his wrath shall come upon them to
the uttermost. True it is, every unrepentant sinner can say, the Lord is
merciful, and Christ is the Savior of the world: but to whom is he merciful,
and whom will he save? Not every one that can say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of the father which is in
heaven. then they must return from their own ways, Ezekiel. 18.21.23.
that they may live: he will put all their wickedness out of his remembrance;
but first they must turn from all their sins that they have committed, and
do that which is lawful and right: he has promised to draw near unto them;
Iam. 4.8.10.
but then they must draw near unto him, yea they must cleanse their hands and
purify their hearts: he has said he will lift them up; but first they must
humble themselves in the sight of the Lord. Thirdly, Christ Jesus is a Savior;
that he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit.
2.14.
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.
Lastly, consider, that notwithstanding the shield and sheiter of the mercy of
God, to which every man runs, he has brought sundry both general and
particular judgments upon the children of disobedience, and his wrath has
been revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, Romans 1.18.
who no doubt builded with the untempered mortar of supposed mercy, but were
swallowed up with his justice. Such were the old world, who no doubt set up an
Idol, all made of mercy, but they found him to be a God of justice. Such were
the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah with the rest of the plain, Genesis 19. Such
were Pharaoh and the Egyptians that pursued Israel to the red Sea, and infinite
others. Nay see how God has whipped his own children, Pro. 11.31. 1 Pet.
4.17.18.
and scourged them with greevous chastisements, as we see in David, and other
Saints, if judgment have begun at Gods own house, what shall the end of them
be, that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?

Secondly, hence arises matter of much comfort to the humble and contrite
spirit that is weary and heavy laden with the weight and burden of his sins
lying heavy upon his conscience. Math. 11.28.29.
Nothing indeed can come hereby to the impenitent, that is, to the obstinate
and wilful offender tha^ resolves to continue in his sin, neither can he
look for any thing but judgment that hangs over his head and lies at the
door: but to the humble and repentant sinner there are a thousand comforts, and
a treasury of mercies laid up in store for him, to keep and preserve him from
doubting and despair. Such Christ Jesus calls unto him, and embraceti them
in the arms of his mere, that they should not be dismayed all the multitude or
greatness of their sins but rather lay hold upon the multitude and
greatness of his mercies, which are infinite, higher then the heavens; broader
then the Seas, deeper then the earth, and surmount all the sins which they
have committed. O what comfort is it to a sick man, lying and languishing upon
the bed of sorrow, to hear of a certain and Sovereign medicine, a present
and effectual remedy of his discase! and ought it not to find rest in our
souls, when we are willed to come to Christ, the Physician of the soul? ought
it not to be as marrow unto our bones, and bring peace to our souls, forasmuch
as his yoke is easy and his burden light? Who ever came penitently unto him,
and weat away heavily or discomfortably? Suet. in vita Titirespat^c.
If it were the saying of a great Prince, that none should depart from his
presence heavy-hearted; how much more may we be assured it is the voice of the
King of kings, that no penitent person shall ever go from him without grace and
favor comfortless? Repentance is a salve that heals all the wounds of the
soul. Search into the examples of all the Saints from the beginning of the
word. What was it, turned Noah's drunkenness into sobriety? Genesis 9.25. and 19.
cum. 2 Pet. 2.8. 1 Timothy 1.13. 2 Chro. 33.12. Esaias. 11.9.
Repentance. What changed the unnatural lust and excess of Lot into
eleannesse and purity? repentance. What was it that cast Manasseth, Paul, and
many others into a new mould; and of oppressors, persecuters, blasphemers, made
them meek and gentle as Lambs? repentance. No man was ever saved without
repentance: for final impenitency brings damnation. Damnation is a necessary
effect of divine justice from the just God; brought upon unjust offenders. Such
sinners and transgressors can have no peace with God without reconcilement:
there is no reconcilement without remission: no remission without Christ: no
Christ without faith: no faith without repentance. Woe then to such as presume
of hope of pardon without payment: these disioyne faith and repentance, and
separate mercy and justice asunder in God, to whom both are alike essential,
and in whom both are infinite: for albeit his mercies exceed his justice in his
works toward us, yet in himself they are alike. And woe unto such as say,
though we give our selves to the free and full practice of sin, yet God is
abundantly, nay infinitely merciful; for such shall certainly perish in their
presumption, and to make him all mercy is to leave him to be unjust in
suffering sin to go unpunished, whereas the judge of all the world should do
right, Genesis 19.25.

Lastly, Motives to stir up to repentance.
nor use the means to attain unto it, which is by repentance. Now we have
sundry motives to move us and persuade us to repentance, which we must no less
affect, Judas, who ended his his days in despair, may be said of every
impenitent person, Math. 26.24.
Woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, Ioh. 6.70. and 3.18.
it had been good for that man, if he had not been borne: and in an other
place, one of you is a Devil, and is condemned already, because he has not
believed and repented. 2 Timothy 2.26.
all the Pharohs and Hazaels in the world cannot be compared with his tyranny,
as 2 Timothy 2. for impenitent the are taken captive by the Devil, and holden in
his snares to do his will. Thirdly, to fall upon their heads every hour. For
albeit they should escape them in this life, yet they are but respited or
reprived, as the judge sometimes does the malefactor that is afterward
executed: and in the mean season, all the fearful plagues and punishments
that have come upon sinners are imminent and may suddenly and swiftly come
upon them. They may be summoned to the bar of Gods judgment in this life, as
Adam was, Genesis 3. and Caine, chap. 4. Genesis 3.9. and 4.9. and 6.7.
they may be drowned in the waters with the old world Genesis 6. with Pharaoh and
the Egyptians Exodus 14. Fxod. 14.28, Psalm. 136.15.
they may be overthrown and overturned with fire and brimstone from the Lord
out of heaven, as Sodom and Gomorrha were, Genesis 19.24.
Genesis 19. they may perish with the arrows of Famine, Pestilence, the Sword,
banishment, and evil beasts, Ezekiel. 5.15.16.17. Exodus 7. and. 8. and 9. and
10. and
as many in Israel, Ezekiel. 5. they may suffer and sustain all the plagues of
Egypt, as the King and people of Egypt, Exodus 7. etc. they may be burned and
consumed with fire, as the captains and their fifties, 2 King. 1. 2 King.
1.10.12.
they may be stung with fiery Serpents, and perish, as the people in the
wilderness Numb. 21. the earth may open and swallow them, as it did Dathan and
Abiram, Numb. 6. Psalm. 106. Numb. 21.6. and 16.31. Psalm. 106.17. 1 Samuel 31.4. 2 Samuel 17.23. Act. 1.18. Act. 12.^3. Act. 13.^1. Genesis 19.11. 2 King. 6.18.
they may destroy themselves, and lay violent hands upon themselves, as Saul
and Athithophel, 1 Samuel 31.2. Sam. 17. they may fall headlong, and burst a
sunder in the middle, and all their bowels gush out, as Judas, Act. 1. they may
be smitten by the Angel of the Lord, and be eaten up of worms, as Herod was,
because he gave not God the glory. chap. 12. they may be smitten with
blindness by the hand of the Lord, and a mist and darkness may fall upon
them, Luk 13.3.
that they may seek some to lead them by the hand, as Elymas the sorcerer, and
sundry others. This is that of which our Savior warned his hearers by occasion
of the sudden slaughter of the Galileans, and those eighteen upon whom the
tower in Siloe fell and slew them, that except they did return, they should
all likewise perish. Luke 13. Fourthly, such are in danger not only of these
corporal plagues to fall upon the body, but of eternal death and everlasting
damnation from the comfortable presence of God, Act. 17.30.31
the heaviest judgment of all the rest, as Act. 17. Now God commands all men
every where to repent, because he has appointed a day in which he will judge
the world in righteousness. Eccl. 9. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do,
Eccl. 9.10.
do it with thy might: for there is no work, nor devise, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. Lastly, none can be made partakers
of eternal life, but such as are penitent. It is vain with Balaam to wish for
heaven, Numb. 23.10.
and to dye the death of the righteous, except we live the life of the
righteous, and repent us of our sins, and so turn from our evil ways with
these Ninevites. To conclude, let us take heed least these men rise up in
judgment and condemn us, who repented at the preaching of one Prophet: the
more has been committed to us, the more shall be required at our hands. The
Lord that searches the hearts and tries the reins, Ier. 7. to give to every
man according to his ways and according to the fruit of his doings, turn us
unto him, and then we shall be turned, to whom be glory and praise in the
Church for ever, Amen.

A Recapitulation of the doctrines in this Treatise.
GOd warns before he punishes. Gods threatenings are conditional. General
all sins procure general judgmentes. The preaching of the word is the means
to work faith. It is a fruit of repentance to take revenge for sin, of our
selves. Public fastes were always called and solemnized in dangerous times
Repentance is wrought by the preaching of the word. Repentance must be speedy
and not prolonged. Superiors must give good example to their inferiors. We have
need to stir up our selves and others to repentance. Fasting and prayer must
be joined together. Prayer is a means to remove Gods judgments. Prayer must be
earnest, zealous, and fervent. Prayer must be directed to the true God only.
Prayer and repentance must go together. The natural man not yet called must
repent. Repentance stands in turning from our evil ways unto God. Where
true faith is, there is a fear of judgments to come God sees all things, and
approves that which is good. God is gracious and merciful to penitent
sinners.
GODS TRVMPET, SOVNDING THE ALARM, Sommoning all persons speedily to repent,
and turn unto God, teaching the doctrine, removing the hindrances, and urging
the practice of true repentance, before the evil days come which are at hand.

Act. 17.30.31. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands
all men every where to repent:

Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, etc.

Revel. 2.5. Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent, and do thy first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. LONDON. Printed by T.C. for Michael
Sparks. 1632.

GODS TRVMPET SOVNDING THE ALARM, SVMMONING ALL PERSONS SPEEDILY TO REPENT.
An Exposition upon LVK. 13.1.2. etc. 1 There were present at that season, some
that told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
Sacrifices.

2 And Jesus answearing, said unto them, suppose ye that these Galileans were
sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things?

3 I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

4 Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloe fell, and flew them, think
ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem.

5 I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

6 He spoke also this Parable, etc.


HEre is a communication touching an inhumane and cruel fact of Pilate against
certain Galileans. The maine doctrine and use taught by our Savior, who took
all occasions to do good to soul and body, is to move to repentance,
comprehended in these words, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
The preaching of this necessary truth be all that were present arose upon the
report and information, Pilates barbarous cruelty in three respects.
which certain made to him of Pilates barbarous and bloody action: which was
so much the more foul and beastly: Governor of Jury, Math. 27.11.
under the Roman Emperor, and as a judge ought to have proceeded according to
Law, to have kept and preserved the Country in peace and quietness, and not to
have used force and violence in sheding of blood: Galileans did not properly
belong to his jurisdiction, neither were these within his liberty, but did
belong to Herod, and therefore if they had offended, they were to be sent to
him, to whom they were bound to give on account; as he dealt afterward with
Christ whom he sent to Herod, Luke 23.7.
Luke 23.7. Lastly, because this murder was committed upon their persons,
Jerusalem, Ioh. 4.20.
or as the Samaritans sacrificing else where in the mountain, it appears
not. But this is certain and appears evidently, that in the time of
sacrificing as the blood of the beast was shed and ran down, Pilate came
upon them with his men of war and shed their blood, so that the blood of the
men and of the beasts was mingled together.

Of this strange and savage practice there were some that informed our Savior,
whereupon he began to make use thereof, and to preach to them the doctrine of
repentance, and to apply it the to consciences of all his hearers, as also to
reprove and meet with a secret and common corruption that reigned in them. For
it seems by Christ's Question, that such as were present and saw that
slaughter judged hardly and uncharitably of those men that so suffered, as
being notorious and extraordinary wicked persons, because such things had
befallen them, and therefore he propounds a general doctrine, I tell you
Nay: but except your selves be take your selves to a better course and resolve
to lead a new life, ye shall in like sort perish as well as they.

To work a deeper impression of this in their hearts, Hieron. in 8. cap. Isaj.
he adds and annexeth another example, not much unlike the former of a like
sudden judgment, upon eighteen persons which perished by the fall of a tower
in Siloe. Esaias. 8.6. Ioh. 9.7.
This Siloe was a calm stream or little brook running softly, which rises
at the root of mount Sion, flow, ing at certain times only, which carried the
water about Jerusalem, De bello Iudai. lib. 6. cap. 11.
and had upon it a fort builded as a Castle or Citadell. Of this read more in
Josephus, Now certain standing under it, a piece of the Tower and wall fell
down, and crushed 18. of them to death. Upon occasion of this example also, he
presses again the former doctrine and in the same words, as if he should say,
Because these 18. were slain, and died in that sudden fall, not once
thinking of death, impute you the cause of this extraordinary event and
success, to be their extraordinary sins? I tell you: Nay, but except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish.

When he has thus propounded the doctrine, he farther amplifieth and explaneth
it by a Parable or similitude: as if he should say, I will tell you in what case
the Church of Jerusalem in general, and you here present in particular are: it
is as much as if a man had a large Vineyard, and in it had planted a fig tree.
Now when he had set it in his fruitfullest ground and fattest soil, he looked
for the fruit of his labors: and at the time of bearing, he comes, and
calls the dresser of the vineyard, he says, Lo, I have planted this fig
tree, I have spared it a good time, and yet it remains barren and brings
forth; no fruit what remains but that I cut it down? The dresser, whether in
regard of pity and commiseration, or that continuance of time might do some
good, or hope that other or farther dressing might help to amend the matter,
pleads with the Lord of the Vineyard for the Vineyard, I will dress it, and
dung it, and dig about it, and use all good means I can: and it may be the
next year, your patience and forbearance shall not be repented off, and my
labor shall not be grudged at: but if after all this toil and paines-taking
it yield no fruit, then thou may cut it down. This is the sum of this
Parable; the application whereof is. So God has placed you of Judea in a
fertile place, has bestowed many blessings upon you, and has looked for good
fruit from you, but behold ye bring forth none; I tell you therefore, except ye
repent and that speedily, ye shall all likewise perish. Now for our better
proceeding in the orderly handling of these words.

Observe herein 2. things An exhortation to repentance or a threatening of
destruction to the impenitent, verse. 3. and 5. An amplification or enlargement
thereof in the residue.


The amplification or illustration is By examples. By a parable.


The examples are of the Galileans Eighteen upon whom the tower fell and slew
them.


The second amplification, which is by parable, we will relerue to the proper
place, and handle the same particularly. For all these things belong unto us,
as well as unto those to whom they were spoken by our Savior, and may be
applied to us as well as unto them. The doctrine of repentance was never more
needful to be preached, and the threatening also as fully concerns us, Except
we repent, we shall likewise perish, as Mark 13. least we pass by the
exhortation uttered to the Disciples by our Savior as impertinent to us, he
adds, What I say unto you, Mark. 13.37.
I say unto all, Wa^ch; So it is in this place, as if he had said, what I say
unto these, I say unto all, Repent. Wherefore, The way to prevent Gods
judgments is to amend our lives.
This teaches, that the only way to prevent and escape the judgments of God
is to amend our lives and turn unto him with all our hearts, and to repent
from dead works. We live in the days of many judgments, some lying heavy upon
us, others hanging over our heads, so that we may say with the Prophet. Psalm.
1^0.1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord: and 42.7. deep
calls unto deep at the noise of thy water spoutes; all thy waves and thy
billows are gone over me. The means ordained of God to revoke his heavy, hand
gone out against us is to turn from our evil ways. See this Deuteronomy. 4. Deuteronomy.
4.29, 30 31.
after that God punishes his people for their sins, he says When thou art
in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter
days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto his voice,
he will not forsake thee nor destroy thee: 2 Chro. 17.13.14.
if thou seek him with all thine heart and with all thy soul. Thus the Lord
said to Solomon 2 Chro. 7. If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I
command the Locustes to devour the land, or if I send postilence among my
people: if my people which are called by my name shall humble themselves, and
pray, and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear
from heaven, and will forgive their sin, Ier. 3 22.
and will heal their land. And the Prophet Jeremy brings in the Lord
speaking, Math. 3.7.8.10.
Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backsliding. So does
John the Baptist reprove the Pharisees, O generation of vipers, who has warned
you to sly from the wrath to come? bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance: and now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every tree
which brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down, and cast into the fire. So
then the only way to stay Gods hand, and to stop his judgments now that his
arrows fly through the land, is to return from all our evil ways, and to
cause others to return.

The reasons follow: Sodom and Gomorrha, as they did Pharaoh, and infinite
others. We may be destroyed by fiery Serpents, burned in the fire, drowned in
the waters, swallowed up in the earth as Dathan and Abiram: and may look every
day for some plague or other to find us out and seize upon us. Ninevites,
Jonah. 3.10.
God saw their works, that they turned from their evil ways, and he repented
of the evil he had said he would do unto them, and he did it not.

If then we would prevent Gods judgments, tears to be turning to God; but so
should Esau repent. Some content themselves with a little humbling and an
outware casting down of themselves, to hang down their heads for a day like a
Bulrush, but so should Ahab repent. Some think every good word Lord, Lord, to
be repentance, and if they can but say Lord have mercy upon me, they have truly
repented, but so should every sick man repent. Others, turn not from sin,
until sin turn from them, and they leave it not, till they can follow it no
longer; but thus every old man repents. Others turn from one sin to an
other, as many from one disease into another: and from evil to worse, as it
were from a fever into a frenzy. Lastly, others turn from some sin, but not
from all: they will keep some beloved sin still; but thus Herod and Judas
repented: but this must be the Covenant that we make with God to keep us from
all sin, remembering that he which fails in one point is guilty of all. Iam.
2.10.
All these blind ways wherein the greatest sort do walk must be avoided of
us. True it is, wicked men may walk in all these paths; they may confess
their sins and desire others to pray for them: but this is an enforced
repentance this is compulsion, not conversion; and thus Pharaoh repented:
whereas true repentance must be voluntary, and as a free will offering. They
may confess some heinous and capital sin, known to others as well as to
themselves, whereby they have brought shame and confusion upon themselves,
howbeit they will not confess all, but thus Iudus repented, saying. I have
sinned, Math. 27.4.
in that I have betrayed innocent blood; but he acknowledged not his
covetousness, that he was a thief and kept the bag. They have often some
remorse and touch of conscience, but it is a great deal more for the
punishment threatened or inflicted, then for the sin committed: if they might
any way escape the punishment, the sin would never trouble or torment them: but
thus Caine repented, Genesis 4.13.
who cried out, My punishment is greater then I can bear. Besides, what
contrition or compunction of heart soever they may have, it is but as a flash
of lightning, it is not constant; it is not constant; it is not joined with an
unfeigned desire to forsake sin and to turn unto the Lord, neither with any
persuasion of Gods goodness and mercy in Christ Jesus, To conclude, we may be
assured of true repentance and of our turning to God by these three infallible
tokens: first when we can say before the Lord, How to be assured that our
repentance and sorrow are, true.
that there is no sin but we do as heartily desire never to commit it, and
as unfainedly crave of God to give us strength to leave and forsake it, as we
desire he would not plague and punish us for it. Every man desires to be freed
and exempted from the punishment; happy are we if we have as great a desire to
be freed from the sin. Secondly, when we as earnestly crave and covet to
forsake sin, as we desire that God would forgive us our sins, and not
impute them unto us: Lastly when we as truly hate sin, as we desire to be
partakers of eternal Glory in the kingdom of heaven. These are unfallible
signs of true repentance and turning unto God, which were never found in any
wicked man in any age of the world, neither indeed can be.

Secondly, Math. 9.12.
The whole (says Christ) need not the Physician, Rules touching tonuersion.
but they that are sick. Now that we may search thoroughly into our selves, and
make an Anatomy of our souls, and plowgh up the ground of our hearts, let us
observe these few rules following. The first rule.
First, every man that comes of Adam, and issues out of his loins (as all
mankind does) is guilty of his sin and disobedience in eating of the
forbidden fruit. And if we had no inherent sin of our own, this imputed
sin of his were enough to condemn us: for we, even we our selves in his
loins did eat of the forbidden fruit, we believed not God, we hearkened to
Satan, we were seduced and deceived as well as he. In this the proverb holds
true, Ezekiel. 18.2.
which is justly reproved in the Jews. The fathers have eaten sour grapes,
and the childrens teeth are set on edge. This the Apostle teaches at large
Romans 5. Romans 5.12.
By one man sin entered into the world and death by sin. Now this sin of
Adam passes to his posterity be two means; by imputation and propagation. The
punishments which all men suffer do plainly argue that the sin of Adam is
imputed to us therefore he adds in the next words, Death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned, to wit, in him.

But because this rule is not easily yielded unto, but we are ready to say with
Nicodemus, How can these things be, John 3. and with the Disciples that
followed him, This is an hard saying, who can here it, John 6.60? We will
propound and answer a few objections, Adam was not only personal, neither did
he sin as a singular person, but as carrying all mankind in the stock and
original, no otherwise then our Savior, satisfying for us on the cross has
not satisfied for us as a private person, but as sustaining and representing
the whole Church in the head, as 2 Cor. 5. If one died for all, all likewise
were dead: 2 Cor. 5.15. Romans 6.6.8.
and Romans 6. We are dead with Christ, and crucified with him. If then we died
in Christ dying, and were likewise crucified with him, who can doubt but it may
be said, that we sinned in Adam? For if the righteousness and satisfaction of
the second Adam be imputed to us, why shall not the sin of the first Adam in
like manner be imputed, especially seeing the righteousness of Christ is
imputed unto us, that the sin of Adam might not be imputed unto us? And besides
the sacred records of holy Scripture, does not this accord with good reason?
For inasmuch as Adam received good things not for himself alone (as we do) but
for his posterity it is not to be marveiled at, if being spoiled, or rather
spoiling himself of these good things, he lost them for himself and his
posterity. If a man be capitally punished for high treason against his Prince,
and forfeit his estate and be thereby brought to poverty, his children also
have their blood stained and loose their nobility. Even as he that is borne of
Parents infected with the Leprosy, draws from them like contagion: so it is
with such as are borne of Adam, out of his loins issues a natural
deprauation and contagion. So then we must consider, that we are all Adams seed
and posterity, he was the common father of us all, whatsoever he received, it
was for himself and his posterity, and whatsoever gift he lost, he lost them
for himself and all his posterity, Calu. justit. lib. 2. cap. 1.
as it is said that Levi paid tithes in Abraham, albeit by his office he
received tithes, Heb. 7.9. Religion and the image of God in which he was
created, if he had stood fast in his estate, had been hereditary and entailed
to his posterity, as an inheritance to be conveied from the father to the
children: but when he fell from God, Genesis 5.3.
he is said to beget a son in his own likeness after his own image, not in
the image of God. This the Apostle touches in many places Romans Romans 1.14.15
16.17.18.19.
5. Death riegned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after
the similitude of Adams transgression. And again, Through the offense of one
many be dead. And again, The judgment was by one to condemnation. And again,
by one man's offense death reigned by one. And again, By the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation. And again, by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners.

Secondly, it may be objected, What reason is it, Adams fall? I answer, 1 Cor.
3.18.
if any man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool,
that he may be wise. Cur omnium fit culpa, paucorum sceluss Seneca in Hippoli.
But howsoever few among the multitude think or believe they shall answer for
Adams sin; yet we must know it was not his sin alone, but a common sin,
his and ours as he was a common or public person, and carried all mankind in
him. If any ask the reason, why the sin of Adam should be imputed to his
posterity, rather then the sin, of other parents, as our fathers,
grandfathers, or great-grand-fathers to their children: I answer, the
difference appears in diverse respects: First, by the sin of Adam we lost
original purity, but not by the sins of the other. Secondly, we showed
before, that Adam received gifts which he should have conveyed to his
posterity: when they were lost, it comes to pass justly, that all his
posterity should be stripped and deprived of them: but our grand fathers or
fathers received not supernatural gifts, which by an hereditary right were to
be derived to their children. Besides, the sins of such Parents were
personal or proper sins, because they did not sustain the persons of their
posterity, it cannot be said of Hezekiah, Iehoshaphat, or Josiah, Velut a^mine
facto, quidata^ portaruunt, et terras turbine perflant; Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1.
who were the posterity of David, that they did in the loins of David murder
Vriah, or commit adultery with her that was the wife of Vriah. Let us see the
truth of this in the example of Adam. He was the root and original of all
sin, he disobeyed the Commandment of God, and after that, a flood gate being
opened, followed a multitude of sins: yet doubtless only that first sin of
Adam was imputed to his posterity, not his daily failings, because by this sin
he brake the Covenant of God made with him, as with the author and original of
all mankind. To conclude then, we must distinguish of Adams sins: they are of
two sorts, his first sins and his after sins. His first sin was the sin
of mankind generally, this was not his alone, nor ours alone but his and ours
jointly together: his after sins (for no doubt he sinned daily, being now
become a sinner) which he committed as a private man, were his alone: being
sins of his person, not of his nature, and therefore not to be laid to our
charge.

The last objection is out of the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 18.4.
20. All souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the
Son is mine, the soul that sins, it shall dye the Son shall not bear
the iniquity of the father, Deuteronomy. 24.16.
neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. How then comes it
to pass, that we die for another sin? or wherefore is the sin of Adam
imputed to us? or is it credible, that that he which forgiveth us our own
sins, will impute to any one an other sin? Exodus 20.5.
So in the law, when the Lord threatens to visit the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, Ezekiel. 18.2.
he understands such children as walk in their fathers steps, and are
partakers of the same sins. For in this place he reproves them that used
this Froverbe, The fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are
set on edge. But the sons of Adam cannot be said to be innocent, as they
which not only sinned in Adam as in the stock and root of mankind, but also
themselves are borne stained with the same depravation and prone to the same
sin. So then this place makes nothing to the present matter: for the first
sin of Adam was not personal, being as one that represented the person of his
posterity; whereas the Prophet speaks of the sins of the fathers whose
sins are merely personal, as they that in sinning did not sustain the
persons of their children.

The second rule depends upon the former, which is, The second rule.
that in all men in regard of the guiltiness aforesaid, the whole nature of
man is corrupted, so that the whole man lies in evil, as Ioh 5. The whole
world lies in wickedness: 1 Ioh. 5.19.
so we may say that every part and power of soul and body is infected with sin
as with a foul Leprosy from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot,
there is nothing in us but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores, so that we
may cry out with the Leper, I am unclean, Levit. 13.45.
I am unclean. No man is free from this blot, whatsoever is borne of the
flesh, is flesh Ioh. 3.6. Ioh. 3.6.
We are by nature the children of wrath Ephesians. 2.3. Ephesians. 2 3. Job. 14.4.
Who can bring forth a cleance thing out of an unclean? There is not one Job.
14.4. David acknowledges himself infected with this contagion from his
conception. Psalm. 51.5. Psalm. 51.5.
and in this common lot he does bewail and lament his own. This we must
confess to be in our selves, and thus the Apostle teaches Romans 3. Romans
3.9.10.11.12.13.14, etc.
Are we more excellent or better then they? No in no wise: for we have before
proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin, As it is
written, There is none righteous, no not one, and they are all gone out of the
way, and their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, etc. that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. This was signified by
Circumcision, for by that external sign or Symbol the Church was and is
warned, that there was somewhat in man (so soon as he was borne) that ought to
be cut off and corrected. The end of our Baptism is the same, which is the
Sacrament of our clensing in the blood of Christ, by which our natural
filthiness is washed away. Neither does the estate of this universal
contagion belong only to Turks and infidels, to the Savages or evil
Christians, but even to the offspring of the Godly and faithful, even as he
that was Circumcised begat one that was uncircumcised; and as a grain of
wheat well winnowed from the chafe brings forth (when it grows) wheat with
chafe again. Therefore when any man has children of evil disposition, he
must acknowledge his own jmage in them: and when he has good children, Ioh.
1.13.
he ought to admire the work of God in them and to confess their goodness to
be his jmage, who are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God, to whom all Glory and praise is due. The Lord Jesus
alone was free from this common contagion and corruption, who derived not
original sin from his mother. True it is, that all men sinned in Adam: and
it is as true that Christ was in Adam, as being one of his posterity:
Nevertheless that sentence of the Apostle does not concern Christ, because
the person of Christ was not in Adam, but only his humane nature; neither was
he conceived after the common manner of other men, but by overshadowing of the
holy Ghost. What original sin is.
He therefore is excepted out of the common condition, all are borne in
Original sin, which is nothing else but the depravation of man's nature,
contracted from the very generation it self, and derived from Adam into all
mankind. Now herein are two things, the want or privation of original
righteousness, and the inclinablenesse or pronenesse to evil: as sickness is
not only a privation of health, but also an evil affection or disposition of
the body arising from the distemper of the humors: so this hereditary blot, as
a sickness, is not only the want of righteousness, but likewise a pronenesse
to unrighteousness: from whence arises blindness in the mind, frowardness
in the will, the loss of supernatural gifts, and the corruption of those that
are natural.

The third rule follows, that all Evil, The third rule
even the whole body of sin is in man, as we heard before that the whole man
is in evil. In every man are the seeds and beginnings of all sin by nature.
Not in one man a pronenesse to some sins, an in another to some other sins: but
a pronenesse to all in all and every one; not only in the worst or most
wicked, in the unregenerate and carnal men, but in the regenerate and best
men: even to the most odious, heinous and abominable sins. All that know
themselves know this to be true, and such as know not the truth of it, do not
as yet know themselves, neither can they truly repent. As the matter first
made (called a Chaos) had the seeds of all creatures in it: so the mass of
sin that is in us has the fountain and root of all other sins. Matter of
wonderful h^miliation.
O how should this humble us, to think what vile and venemed natures we have!
never was there any gross sin or impiety committed in the world by
desperate, deboshed, and develish men, albeit we have not committed it already,
neither intend to commit it hereafter, but do hate and abhor it: yet there
lies hid in our hearts a fitness and forwardness, a pronenesse and
disposition thereunto. All ground is not fit to bear and bring forth all kind
of fruit, but some yields one sort and some an other: it is not so with our
hearts; they are Seminaries or seed-plottes of all sins. We complain and cry
out of the Apostasy of the Angles, of the murder of Caine, of the filthy
lusts of the Sodomites, of the hard heart of Pharaoh, the murmuring of the
Israelites, of the conspiracy of Korah of the rebellion of Absalom, of the envy
of the Pharesees, of the horrible treachery of Judas, and such like vices and
villainies: but let us never accuse or accurse these and cry out against them;
rather it behooveth us wisely to return home to our selves, and to enter into
our own hearts; where we shall see, that we carry them all within us; every
man has a Caine, a Sodomite, a Pharaoh, a Pharisee, an Absalom, a Judas, nay a
devil, nay all these together in his own breast, and bosom. These are indeed
most wicked and wretched men: howbeit they serve as glasses to behold our own
faces. For as in the water face answers to face, so does the heart of a man
to man: Pro. 27.19.
their heart answeareth to our hearts, and ours to theirs. And as there is the
same nature of cruel and savage Lions, so there is between the heart of
Caine, of Pharaoh, of Judas, of our selves, and any other man. For (as the
Apostle speaks,) are we better then they? Romans 3.9.
No, in no wise. We complain against Annas and Caiaphas the high Priests,
against Herod and Pilat the chief Governors, against Judas and the Jews the
cursed instruments that crucified the Lord of life, and accuse them as
notorious wicked and hard hearted men: but do we judge our selves any better by
nature, or of our selves? or shall we say with the proud Pharisees, Math. 23.30.
if we had been in the days of our fathers, we would never have done as they
did we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets:
nay had we lived in their times, and stood in their places, doubtless we would
have put upon us their persons, and by the sway and swing of the same
corruption, we would have done none otherwise, unless Gods grace did prevent
us and restrain us. If he should leave us (as he did them) to our selves, and
not stay us up being ready to fall, if he did not hold us in the arms of his
mercy, Exodus 19.4.
as a father does the child; and bear us as it were on Eagles wings; we
should quickly fall down as deeply as ever they did, and plunge our selves
headlong into all iniquity.

The fourth rule to be known of every one that would amend his ways is, The
fourth rule.
that every one borne of Adam lies under the curse of God, Ephesians. 2.3.
and is the child of wrath by nature, as well as others, yea of hell and
damnation. Have we not then need of repentance? As then the Eggs of the Aspe
are justly broken, and Serpents new bred are justly killed, albeit they have
yet poisoned none: so even infants, much more others, are guilty before him,
Gentiles, Romans 3.1.
and to have many preheminences above them? I answer, Romans 3.9.
being alike sinners by nature; in regard whereof he says they were in no sort
better then they: The Jews had a preferment of favor to be Gods chosen or
peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 4.34.
to have his Law and Prophets, the Ceremonies and Sacrifices, the Arc and the
Covenant, but touching grace and justification through grace before God, by
faith not by works, it was all one to Jew and Gentile, because all are
sinners. So then this rule teaches, that all men are under the guilt and
punishment of sin, which is a matter of such danger, as it were better to
have the whole weight of the world upon us, then to lie under the burden and
bondage of one sin; because the wrath of God (which is the heaviest thing
under heaven) does hang upon sin and sinners for ever. We are all of us
condemned men, there is not any one which is not in himself damned and
forlorn. Their is nothing in our whole nature but corruption; we are loathsome
and abominable in his sight, the heirs of death and destruction, the enemies
of God, the bondslaves of Satan held under his dominion even from our mothers
womb. This does admonish us of the miserable condition of all mankind through
sin; no creature more wretched; we have no cause to advance or magnify our
selves. It stirs up our minds to seek after a Savior, Luke 15.32.
to find us being lost, and to quicken us being dead. It teaches us to think
seriously upon the riches of Gods mercy, Ephesians. 2.4.
and to praise his name for his great love wherewith he has loved us. It
puts us in mind by our own estate of corruption, to reprove others with
compassion, Gal. 6.1.
considering our selves, that are no less sinners, and stand in the same case
and condemnation as well as they.

The fifth rule is, The fifth rule
that the natural man can do nothing at all that can please God. For until
we have faith and repentance, all that we do or can do is sinful, and
abominable in his sight. Every thought of the heart of man is evil, and only
evil, Genesis 6.5. and 8 21.
and continually evil, Genesis 6. and 8. It is deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked, who can know it? The wised me of the flesh: Ier. 17.9.
and therefore the best thing in a carnal man, even whatsoever he
understands, or perceives, is enmity against God: Rom 8.8. and 7 18. and 3.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. The Apostle
says of himself, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good
thing: and generally of mankind he pronounces, Tit. 1.15.
There is none righteous, no not one, they are all gone out of the way. and
again, Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbeleeuing is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled. The
doctrine. of Pelagius,
The opinion of Pelagus, that a man that is an infidel and unregenerate has
in himself and of himself a sufficient power to believe and to fulfill the
law, Ezekiel. 36.26.
is as contrary to the whole doctrine of the Scriptures, as light to darkness,
as sweet to sower. For the Prophets and Apostles teach, that the heart of man
is stony, and therefore in it own nature unfit and incapable to receive the
impression of the law of God, unless God write on that stone with his singer:
that the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.14. 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. Ephesians 2.1.5. Col. 2.13.
for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them: that the Ephesians
before their calling, yea and all of us are dead in sins and trespasses.
Hence it is that the Scripture calls the change of man by regeneration,
sometimes an other birth, Ioh. 3. Sometimes the creation of the new man, Ephesians 4.
Sometimes an other resurrection from the dead Luke 15.32. Ioh. 5.25. For as a
dead carcass can by no means dispose nor prepare it self to the
refurrection, as Lazarus lay in his grave stinking, until by the powerful
voice of Christ he was raised up to life: or as a thing that is not created,
cannot further it self any thing to the creation of it self: so man in the
state of nature and before his regeneration has nothing whereby he may dispose
himself or further his new birth, or spiritual life. This rule teaches that
many there are, who albeit they bless themselves, as men in a good case, yet
are found the children of wrath, the enemies of righteousness, haters and
hated of God Such are they that rest in outward or civil honesty, that boast
and brag that they are no adulters, no thieves, no murderers, that they live
peaceably and quietly among their neighbors, and pay every man his own; and
are not all these good? Yes doubtless they are good, but they are not good
enough: these must we do, Math. 23.23.
but other things may not be left ^^done. For if they could look thoroughly and
unpartially into their souls, they should find there a filthy sink and
puddle of all manner of sin, and nothing else. It teaches that we have no
freedom left in any faculty of the soul to spiritual goodness, and
therefore beats down the doctrine of the Church of Rome, that sets up and
aduanceth man's free will, as if it were not lost, but only weakened. It
teaches that before the natural man be washed and purged, every thing is
unclean unto him, yea he tainteth and defiles every thing that he touches:
which way so ever he turns himself, all his actions, spiritual, civil, or
natural are polluted, because they proceed from unclean hearts and
consciences. His spiritual actions, which may seem best of all, his hearing
the word, reading the Scriptures, praying to God, receiving of the Sacraments,
all being the sacrifices of the wicked, Pro. 15.8. and 28.9.
are abomination unto the Lord; the person must please him before our works
can please him. These divine ordinances, how pure and precious soever in their
own nature, as instituted of him, are turned into sin. His civil actions
and honest dealings in the world, his buying, selling, giving, lending, his
labors in all the works of his calling, are in him and to him no better then
sins: Lastly, his natural actions, as eating, drinking, sleeping, and the
like, all are unclean unto him and in his use. To conclude, it teaches us the
necessity of regeneration in every part, especially it should move us to
beware, that we approach not near the Courts of God, neither compass his
altar without washing our hands in innocence, Psalm. 26.6.
and to pray unto him to sanctify us throughout, and to wash the whole man,
both soul and body.

The last Rule is, The sixth rule.
that the posting over, the denying, and diminishing of our sins is one of
the greatest hindrances of repentance. Some post them over, and think to save
themselves by appealing and appeaching of others, as Adam and his wife, Genesis 3.
Some deny their sins, and so think to hide them, as Ananias and Sapphira,
Act. 5. Some extenuate and excuse them, as Saul 1 Samuel 15. Thus we stop the
passage to repentance, and harden our hearts that we cannot turn unto God:
Whereas we should fear our sins, more then his plagues. How many are there
that stand in fear of his judgments, who never once consider the causes
thereof; not hate their sins, though heinous and horrible, which bring them
upon us? We deal commonly with our sins, as the unjust Steward did with his
Masters debtors and debt for an hundred he sets down fifty. Luke 15.6.
See herein how partial we are: when we censure others, we are ready for fifty
to set down an hundred, and of every molehill to make a mountain: but when
we cast up our own accountes, we say to our own souls, Take thy bill and sit
down quickly, and write fourscore or fifty, or happily four or five, so
unequal and unjust are our ways. Again, others acknowledge themselves to be
sinners in gross or in general, as Pharaoh, Saul, and sundry others, but come
to the particulars of the law, which is the glass to show us our sins (for
by the Law comes the knowledge of sin) and examine these by it from point
topoint, Romans 3.20.
who never examined themselves, they are not ashamed to pronounce themselves
innocent. For bring them to their trial, as it were to hold up their hand at
the bar, whether they ever brake the first Commandment, Exodus 20, 3.4.7.8.13.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me; they answer readily, God forbid I
should set up strange gods. Or the second, To make graven images, or the rest,
To kill, To steal, To bear false witness, Math. 19.20.
and such like: they stick not to plead not guilty, and to say with the young
man, All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet. These are
like to a man that says he is sick and being asked, where? and led a long
from the crown of the head to the Sole of the foot, should then say he is well
in every particular part. Thus they show, they understand not the Law which is
spiritual, Romans 7.14.
and searches into the heart.

Lastly, Motives to stir us up to repentance.
If there were no other, but the distress and calamity that lies upon our
Churches, Psalm 80.5. and 79.8.9.
that the Lord feeds them with the bread of tears, and gives them tears to
drink in great measure, and thereby be stirred up our selves, and stir up
others to unfeigned repentance: then let us say with the Prophet, O remember not
against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for
we are brought very low: help us, O God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy
name, and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy names sake: and he will
hear us in the end, and send us a gracious deliverance. Exodus 12.30.
as the Egyptians did, till one in every house was dead. God was never more
provoked then at this day. Hitherto he has prevailed little or nothing with
us: Math. 3.10.
now the axe is laid to the root of the trees, therefore every one which
brings not forth good fruit is hewne down and cast into the fire. cry aloud
and spare not, Esaias. 58.1.
to lift up their voices like a Trumpet, to show the people their
transgressions, and their sins. He has also the trumpet of his judgments, to
pierce into our hearts when the word finds no place in us. He has often
sounded the alarm and blown the trumpet of his Word by the Ministry of his
servants that have spoken unto us early and late in the name of the Lord, and
warned us of his wrath to come, and of our wickedness present, and we would
not hear them. He is therefore constrained to take in hand an other trumpet,
and to strike us with the pestilence and mortality: Ames. 3.6.
shall this Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Or
shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? For as when a
trumpet gives a sign or token out of a watchtower, the people hearkneth and
is troubled, and prepare themselves this way, or that way, as the trumpet
gives the token: so the Lord cries unto us by his judgments, as it were by
the voice of a shrill trumpet, ought we not then to be attentive, and be moved
at the sound thereof, and, according to the warning, prepare our selves to
repentance? and hear his voice while it is called to day, Psalm. 95.8. Heb.
3.7. and 4.7.
lest our hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin? It were better
for us a thousand times to hearken to the sound of the first trumpet, then
tarry till be sound the second: to hear his word, then wait till he take up
his sword. O how much better had it been for us, to have taken his word which
he sends among us, and to Obey it, then to cause and even constrain him to
send his destroying Angel to make havocke of us! Lastly, he that converteth
not, is in danger of eternal damnation, to be separated from Gods presence, at
whose right hand is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore: Psalm. 16.11.
Dan, 12.2.
to have fellowship with the Devil and his angels, to have shame and
everlasting contempt powered upon them, and to have horror and anguish of
conscience cast upon them, arising from a feeling of Gods wrath; Then shall the
last trumpet blow, and wax louder, that the dead shall hear the sound
thereof, 1 Cor. 15.52. 1 These. 4.16.
when the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a great shout and with
thousands of his Angels.

Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.) We have heard before, that
the scope of Christ in these words, to which the examples, one going before,
the other following after, are referred, is to persuade men to repentance. This
we must lay as the foundation of our weekly meeting together, to make
profession before God, before men and Angels of our repentance, to renew our
Covenant with God, and to seal to it with our hearts, and to cry unto him to
remove his judgments that lie heavy upon us; Consider in this threatening
farther an other doctrine, to wit, what danger it is to omit and reject
repentance: such persons are subject to death and destruction th^^ repent not.
Such as continue in sin without repentance shall certainly per^^.
that howsoever. God for a time spare and forbear the Church, and do not always
strike upon every occasion (as he might do) yet it is a sure and certain thing
concluded with him, that such as continue to walk and wallow in evil without
repentance, their end is confusion, their reward and wages is to perish. See
the truth of this in the Prophet, remembered in a parable answearable to that
which follows of the Vineyard; he had pruned, trimmed, and hedged about it;
he had dug and dunged, and done all that he could, Esaias. 5.4.
he looked for grapes, but it brought forth wild grapes: the conclusion is
this, I will take away the hedge; and it shall be trodden down: I will command
the clouds, and they shall rain upon it: I will lay it waste, and there shall
come up briers and thrones. This will farther appear by sundry examples, and
by the woeful experience of many desolations made in all ages of the Church
through default of repentance. When the Lord had heaped his mercies upon the
old world, Genesis 6.3.
and given them 120. years, the days of his patience, as the time of their
repentance, he sent the Patriarchs that called upon them, and appointed Noah a
Preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5.
who confirmed his doctrine by building the Arc, which was a figure of the
destruction of the world of the ungodly, yet they continued their evil ways,
Luc. 17.27.
eating and drinking, etc: they never though: of the day of the Lord, they
never considered the day of their visitation; the flood come and destroyed them
all, a small remnant reserved, and a few souls saved. The like we might say of
the Sodomites, Genesis 13.13. and 19.25.
Genesis 19. They were exceeding sinners before the Lord, and were overturned with
fire from heaven, because they repented not. And was it any otherwise with the
Israelites themselves 2 Chro. 36. he sent to them by his messengers, rising up
betimes, because he had compassion on his people, and desires not the death of
a sinner, 2 Chro. 36.16. Math. 23.37.38.
but that they should turn unto him: but after all this, they mocked his
messengers and despised his word, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of
the Lord (in the end) arose against his people, till there was no remedy. So
then, howsoever God sometimes spares the sons of men, yet such as continue
in sin, and wholly delight in the works of the flesh, the end of them is
fearful, they repent not, and therefore they must perish.

Reason 1. can two walk together, Amos. 3.3.
except they be agreed? but the Lord has no agreement with evil, neither have
the evil any agreement with him. He is holy in all his ways, but impenitency
is contrary to his ways, and has all sins following after it, and attending
upon it, and consequently also all plagues, Ier. 5. an unclean thing. Does any
deserve life? or can he plead with his maker? we are all corrupt and
abominable. The world, the Church, the Commonwealth, our selves, our own
Consciences know it and witness against us: Lam. 3.22.
It is his mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.
His mercy is not reserved for the impenitent that proceed and go forward in
their sins, this were to confound heaven and earth, nay heaven and hell, God
and the devil. Therefore the Prophet Jeremy declares, that God had taken away
his mercies from them, Ier. 5. If then he will not show mercy to such as walk
in the stubbornness of their evil hearts, conclude with me this point for a
certain truth, that howsoever God forbear the children, yet wearying him by
urging and provoking him by our sins, destruction is reserved for such
impenitent persons:

Seeing such as have hearts that cannot repent, Romans 2.5. let us put far from
us the ways of the impenitent, let them not clea^ (...) as pitch) unto our
souls, lest if we follow their works* we be partakers of their Plagues. Let
us be grieved for our former evils, and return to the Lord, that be which has
s^ricken us may heal us again. But (alas) while we go forward in our wicked
ways, do we hold this point, that the impenitent are reserved to wrath? So
many of us as hold and believe this truth, let us depart from our old courses,
and labor to heap up mercy upon mercy, Job. 21.30,
being assured, that the wicked is reserved to the day of wrath and
destruction. O how many things have we need to repent of? the days of our
ignorance, the sins of our youth, our presumptuous sins! If the Lord call
us to an account, who shall be able to abide?

Secondly, Es^y. 28.15. 2 P^t. 3 3.
Carnal men promise peace, and have made a covenant with death and with hell,
and make a mock of all judgments. They see the wicked prosper, and the
ungodly flourish; but they cannot mealure him that is not to be measured: there
is no measure of that which is infinite. God has more works to work then
one, he will not speak peace for ever. Esai. 28.24.
The husbandman does not plough all the year long, neither reap, or gather into
his barn all the year, and God has given to man this wisdom and
understanding, to observe the times and seasons: and shall we not think that
the Lord also has his times of his judgments and of his mercies? He has
preached unto us by his mercies a long time, and the days of his patience have
long continued among us. How near has Gods hand bin unto many of us in the
great plague, When it has been in the same house? one has bin taken away,
and another has bin spared? Nay in the same bed one has bin smitten, another
has had his life granted him for a pray? Consider this ye that have forgotten
this mercy of God, and labor to appease his wrath, before his judgment
falls upon us. He comes with a leaden foot, but he strikes with a rod of
iron, and dasheth his enemies in pieces, as a potters vessel. The Lord
complains in the Prophet, Ier. 8.7.
that the storke in the Heaven knows her appointed times, and the turtle, and
the crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people
know not the judgment of the Lord, they have rejected the word of the Lord,
etc. Every man, even by the light of nature, observes his times for his
several worke^. Skillful Physicians have their times of the year and of the
Moon for their purges and potions: The Mariner stays not when the tide is
come: the Husbandman sows while it is winter: the Smith strikes while the
iron is hot: the Merchant buyeth while the market lasts: thus do these take
their time while the time tarrieth: only men in the matters of God and their
own Salvation know not, or will not know the time of their returning. Ephesians.
5.14.
They will not awake from their deep sleep in sin, they will not stand up
from the dead, that Christ may give them light and life: They will not hear
his voice while it is called to day, but suffer themselves to be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. The Lord speaks in the time present,
behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation: but we will take
a further day with God, as desperate debtors do with men: they can abide no
present reckonings. Thus does Satan beguile careless sinners, he promises
them time enough hereafter, like to biting Usurers (as one says) who are wont
to give day to young heirs from year to year, until at last they wind and
wring their inheritance from them: So the Prince of darkness, August. Conf^s.
lib. 8. cap. 5
the God of this world suggesteth to the children of disobedience, that they
may let repentance alone a little, and it will be soon enough to come anon,
to repent hereafter. Remember that Esau losing the opportunity of the
blessing, sought it afterward with tears, Heb. 12.17.
and yet found no place for repentance. Remember that the rich man cried for
mercy, but it was too late. Lne. 16.24.
Remember the foolish Virgins that cried, Lord, Lord open unto us, Math.
25.11.12. and 7.22.23.
but the door of mercy was shut, and they received their answer, verily I say
unto you, I know you not. Remember that many shall say in that day, Lord, have
we not Prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out Devils? and in thy
name done many wonderful works? but it shall be said to them, Depart from me
ye that work iniquity. Let us therefore begin betimes to turn to God,
while the day of grace endures: let us cease to do evil, learn to do well;
eschew evil and do good.

Lastly, Micah, Judge. 17.13.
Now I know that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my priest.
This was the vain flattery of the Jews, who, because they had Abraham to
their father, together with the law and the Oracles, the Arc and the Covenant,
thought themselves in a good case, and that they must needs be Gods people;
they cried, the Temple of the Lord, this is the Temple of the Lord. But John
the Baptist puts them from this foolish confidence in the flesh, Math. 3.
Math. 3.9.
think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our father; for I say
unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
And the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 7. Ier. 7.8.9.
Behold ye trust in lying words that shall not profit: will ye steal, murder,
and commit adultery, etc. and then come and stand in this house before me which
is called by my name, and say we are delivered to do all these abominations?
behold I see it, says the Lord. O let it not be so with us to profane the
house house of God, to continue in our sins; far be it from us to bring
them to the place of Gods worship for this will cause him to curse all our
meetings and assemblies, that they shall be for the worse, not for the better:
to increase our plagues, not decrease them: and to double his judgments, not
diminish them. Let us therefore leave them behind us, and cast them from us,
never to return to them again, 2 Pet. 2.22.
lest we be like the Dog that returns to his vomit, and the Sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the mire. Otherwise let us not boast of the Gospel,
and flatter our selves because we have the Gospel as the Jews did glory in the
Temple: but seek to bring forth the fruit of the Gospel. For our sins are
the causes of all plagues and judgments: neither can we look that he should
stay his hand, or say to the destroying Angel, 2 Samuel 24.16
It is enough, stay now thy hand, as he did in the days of David; And
doubtless then we have begun to profit under the correcting hand of God, when
we seek the cause of his judgments within us, and acknowledge out sins to be
the cause of all. For what is the true cause of this plague and pestilence? Our
sins. And what is the cause of the continuance of his heavy judgment? Romans
1.18.
doubtless the continuance in our sins: We must confess that the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men. When Israel had received an overthorw and turned and their backs to their
enimes, Josh. 7.10.11 When we are chastened, we must look to our sins. 1
Cor. 11.30 Esaias. 64.5.7. Lam. 3.39.40. Levit. 26.
the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy
face? Israel has sinned, and they have also trespassed my Covenant which I
commanded, them, for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also
stolen, and dissembled also. Nay as we increase our sins in number and
measure, he will not only continue his judgments, but increase them also: and
if we will not, for all this, hearken unto him, but walk contrary unto him, he
will walk contrary unto us, and chasten us seven times more, and bring seven
times more plagues upon us according to our sins, Thus we see, that after more
and more sins, we must look for more and more judgments to follow us at our
heels.

Some that told him of the Galileans.) We are rather to look to our own
ways, then to censure others.
yea not to censure them so much as to reform their own ways. From hence we
may observe this point, that every one is rather to respect his own standing,
then censure others. But is it not lawful to respect others? nay are we not
commanded to admonish, to exhort, to reprove? yea doubtless Levit. 19.7. 1
These. 5.11. Heb. 3.13. Pro. 9.8. but it is more agreeable to the word, to have
regard to our selves then to others, and more fit for our profession to search
after our own standing. Math. 7.5.
This our Savior teaches, Math. 7. first cast out the beam out of thine own
eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers
eye. Iam. 3.1.
And the Apostle James urges this, chap. 3. be not many Masters, that is, be
not over-sharp reproovers and rash condemners of other men's persons, as if we
had a Master-like authority over them, which proceeds from self-love in our
selves, and from hatred toward others. So Romans 14. Why judge thou thy
brother? Romans 14.19.
or why do thou set at naught thy brother? So then every one is bound to
begin with himself, and to reform his own sins and offenses which he best
knows.

And no marveile. For first, Math. 7.5^
what marveill is it if our Savior brand such with the name of Hypocrites:
Thou Hypocrite. Math. 7.2.
for God does in justice pay them in their own kind. Thus our Savior
speaks, Math. 7. With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with
what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. Romans 14.4.
every one stands to his own Master, who then art thou that judge an other
man's servant? as if he should say, such censuring concerns God only, he
shall raise or condemn him. This were to judge before the time, 1. Cor. 4.5.
Again, Romans 14.10.12.13.
We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and every one of us
shall give account of himself to God, let us not therefore judge one another
any more, etc.

First, Cor. 13.7.5. neither does it agree to our profession, Math. 7.12.
neither does it agree with the general rule, Whatsoever ye would that other
men should do unto you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the
Prophets. For how can we reprove sin in others with a good conscience, Non
potest alios continere qui se ipsu^ non continet: neque severus esse in
judicando, qui alios in se severos esse Iudices non vult. Cicer. de lege Manil.
Math. 7.4. Romans 2.1.3.21.23.
when we make no conscience of sin our selves? Or what hope have we to work
good in others, when there is none wrought in our selves? or how can we cause
others to refrain from evil, when we do not abstain from evil our selves? or
how can he be a sharp judge and censurer indeed, that cannot abide to have
others sharp and severe judges and censurers against himself? Hence it is that
our Savior says, Math. 7. How will thou say to thy brother, let me pull out
the mote out of thy eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye? And the
Apostle, Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge, for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: and again, Think
thou this, O man, that judge them that do such things, and do the same,
that thou shall escape the judgment of God? And afterward, Thou that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? thou that make thy beast of the law,
through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? Let not us be like unto the
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, who brought to our Savior a woman taken in
adultery, and put him in mind, how Moses commanded that such should be stoned,
Levit. 20.10. thus they tempted him, that they might have to accuse him: and
thus they were quick in pronouncing sentence against her. But our Savior
calls their wandering thoughts home to their own doors, Ioh. 8.7.
and teaches them to begin with themselves, Let him that is without sin
among you, first cast a stone at her. The like we might say of Judah and his
incest with Tamar, albeit the cause were in himself, in which respect himself
confesses she was more righteous then he, Genesis 38.26.27.
yet he said, bring her forth that she may be burned. He was sharp-sighted in
condemning her, but altogether partial in judging himself. The Apostle gives
us a general precept, that we should study to be quiet, and do our own
business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. It is a common sin in all places, and so common that
it is commonly accounted no sin: the common talk in all meetings is of other
men, and it rejoices the hearts of the most sort to have other men's faults
ripped up; and therefore it is our duty to strive more earnestly to be purged
of this corruption, and to be preserved from the evil practice of rash
judgment.

Secondly, beware of all rash and uncharitable judgment, Math. 7. judge not,
Math. 7.1.
that ye be not judged. Many there are that run headlong like wild horses
without any bridle in their mouths, of the which there are three sorts: First,
when a man has done some good duty, and that in an holy and sincere manner,
evil men judge it to be done in hypocrisy and dissimulation. This was the
sin of Eli other wise a good man, 1 Samuel 1. Christ our Savior conversed much
with publicans and sinners, to the end he might do them good, and draw them
from the kingdom of sin and Satan, and make them inheriters of the kingdom
of heaven: a work in all respects most holy and righteous; yet the Scribes
and Pharisees judged him to be a friend and favourer of them and of their
sins. Lue. 7.34.
And albeit he castout Devils by the power of his divine Majesty, for the
confirmation of his doctrine, and edification of the weak in faith: yet they
said he did it by Beelzebuh the Prince of the Devils. Math. 12.24.
So in our days, religion and the zealous profession thereof are reputed no
better then counterfeit holiness. Let the examples of the faithful be before
us continually, whenever we find the same measure offered untous, and comfort
our selves with this, that it has no otherwise befallen us, then to many
Prophets of God, and faithful servants of Christ, Math. 5.12.
who must not look to be greater then there Master, neither to find better
entertainment in the world then he did. The second kind of judgment forbidden,
is, when men commit evil things worthy in themselves to be condemned, and
thereupon are judged, not only dangerous, but desperate offenders, past hope
of repentance and recovery. This is to execute indeed a right Lordship over
their souls and Salvation, and to step up into the seat of God. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Of this the Apostle speaks, Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord
come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man have praise of
God: and we are charged to instruct with meekness the contrary minded, 2 Timothy
2.25.
to bring them to God, and not leave them in the snares of the Devil. No man
therefore ought to pass their doom of the everlasting estate of any man and
to pronounce peremptorily and absolutely that they shall perish and cannot be
saved, as if they were Lords of one another life and death, salvation and
damnation, or had power to bring them to heaven or cast them into hell. This is
beyond our reach and commission; and to usurp the office of Christ, to whom
all judgment is committed. No man dare make himself a judge, and sit down in
the judgment seat to give sentence of absolution or condemnation in matters
of this temporal life without the Princes special appointment: and shall any
dare do it in things of the life to come, to pronounce any to be forlorn
reprobates and vessels of wrath? For who knows what one day may bring forth,
Pro. 24 1? He runs far that never returns. We see many notorious wicked
men suddenly and mightily called and changed, 2 Chr. 33. Act. 9. Luke 23. We
read of some standing idle all the day long, called at the eleventh hour to
labor in the vineyard, Math. Math. 20.
20. The thief repented and was converted at the instant of his death. Let us
remember that we are all brethren, one no better then another, and therefore we
ought not presumptuously to challenge this superiority to judge and condemn one
another. Christian love hops well of all men: and so long as they live, there
is some hope. The third kind is, when we do things which in themselves are
indifferent, which may be done either well or ill, either with a pure or a
profane heart, with faith or without faith, to judge such an action wicked,
which indeed is to be accounted good or evil according to the intent, purpose
and affection of the doer, whereof God alone is the discerner, because he alone
is the searcher of the heart, he alone is the Judge of the heart. This
corruption we read to have been in Eliab the brother of David, Why came thou
down hither? 1 Samuel 17.2^
and with whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy
pride and the haughtiness of thy heart: for thou art come down to see the
battle. This the Apostle forbids Romans 14. Romans 14.3.
Let not him that eats judge him that eats not, etc. The faithful servants
of God are hardly dealt withal in all these respects, their good things are not
good, or at least it is shrunk up and contracted: their indifferent things are
pronounced to be stark naught: and if they fall into evil, it is stretched and
made a thousand times worse, even by those of the worser sort.

Lastly, How we may perceive the neinousnesse and greinousnesse of sin Luc.
12.48.
it is in others, not in our selves. Now that we may discern of sin in the
nature thereof, we must consider these few particulars. First consider how God
striveth with us by his manifold mercies and blessings to draw us to a love of
Godliness, and hatred of wickedness: now unto whomsoever much is given, of
him shall be much required, and to whom men have committed much, of him they
will ask the more. Secondly, if we compare our sins with Adams first sin
considered in the fact, doubtless we have as great in our hearts, yea greater:
and yet by that one disobedience he brought destruction upon himself and all
his posterity, that is, the first and second death. Thirdly, we may behold the
grievousnesse of sin by proportion with the punishment. For what is the wages
and reward of sin? a subjection to all woe and misery in this life, to death
it self in the end of this life, and to eternal death after this life in hell
with the Devil and his Angels. Fourthly, they were laid upon the person of our
Savior Christ, who outwardly endured the torments on the Cross in his body,
and inwardly apprehended the wrath of God in his soul, due unto us, and which
we should have suffered. This made him to sweat water and blood, Lue. 22.44.
Math. 27.46.
and to cry out in the anguish of his spirit, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Math. 27. Are such sins to be holden as motes? no doubtless,
they are great beams: are they as little moul-hills? no doubtless, they be
huge mountains, able to crush the sons of men in pieces under the heavy
indignation of God. Lastly, the law of God is holy and perfect, and forbids
the first thoughts and motions in the heart, that arise against God or our
neighbor, yea though we never give consent of will to practice them, Romans 7.
If then the first motions be sins in themselves deserving damnation, Romans 7.7.
because the law says Thou shall not lust: how heinous must the sins of our
nature, and the transgressions of our life be, wherein we have yielded full
consent to rise up and rebel against God?

And Jesus answering said unto them, Suppose ye, etc. It seems by this answer
of Christ, that these men justified themselves, because they suffered not as
the other did; and condemned them as notable and notorious wicked men, which
rash judgment as a false sentence and censure in them Christ condemns.
Outward judgments do not always befall the worst, neither free the best men.
do not always seize upon the most wicked and worst men, neither do they free
the most righteous from them. It is the corrupt judgment of corrupt men to
jmagine that such as are sharply corrected and extraordinarily visited and
chastened, are the greatest sinners of all: and on the other side such as
escape and live in health, in wealth, in glory, in favor, in peace, in honor,
and inprosperitie, are highly in his favor. A common error of the world, and
no marveile: For first being blinded with the disease of self love, few look
upon themselves, and enter into a search of their own hearts and ways, or
consider what they do themselves deserve. They turn their own sins behind
their backs, where they are sure they cannot see them: but other men's they
hang before them, to have them always in their sight. Secondly, by escaping
without punishment, and having freedom from scourges, they flatter themselves
with a vain persuasion and presumption, that God approves and is delighted
with their works: whereas we should learn, that God by such examples stirs
up all men every where to repentance. This error we see in Jobs friends, who,
beholding the sudden calamity into which he was fallen, took occasion to
condemn him of Hypocrisy and impiety: that because he suffered much, they
judged he had offended much, and therefore suffered more then others, and more
then themselves, Chap. 22. This we see in the Disciples of Christ, Ioh. 9. Ioh.
9.2.
When they saw the man that was blind from his birth, they asked him, Master,
who did sin, this man, or his Parents, that he was borne blind? They never
consider the secret causes of Gods judgments, but as if there could be no
other cause but this one, they enquire whether he or his Parents deserved by
their sins that he should be so borne? The like we see in the Barbarians of
Melita Act. Act. 28.4.
28. When they saw the viper upon Paul's hand, they said amongst themselves,
Doubtless this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped the sea, yet
vengeance suffers not to live. So in this place, these men would have
concluded these Galileans to be desperate sinners (who happly might be better
then themselves) because they were suddenly and savagely slain with the
sword: but Christ's answer teaches, that outward afflictions and chasticements
do not evermore seize upon the worst and wickedest men, neither are the better
sort freed from them, but they oftentimes lie open to them more then others, as
we see in Job, Chap. 1. and 2. and 1 Pet. 4. judgment begins at Gods house,
the wicked abound in all things, Psalm. 17. Whiles David lay under persecutions,
Psalm. 73.

The reasons; David says, ^ Sam. 11.25
The sword devoureth one as well as an other: So affliction meets with one as
well as with another. There is one event to the righteous and to the wicked; as
is the good, so is the sinner: and therefore no man knows either love or
hatred by all that is before them, Eccl. 9.1. Secondly, the wicked are
oftentimes as it were stalled and fatted to the day of slaughter, like fed
beasts appointed to be killed, Iam. 5.5. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Iam. 5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton, Ye have
nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter. Thus he lets them alone to
work out their own destruction, that they forsake God which made them and
lightly esteem the rock of their salvation. Thirdly, he chastises his own
children, that he may bring them nearer to himself, and that they should not
be condemned with the world, as 2 Cor. 4. We always bear about in the body, 2
Cor. 4.10.11. 1 Cor. 11.31.32.
the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made
manifest in our mortal body: for we which live are always dilivered unto death
for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our
mortal flesh. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the world: if then we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.

Use 1. like mount Sion which cannot be removed: Psalm. 125.1.
the Lord stands like a buckler round about his people, Romans 8.28.
that all shall work for the best to them that love him. This is a singular
comfort, that he will make not only his blessings to turn to our good, but he
will sanctify all our afflictions and adversities, and make even them blessngs
also, and further our salvations, yea oftentimes more then the other. It is not
so with the ungodly, not only their crosses are curses, but all their blessings
are turned into judgments, and nothing shall be able to do them. Indeed the
faithful must suffer, they are called unto it. 1 Pet. 2.21.
The Cross is the calling of a Christian, and the badge of Christianity.
Christ has left us an example, that we should follow his steps: therefore
though they suffer, yet their sufferings cannot take them from God, nor God
from them. The foundation of God remains sure, and his gifts are without
repentance. They then are justly to be reprooved that conceive and judge hardly
and harshly of them that have been taken away by the plague and pestilence in
this heavy visitation: nay the days may hang over out heads, and we may see
them with our eyes, when we may pronounce them happy that died of this
contagious sickness, and ga^^ up the Ghost in their beds: no doubt many of
our dear brethren in other places, that are pursued by the rage of cruel
enemies, and daily in danger of the sword at their throats, that are
constrained to keep garrisons in their towns and Cities, yea, billit
merciless Soldiers in their houses, as it were vipers in their own bosoms,
desire with all their hearts that they were stricken by the immediate hand of
God, rather then endure these manifold miseries that are upon them and those
that belong unto them.

Secondly, Shechemites that would be circumcised for gain, Ioh. 6.26.
Genesis 34. and by those that sought him because they did eat of the loaves, and
had their bellies filled Ioh 6. but he forewarneth them in all places of
grievous troubles, he sent them out as sheep in the mids of Wolves: he
tells them that they will deliver them up to the Councils, and scourge them
in their Synagogues: and the Apostle was assured by the holy Ghost, Act. 20.26.
that bands and afflictions did abide him. It shall not be thus in the life to
come, when the Lord shall wipe away all tears from our eyes: 1 Cor. 15.19
therefore the Apostle says, If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of all men most miserable. This is the description of such as are wicked
men, Psalm. 17.14.
their portion is in this life, Psalm. 17. they lay up for themselves treasures
upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through
and steal, and where their treasure is, there is their heart also, Math. 6.19.
Math. 6.19.21. they say, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, 1 Cor.
15. The happiness of a godly man is hereafter: Phil. 1.23.
to be dissolved and to be with Christ is best of all, Phil. 1. When this
earthly house of this his Tabernacle is dissolved, he has a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Phil. 3.20.
2 Cor. 5. his Conversation is in heaven, and from thence looks for a
savior, Phil. 3. Col. 3.1.2.
he seeks those things that are above, where Christ sits on the right hand
of God, Col. 3. he sets his affections on things above, and not on things,
on the earth.

Thirdly, seeing be oftentimes chastises his children while worldly men feel
nothing at all, it behooves us to bear his chastisements cheerfully, humbly,
and patiently, and not faint under the cross, as men out of heart, Heb. 12.6.
veing he corrects every son whom hereceiveth and loves: and with this we
should comfort our selves, and strengthen the feeble-minded, support the weak,
and be patient toward all men. This condemns all murmuring and complaining
under the Cross, which causes the Lord oftentimes not to remove, but rather
to double his strokes upon us. When Parents perceive their children grow
stubborn and wayward, froward and foolish under the rod, do they not rather
increase their punishment, then let them alone? Lam. 3.33.36.
Thus do we constrain the Lord to deal with us; true it is, he does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men: to crush under his feet and
to subvert a man he approves not: but when we are impatient and fret against
him, this is not the way to stay his hand and to call back his judgments, but
rather to provoke him against us, to strike again and again, Motives to
patience.
and to double and treble his strokes upon us. Now there are sundry motives to
move us to this patience, and to stay us from all impatience. First, God uses
bodily afflictions to cure spiritual diseases. Every pain preventeth the
pains of hell by drawing us to Christ. We may learn more by adversity, then
we can do by prosperity. Manasses learned more in Babylon, then in Jerusalem:
and profited more in prison, then in his palace, 2 Chro. 33. In prosperity
David said, I shall never be remooved: but in adversity he confessed, Psalm.
30.6.119.71.
it was good for him to have been afflicted, that he might learn the statutes
of God: whereas before he was afflicted, he went astray, but now he kept his
word. Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done
unto me, Lam. 1.12.
wherewith the Lord afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. Psalm. 39.9.
I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. This consideration
wrought patience in him. And our Savior teaches us to lift up our eyes higher
then the earth, Math 10.29.
and to rest in his providence, Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? and
one of them shall not fall on the ground without your father. David had his
wish to choose his own chasticement, either war, famine, or pestilence, all
sharp weapons able to wound to death, he chose rather to be corrected by the
hand of God, then by men or other means, 2 Samuel 24.14
2 Samuel 24. Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are
great: and let me not fall into the hand of man, for the very mercies of the
wicked are cruelty. For if we stood at the discretion of merciless men (as
sundry our brethren at this day in other places do) and heard the alarm of
battle sounding in our ears, when mourning is in our streets, Amos 5.16.
and we should hear crying in all our high ways, Alas, alas, and all places
be filled with weeping and wailing: when the blood of the Saints shall be
powered out like water that cannot be gathered up again: when so many widows
and fatherless children are left to lament: we would confess it a great mercy
to fall into the hands of God and not of men: if we considered aright these
things. Sixthly, the afflictions of this life are not worthy the glory laid up
for us in the life to come, Romans 8. Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17.
The grief may be great, but the glory will be greater. For what comparison is
there between a thing finite and a thing infinite. Tell me, my brethren, how
many stripes is heaven worth? Nay what is a few drops of blood to the kingdom
of heaven? how much less then can a word or two of reproach be worthy of that
glory?

Lastly, from thence we may conclude, because sentence is not speedily executed
against an evil work, Eccl. 8.11.12
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: but
though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet
surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear
before him. Hence it is, 1 Pet. 4.17.18.
that the Apostle concludes, the time is come that judgment must begin at the
house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that
obey not the Gospel of God? etc. So the Prophet Jeremy fortelleth the
destruction of Babylon the rod of his wrath, and assures them thereof, because
he would chastise and correct his own people; can he then let them alone, or
shall they escape? no doubtless: for lo (says the Lord) I begin to bring
evil on the City which is called by my name, Ier. 25.29.
and calls upon my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not
go unpunished, etc. When we see how God has dealt with his own servants, whom
he tendereth as the apple of his eye, as we see in the examples of David for
his uncleanness, 2 Samuel 12.10.11. Psalm. 106.33. Luc. 1.20. 2 Chro. 32.25. and
19.2.
of Moses and Aaron for their disobedience, of Zachariah for his unbeleefe, of
Hezekiah for his unthankfulness, of Iehoshaphat for his affinity with Ahab:
may we not be assured, that he will visit with grievous plagues the rebellion
of such as are strangers to him, nay his utter enemies? Nay his little finger
in the latter end shall be heavier upon the reprobate, then his whole loins
have been upon his own dear children. He chastised poor Lazarus in this
life with penury and much misery, while the rich man was clad in purple and
fared deliciously every day: but what was the end and issue of them both? the
poor man was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, and the rich man lay
in torments in hell. This made Abraham say, when he desired to find some ease
or release, Lu^. 16.25.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

Whose blood Pilate had mingled with, etc. the tower in Siloe fell and slew
them.) The Galileans about their best actions are suddenly taken away by the
sword, when they thought themselves most in safety. For where and when should
we judge our selves more in safe-gard, then when we are about the service of
God, and in the house of prayer? And the Jews that lay under the tower were
pressed and crushed to death in like manner: both examples jointly showing,
both that God has many ways and weapons to take away the life of men, and to
consume them at a sudden and in a moment, even while they persuade themselves
to be safe in a Sanctuary or privileged place, and to be without all fear of
death or of danger. This teaches us, God has many ways to take away many
man's life, and can do it suddenely.
that the Lord has variable and infinite ways to take away man's life, and it
is offentimes suddenly taken from them, even while they say peace and safety,
sudden destruction comes upon them. There are two points to be marked in
this doctrine, and both offered unto us in these examples: the first is the
variety and manifold means the Lord has in store to cut off our days: the
second is the uncertainty of our life, which is soon gone and taken away.
Touching the variety, read Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28.20.21.22. etc. Ezekiel.
14.13.15.17.19.
where the point is handled at large. See Ezekiel. 14. When the land sins
against me by trespassing grievously, I will stretch out mine hand against it,
and will break the staff of bread, and will send famine upon it: I will bring
a sword upon the land, and say, sword go through the land and cut them off: I
will send the pestilence into the land, and pour out my fury upon it to cut
them off. What should I speak of the overflowing of waters, Genesis 7.4. of the
violence of fire, Genesis 19.24. Psalm. 106.18. of the opening of the earth, Numb.
16.31.32. of the stinging of Serpents, Numb. 21.6. of the eating of Worms,
Act. 12.23. of the destroying of the destroying Angel, 2 King. 19.35. and what
not? Nay, he can make the means and instruments ordained to preserve life to
be means to shorten our life. And touching the second point, to wit, the
suddenness of death and the uncertainty of our life, nothing appears more
evident; though we be active, young, strong, fresh, lusty, and beautiful, and
promise to our selves many days and years, yet our life is frail and
speedily gone, Job. 14.1. Psalm. 49.11.20. 1 Pet. 1:24. Luc. 12.20. Act. 5 5.10.
Eccl. 9.12.

The reasons: first for the variety, Esaias. 7.18.19.
he is the Lord of hosts, and has every creature as his servants and
soldiers, even a royal army or camp to employ them: if he bid them go, they
go; if he bid them come, they come: if he say do this, they do it. We see
this in the plagues of Egypt, Psalm. 105.31.34.
Psalm. 105. He spoke, and there came diverse sorts of flies and Lice in all
their coasts: he spoke and the Locustes came, and Caterpillars, and that
without number, etc. Secondly, for the sudden fading and vanity of our days,
the Scripture expresses it by comparisons, to show the shortness thereof.
Hence it is, that our life is compared to the swiftness of the weavers
shittle; Psalm. 103.15.16. Job. 9.25. and 7.6.
to a wind that passes away; to a swift post that tarrieth not long in one
place, but soon departs to an other; to a Flower of the field which quickly
wastes and withers: to a shadow which easily vanishes: 1 Chro. 29.15 Job.
8.9. Psalm. 90.4.9.109.23. 2 Samuel 14.14 Job. 13.28.
to a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Iam.
4.14. The Prophet David compares it to an hand-breadth and to vanity, and what
is lighter then vanity? to a watch in the night, to a tale that is told, so
that our life is soon gone, and we fly away, and we are carried away as with a
flood: to water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again: and to
a garment that is moth-eaten We have spent our days as a thought, they are but
in a manner begun, and yet in a manner they are already done. For what are forty
or fifty years, when they are past? Nay a thousand years are but as yesterday
when they are past, Psalm. 90.4.

This doctrine is not hard to conceave, Psalm. 90. So teach us to number our
days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Psalm. 90.12.
But some will say, nothing is more easy then to number our days, and to
reckon the years of our life: thus indeed we may do, and yet never gather any
profit by it, to say with the Prophet, Psalm. 39.4. The first reproof
Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is: that
I may know how frail. I am. First, this serves for reproof, and that of
sundry sorts, who never consider the uncertainty and ininstability of future
things, and are unmindful of the frailty and inconstancy of our life and of all
humane affairs. For how many are there, which think wholly and only of
heaping up riches and getting gain, yet cannot tell who shall possess them?
Such a one was the rich man in the Gospel, Lue. 12. Alas, who knows what one
day, or one night may bring forth? good, or evil? prosperity, or adversity?
life, or death? One night or one day alters and changes many things, and
turns them quite upside down. Many men alive, merry, and pleasant over
night, and dead in the morning? in good health in the morning, and dead before
night? Nay, many in one hour alive, and dead the same hour? is it not thus at
this time? Many at night rich, and go to bed wealthy men, able to help and
relieve others, but the next way impoverished and beggered, and utterly undone
for ever. Many houses and buildings standing to day, which before to morrow may
be destroyed and burnt stick and stake to the ground. The sons and daughters
of Job were making merry together and feasting together in their elder brothers
house, Job. 1.18.
but in one day, even in a moment they were oppressed and slain by the fall of
the house upon their heads, wherein they were, and not one of them escaped.
Secondly, The second reproof.
it reprooveth such as delay and defer the time of their repentance, and put
it off from day to day, nay from year to year, and from time to time till
there be no more time remaining for them: never remembering that the present day
may be the last. We dream oftentimes of a time to come hereafter, and in the
mean season, death cutteth short our days. We ought evermore to gird up our
loins, ready to take our journey, from hence we should watch and prepare our
selves, Math. 25.8.
and learn wisdom by the example of the Foolish Virgins, Math. 25. This was
never more necessary then now it is, when God summoneth us by his judgments
round about us, and yet we labor not to have oil in our Lamps. The third
reproof.
Thirdly, they are condemned that rejoice at other men's evils, albeit they hold
life and all with the greatest uncertainty, and such as insult over the misery
of others, and so add affliction unto affliction. Doubtless if we were well
grounded and established in the present truth, that we know not how soon and
suddenly our selves may end our days, we would not triumph at the miseries of
our brethren. Hence it is that Solomon calls us homeward, Pro. 17.5. and
24.17.18.
Pro. 17.5. He that is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished, and chap 24.
Rejoice not when thine enemy falls and let not thine heart be glad when he
stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and he turn away his wrath from him, to wit,
upon thy self, as the stone that rolleth upon him that moved it. We ought
rather as fellow members one of an other to be grieved and inwardly touched at
the calamities of our brethren: and these are the days (if ever) that call for
this affection from us. No man can be ignorant under what afflictions they lie,
Amos. 6.6. Esaias. 57.1.
yet who is sorry for the affliction of Joseph? and albeit the righteous
perish, and merciful men are taken away, yet no man lays is to his heart.
This is it that Job complains of chap. 19. all mine inward friends abhorred
me, they whom I loved are turned against me: then he cries out, Job. 19.21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, Oye my friends: for the hand of God
has touched me. The Apostle charge us to remember them that are in bonds,
Heb. 13.3.
as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also
in the body. First, being your selves subject to the same afflictions, and
lying open to the same dangers. Miseries and calamities, sicknesses and
diseases are common, whatsoever happens to others may befall to our selves,
we know not how soon; they are chastened to day, we may be corrected, nay
consumed to morrow. Job. 31.29.
Let us be like minded and tender hearted with Job, chap. 31. I rejoiced not at
the destruction of him that hated me, neither have I suffered my mouth to
sin, by wishing a curse to his soul. This is the note and nature of a godly
man, to be grieved at the evil of others, as we see in David's example, 2 Samuel
1. He and his men mourned, fasted, 2 Samuel 1.12.
and wept till even for Saul and for Jonathan, the one the head and governor
of the people, the other his son; albeit Saul had persecuted him and hunted
him up and down as a Partridge in the Mountains, and sought to take away his
life, and albeit he were to succeed after him in the kingdom: and Psalm. 35.
Psalm. 35.13.14.
They rewarded me evil for good to the spoil of my soul: but as for me, when
they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth, I humbled my self with fasting, I
behaved my self as though they had been my friend, or brother, I bowed down
hea^ily as one that mourns for his mother. On the other side, would we know a
wicked man? he is not only without natural affections, but insulteth and
grinneth his teeth at the miseries of others, especially of the faithful. Thus
does the Prophet describe the malice of his enemies, in mine adversity they
rejoiced and gathered themselves to gether against me, yea the abjects
gathered themselves together, they did tear me, and ceased not. 2 Samuel 16.5. 1
King. 2.8.
O how did Shemei laugh and leap for joy in David's misery, he cursed him with
an horrible curse: but what was the end? the curse causeless shall not come,
says the wise man Pro. 26.2. but was that all? no, the Lord met with him in
the end, for he perished and no man lamented for him, saying, The fourth
reproof.
Ah my brother. Fourthly, such are convinced, who breath nothing but
threatenings as it were fire and flames out of their mouths, and think upon
nothing but revenge against their enemies, never considering the shortness of
their own lives, and that vengeance may first meet them in the way, and fall
upon their own heads. Such never mark nor meditate with themselves, Psalm.
7.16. and 9.15. Eccl. 10.8.
what danger may lie at their own doors, and hang over their heads, as they
that dig a pit for others, and fall into it first themselves: or spread a nett
to ensnare others, and their own foot is taken therein. We see an example
hereof in Haman, Ester. Est. 7.10.
7. He builded a pair of Gallous for an other more righteous then himself,
and himself was hanged thereon: as also the adversaries of Daniel cast him
into the den of Lions to be devoured, Dan. 6.24.
but themselves were destroyed, for the Lions had the mastery of them and brake
all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the den.
Lastly, The fifth reproof.
this meditation reproves such as are unmercifull toward those that are in
misery and necessity, and will part with nothing, never regarding what
mischief may hang over their own heads, and in what wonderful uncertainty
they hold their lives, their estates, their goods, and all that they have. For
what store and plenty soever we have present, we do not know what want and
penury we may suffer. Many that have had abundance and superfluity of all
things, have also had lamentable experience of great misery before their last
end. Eccl. 11.1.2.
This does Solomon teach Eccl. 11. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou
shall find it after many days: give a portion to seven and also to eight, for
thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. Where he exhorts to
liberality and bountifulness toward the poor, and not think we have done
enough, when we have given to one or two: yea he stirs up thereunto from the
uncertainty of things which we dream to be certain, All earthly things are
uncertain in sundry respects.
and not to measure things by our present fruition and possession of them. All
earthly things, as life it self, are uncertain, and that in diverse respects.
For first it is uncertain, whether we shall prolong our days to show our
bounty toward other, Eccl. 9. Whatsoever thy hand shall find to do, do it
with thy might: Eccl. 9.10.
for there is no work in the grave whither thou go. We must walk in the
light while we have it, Gal. 6.10.
the darkness comes wherein no man can work: as we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the
household of faith. Gal. 6.10. Secondly, whether our substance which we have in
present shall continue and abide with us, or not. It is not with the world and
worldly things, as with spiritual and heavenly things. Math. 6.19.
For the moth and rust may corrupt the former, and thieves break through and
steal them away, but they cannot deprive us of the latter. Therefore Solomon
warns us that riches are deceitful, that we should not lay up our treasure
upon earth, but in heaven, Pro. 23.5.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle does toward heaven. So the rich in
this world are charged not to be high-minded, 1 Timothy 6.17.
nor to trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly
all things to enjoy. Thirdly, Eccl. 2.19.
Who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a Fools that shall have rule
over all our labor? Let us therefore follow the counsel of our Savior Luc.
16. Luc. 16.9.
I say unto you, make you friends of this earthly Mammon, that when ye fail,
they may receive you into everlasting habitations: he means that our good
works will give a friendly testimony to our consciences that we are the elect
of God, and have not believed in vain. To conclude, let us remember the saying
of the Prophet, after that he has brought in the counterfeit fasting of the
hypocrites of his time, complaining that they had fasted and God regarded it
not, and pleasing themselves in the outward work, Esaias. 58.
saying, Is this such a fast as I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his
soul, to how down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under him? will thou call this a fast and an acceptable day to the Lord? He
proccedeth to teaches them and us by them what to do, Is not this the fast
that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to deal thy bread to
the hungry, lo bring the poor to thy house, when thou see the naked that
thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Hereby
we make our fast acceptable to God, otherwise covetous and miserable persons
may like of it, thereby to save somewhat both to pinch their servants at home
and to defraud their own bellies: but if it be performed aright, then shall
our righteousness go before us, and the glory of the Lord shall be our reward.

Secondly, Pro. 27.1. neither ascribe any power to our selves, let us not
resolve and appoint what we will do: we know not what God has decreed and
determined concerning us. The Apostle James concludes this, Iam. 4.13.
chap. 4. Go to now ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a
city and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain; whereas ye
know not what shall be on the morrow! for what is your life? it is even a vapor
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away: for that ye ought to
say, If the Lord will, both we shall live, and do this, or that. But on the
other side, it should hasten and further our repentance, and cause us to humble
our selves under the mighty hand of God, as the Ninivites did, who hearing
their end was near at hand, they proclaimed a fast, they put on sackcloth,
they cried unto God from the greatest of them to the least of them. And who
knows how nigh at hand our time may be! are not many gone and swept away,
that seemed before as safe as we? The Sodomites thought themselves as free from
judgment, and as far from their end, as we do; Genesis 19.23.24.
the Sun shined upon them, they promised to themselves a fair day, but
before night they suffered a perpetual night and darkness of death, they were
destroyed with fire and brimst one from heaven. So it was with the Egyptians,
they went quietly to bed, and slept soundly, but it came to pass at midnight,
Exodus 12.29.
the Lord smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, etc. The like I might
say of Belshazzar, Dan. 5. and of Anarias and Sapphira Act. 5. Now is the time
of our acceptance, of turning and changing; after death, there is no change at
all.

Thirdly, Cicer. de Senectute.
and therefore the less provision will serve our turn. It is great folly for
a man that has a short way to go and a little journey to take, to carry
greater provision with him for it. A little will serve to bring us to our
iournies end. 1 Timothy 6.7. Heb. 13.5.
Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. We brought nothing into this world, and
it is certain we can carry nothing out: and having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content.

Lastly, let us be wise to number our days, and to measure out the length of
our time, that we may know how frail we are. There is a great art and skill
required to do this aright: few have learned this knowledge. Hence it is that
the Prophet himself turns himself to God to be instructed of him, as one
that was not able of himself to conceive it without such a master, Lord teach
me: Psalm. 39.4. and 90.12.
Lord make me to know mine end, etc. This is the best art of numbering and
skill of mensuration. It is a vain thing to be able to measure our land, and
to number our sheep and other cattle, and yet have no knowledge how to number
our days. The numbering of our days aright has many branches.
A man may seek the register and know his age, and not number his days; but
suffer whole years to pass over his head, and the greatest part of all his
life without heavenly wisdom. This point has many branches: first account
the present time and day to be as the last; Luc. 12.10.
when we must go hence and be no more: not as the rich man that numbered
falsely, and deceived himself in his accounts, Thou have much laid up for many
years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, and therefore is worthily
called a fool for his labor. There can be no worse deceit, then when a man
deceives himself in his reckonings. Genesis 2. Must not that needs be bitter,
which has brought forth such bitter fruit? Genesis 3.17.18
the ground was cursed to bring forth thorns and thistles: but man brings
forth more sour and unsavery fruits of ungodliness and unrighteousness, and
has pulled down that goodly building which God had set up, that only a little
rubbage thereof remains. An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit: so man
drinks iniquity as water, and cannot bring that which is clean from the
fountain that is unclean. 1 Cor. 15.31.
This the Apostle practiced 1 Cor. 15. I protest by your rejoicing which I have
in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. We must exercise and enure our selves in
dying by little and little, so long as we live here upon earth, before we come
tody indeed: and then I doubt not but we shall depart hence in peace and dye
well in the end. Every affliction is a preparation to death, and a putting of
us in mind of our dissolution. For he died daily, not only because he was
often in danger of death, that there was often but a step between death and
him, but because in all his troubles and dangers he made himself ready, not
knowing when God might call him. He that will enable himself to bear the
cross of all crosses, I mean death, Job. 18.24.
called the King of terrors, must first of all learn to bear smaller and
lesser crosses patiently and meekly, as sickness of body, trouble of mind,
anguivh of conscience, loss of goods, greatness of pains, death of friends,
burdens of poverty, lacking of maintenance, crosses in our affairs and many
such like, which are as the harbingers or messengers of death, making the way
before it. Learn we therefore to entertain them, and make good use of them,
that when death the end of all comes indeed to cut off our days, as the
sickle reapeth down the corn that is ripe and ready to be carried into the
barn, we may look it in the face, bid it welcome, and prepare to meet it
half way. O how bitter and distasteful is death, to them that live in the
pleasures of sin, and how sweet to the distressed! 1 Cor. 15.56
The sting of death is sin, says the Apostle, as the strength of sin is
the law. Or let us deal with it as the Philistines dealt with Sampson, they
never rested, but labored day and night to know, wherein his strength lay,
Judge. 16.5.
that they might weaken him and make him like to one of them. So ought we to
do. If any ask, wherein lies the strength of death, that it beats down so
many to the ground, nay throws and thrusts them headlong down to hell? I
answer, it lies altogether in our sins, and therefore we must labor
earnestly to take away the strength of them by repentance from dead works, and
faith in Christ Jesus. So many sins as we maintain and cherish in our
selves, so many stings of death be in us, the least whereof is able to wound
our souls to eternal death. The venime of these sticks deeply in us, it
must be the labor of our whole life to pull it out. Exodus 8.8. 1 King. 13.4.
when he is dying, will pray and desire others to pray for him. So I haraoh did
in his troubles: so did Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, when his hand was
withered and dried up, that he could not pull it into him again. Sixthly,
Balaam, Number. 23.10.
he would have his soul die the death of the righteous, but he would not live
the life of the righteous. A profitable meditation in these dangerous times, we
know not how soon we may be called to give an account of our stewardship.
Phil. 3.20.
and even now have our conversation in heaven, Col. 1.13.
and seek those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand
of God. So the Apostle describing the estate of the faithful says, God has
delivered us from the power of darkness, Col. 3.1.
and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear son. It behooves us
therefore to be watchful and in a readiness, like the wise Virgins against
the coming of the bridegroom, lest we be taken unawares, and swept away from
his presence, as the chafe which the wind drives away. To this purpose
Christ exhorts Mar. Mar. 13.35.36.
13. upon this ground to watch and pray, and to take heed, lest he coming
suddenly to us, or calling us suddenly to come to him, do find us sleeping,
Of that hour and that day knows no man, no not the Angels that are in
heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only: take ye heed therefore, watch
and pray, for ye know not the time, when the master of the house comes, at
even, or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, or in the morning, lest coming
suddenly he find you sleeping: and what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch:
thus heteaceh thus to apply general commandments particularly to our selves,
and this was never more necessary then in these present days of affliction.

Whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.) The wicked are by
nature cruel and bloody.
See here the violent practice of Pilate: behold a matter of great impiety,
without having respect to persons, to time, place or action whereabout they
went that offered sacrifice. He was the governor and judge in Judea, he should
have preserved peace, and prohibited others from such outrage: This teaches us
that wicked and ungodly men are bloody and cruel, without mercy or natural
affection. See this at large, Amos 1. Amos. 1.3. Obad. ver. 12.13.
describing the enemies of the Church, They have threshed Gilead, that is, the
inhabitants of Gilead, with threshing instruments of iron, they pursued their
brethren with the sword, and cast off all pity, they have ripped up women with
child, etc. This is to be noted in the Edomites against their brother Jacob,
they rejoiced in the day of his destruction, and laid hands on his substance in
the day of his calamity, and stood in the cross way to cut off those of his
that did escape, etc. Behold the truth of this farther confirmed in the
examples of Caine, of Nimrod, of Esau, of Pharaoh, of Saul, of Hazael, of Agag,
of Herod, of infinite others, whose tender mercies have been terrible
cruelties, as Solomon speaks, Pro. 12.10.

The reasons are evident: for first who rules in them? Ioh. 8.44.
who was a murderer from the beginning, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and the great Dragon that persecuted the woman that brought forth the
man-child: the roaring Lion that walks after his prey, and seeks whom he may
devour. For that which is said of Caine, is true of all the company of the
ungodly; he was of that wicked one and slew his brother, because his own
works were evil and his brothers good. This our Savior also teaches, Revel.
2. Behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried:
not that Satan was incarnate and become a layler in his own person, but he
understands the instruments of the devil, such as obeyed him as the servant
his master. Secondly, Psalm. 22.12.13.16.
Wolves, and such like, of which the Scripture is full in every place, that we
should not be ignorant of them.

This serves to reprove all such as are guilty of violence and cruelty,
Several sorts of cruelty.
of oppression and unmercifulness toward others: and hereof there are sundry
sorts, and herein we may offend sundry ways. Moses the Judge is charged to
justify the righteous, and to condemn the wicked: and if he be worthy to be
beaten, he shall receive according to his fault; Deuteronomy. 25.3.
forti^ stripes he may give him, and not exc^ed. So then these are to be
punished, Moses, Levit. 24. Levit. 24.19.20.
if a man cause any blemish in his neighbor, as he has done, so shall it be
done to him, etc. as he has caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to
him again. True it is, many carnal men of this world know no other valor or
virtue, then hurting, laming, quarelling and desire of revenge, which breath
forth cruelty and are often times the forerunners of bloody murder. Such as
have neither hand nor heart to fight against the enemies of their souls, and
against spiritual wickedness in high places, to fight the battles of the Lord
against sin, Satan, and the world, but are ready as cowards and dastards to
yield unto them the field, yet are never well but when they are fighting and
quarreling, chalenging and provoking others; contrary to the earnest persuasion
of the Apostle, As the elect of God, Col. 3.13.
holy and beloved, put on tender mercy and kindness, hum blenesse of mind,
meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another and for giving one another,
if any man have a quarrel to an other, even as Christ forgave you, even so do
ye. And doubtless if the spirit of the Lord were in us, and we had any feeling
of his love in sparing and forgiving us, we could not but express the power
thereof, and the spirit of meekness would mortify in us more and more this
thirst after revenge, and we would learn of our Savior, Math. 11.29.
who has said, I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto
your soule^. Thirdly to procure any way the death of others, and the shortning
of their days. What cruelty is showed in infectious times.
This may be done many ways, either by the sword, or by famine, or by false
accusations, and such like. But not to speak of all these means, it is done
in these infectious times, when the pestilence walks in darkness, and
destruction wastes at noone day, three ways especially, by such as restrain
them, by such as are restrained, and by such as are appointed to attend them
that are restrained. First they offend that restrain them, but do not relieve
them: that are very careful to shut them up, and then shut up their compassion
from them, and their farther care of them, like those that bind a man hand and
foot, and then beat him. This is extreme cruelty, that a natural man would
not show to his bruit beast. If a carnal man have any of his cattle sick and
he shut them up, he will use all means to recover them: and ought we not much
more to supply the wants of our poor brethren made after the jmage of God, and
for whom Christ Jesus died? shall we add affliction to them that are
afflicted, and make the heavy burden they bear more heavy, and cause them to
break out into unlawful and ungodly courses which may not be warranted?

Secondly, Belial, that break all laws of God and man: that cry out, shall we
be restrained and cooped up, as it were imprisoned like malefactors? we will
break their bands, and cast away their cords from us: We will have our
liberty, and who shall hinder us? we will have what we list, or else we will
make those rich grubbers repent it? These are impatient under the hand of God,
and will not stoop down at his correction; but as refractary beasts lift up
the heel against him: whereas they should consider that it is God which
restrains them and not man. Hence it is, that the Lepers in the law were shut
up, Levit. 13.46.
and dwelt apart by themselves, as Levit. 13. All the days wherein the plague
shall be in him, he shall be defiled, 2 Chro. 26.21.
he is unclean: he shall dwell alone, without the camp shall his habitation
be: yea even Kings and Princes dwelt in sever all houses, and were cut off from
the house of the Lord. This rule holds by proportion in contagious diseases.
Therefore when God visits us and strikes us, we must not strike others: and
when we are infected we must not infect others: for then we make our selves
guilty of blood in Gods sight. Be it that we may go away scotfree; and not be
accounted as murderers in the courts of men, yet we shall be arriagned as
guilty in the high court of heaven; and albeit the laws of men should not take
hold upon us, yet the law of God will find us out, wherein we are commanded to
preserve life, and therefore much more forbidden to shorten the days of any,
and bring them to an untimely death. This is an heinous crime and horrible
cruelty, and brings a blot upon our own souls. True it is, we may hurt their
bodie^, but we hurt our own souls and wound our consciences more then we can
annoy others: and we may carry the plague into their bodies, but we admit a
greater plague into our own souls. Thirdly, be well reported of for good
works, and have relieved the afflicted, washed the Saints feet, and have
diligently followed every good work. 1 Timothy 5.10.
This is a glass wherein such should behold themselves and their office, that
are called to look to others in their extremity, to exhort to counsel, and
comfort them, to support them, to feed them, that are not able to help
themselves. An other branch of cruelty is by using any of the creatures of God
hardly. Solomon reprove Pro. 12.10. a righteous man regards the life of his
beast: how much more ought he, of his servant, though he be never so mean,
poor, or simple. In the institution of the Sabbath the Lord had regard and
reference to the servant, Deuteronomy. 5. Deuteronomy. 5.14.25.
That thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou, and
remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, etc. And wherefore did
the God of all mercies forbid in the law to kill the damme when they had taken
her young ones away, Deuteronomy. 22.6.
but that he would have it known, that he allows cruelty and wrong to be
offered no not so much as to the seeliest birds or beasts. It is true that the
mercies of the wicked are cruel: and it is true that many wicked men regard the
lives of their beasts, and provide plenty of fodder for them: but wherefore?
doubtless it is not simply in mercy and love to the creature, but in love to
themselves, and covetousness and desire of their own gain, either that they
may do them the more work, or carry them the better on their backs, or live
the longer to do them service, or be more sailable to yield them money, and not
to obey God therein that made them. The mercies of the wicked how they are
cruel.
True it is the wickedst man will pretend mercy; but their mercy pretended is
cruelty extended: for first they are or would seem to be very careful, that
their people and families should have their recreation and refreshing, their
liberty from their labor, and times for their sports and delights: yea they
pretend necessity, and plead their cause that they must have it. What, say
they, would you not have them take any pleasure? what? nothing but droyling and
moyling, and never be at rest? But when shall this be? if at any time, I
warrant you, upon the Lords day, when they may do them no service, when it
shall do more hurt to their servants souls, then good to their bodies; and
when they cannot be suffered to work for them, they care not if they play,
neither what else they do; but whosoever gives, must learn to give of his
own: the Lords day is none of his own to give away. Secondly, Jobs almesmen,
the poor labourer, the blind, the lame, the aged, the impotent, the maimed,
but to the idle and sturdy beggar, whom it were more mercy to punish, and it
would do them more good. Saul that spared Agag, or like the Jews that would
have Barabbas let loose, who had bin put in prison for murder and sedition.
Levit. 19.14.
Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind,
but shall fear thy God. Prove. 17.5.
I am the Lord: and Pro. 17. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his maker:
and he that is glad at calamities shall not be nupunished. Lastly, to deal
hardly with the poor among us that are most helpless and succourlesse, of
which are four sorts often joined together, the day labourer, Mal. 3.5.
the comfortless widow, the fatherless child, and the destitute stranger.
Touching laborers oppressed.
The first branch is of such as withold the laborers wages, often reproved
and condemned in the law and the Prophets, Levit. 19.13. Deuteronomy. 24.14. Ier.
22.3.13. Doubtless if there were not great wickedness and crue^ty in men, it
had been needless to set down any such threatenings as these here contained.
We know the poor have no rents nor revenues to live upon, as the richer sort
have: The poor labors how defrauded.
their lands and inheritance is the labor of their hands: it is therefore
against all right and reason, that they should be deprived of the fruit of
their labors. This is done many ways, first when the wages of their work is
denied, or detained, or delaied, without respect or regard of the necessity of
the workman. Secondly, though it be not wholly wrung and wrested from them, yet
it is often clipped or gelded, and so a part is kept away. For if we constrain
a poor man to labor for us, and then will pay him but by halfes, and use him
as the Ammonites did the messengers of David, 2 Samuel 10.4.
who cut off their garments by the middle this also is open violence and
oppression, Thirdly when we will seem to deal justly and truly with them, and
pay them all, but it is not in money according to Covenant, but with old shoes,
or with rags and relics of our own, or with cast garments which we have
left, yet sell them and value them again to our servants, as if they were new,
and sometimes at a dearer rate. Thus both we show our own cruelty, and abuse
their simplicity. Fourthly, when we see a poor man out of work, and that he
must needs pass through our hands, if we take occasion and advantage thereby
to bargain with him as we list, and to give him little or nothing, because we
know he knows not otherwise where to have work and whereabout to set
himself, and begin to say within our selves, This fellow is a fit pray and
booty fallen into my hands, he cannot escape me: he is quite out of work and
apparel, now I may hire him for a crust; now I have him at an advantage, I
can use him at my pleasure: now he will be glad to serve for a song, or a
morsel of bread: what is this but horrible and monstrous oppression? for
albeit through the wrongs and injuries they lie under, as a greevous burden
that presses them down, they dare not complain or mutter, much less sue and
bring an action: yet the hire it self detained, and the wrong sustained cries
out and is ready to witness against such cruel oppressors that grind the
faces of the poor, G^^. 4.10.
as it is said of the blood of Abel, behold the voice of the blood of thy
brother cries unto me from the ground so the Apostle James teaches that the
hire of the laborers, Iam. 5.4.
which have reaped down your fields, which is by you kept back by fraud,
cries: and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of
the Lord of the Sabbath. Levit. 19.13.
This is indeed and in truth no better then a cunning kind of stealing and
robbing. This they must learn, that use such winching to save a penny or
halfe-penny out of a poor man's wages which being given could do them no hurt,
but to the poor man much good: whereas we should provide not only that they
may live, but that they may live cheerfully and comfortably. Otherwise, what
do we, but prolong their lives in misery and penury, and of their wives and
children in beggary and necessity. How many are there every where, that care
not how much they spend in surfeiting and drunkenness, in revelling and
riotousnesse, in feasting and banketting, who think they never bestow enough
in complements and entertainment? yet grudge at a little given to the poor,
and strive who shall bestow least; Touching widows and fatherless children,
how wronged.
such a one is though the best husband and most provident, he is judged to have
made the best bargain, and to go away with all the praise and glory in the
world. The second and third branches are touching the widow and the
fatherless: God will be avenged of such as vex and oppress them, Deuteronomy.
10.18. and 14.29. and 24.17. True it is, many widows are tendered and regarded,
and much made off while their husbands are living, and so are children in their
father life time: but when once their husbands and parents are dead, they are
not once looked upon, but left to the wide world and soon out of mind. It is
grief and sorrow enough to the widow to loose her husband, and the children
their parents: howbeit the cruelty of men spares not to add more affliction:
but the Lord will take their cause into his own hand, and reserveth to
himself the punishment of such oppressors. See this Exodus 22. Ye shall not
afflict any widow, Exodus 22.23.24.
or fatherless child: if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all
unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I
will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless: Where he threatens not only to punish them, but in like
manner and measure as they had sinned, according to the saying of our Savior,
With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: Math. 7.2. Touching
strangers* how they a^^ iniuried.
and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. The last is
touching strangers, that is, such as being borne in a foreign land, are
willing to forsake it, to come and dwell where the word of God is truly and
plentifully preached, being peacable to the state, and proselytes to the same
religion, and serve the same God with us: doubtless God will be avenged of
such as hurt or oppress them, for he will not have such vexed and wrenged.
This was forbidden to the Jews, Exodus 22. Exodus 22.21. Levit. 19.33.
Thou shall neither vex a siranger oppress him: for ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt: and Levit. 19. If a stranger sojourn among you ye shall not vex
him he shall be as one borne among you and thou shall love him as thy self for
ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: so Deuteronomy. 24. Deuteronomy. 24.18.
Thou shall remember that thou wast a bondsman, in Egypt, and the Lord thy God
redeemed thee thence therefore? command thee to do this thing. This was often
remembered and repeated to the Jews. But what, may some say, does this belong
to us? who were never in Egypt, Ioh. 8.33.
much less strangers in Egypt, or any other land, as the Jews said, We were
never in bondage to any man. I answer, though we were not, yet we know not
whether we shall be, neither how soon we may be: Pro. 27.1. Math. 7.12.
we know not what hangs over our heads, neither what a day may bring forth.
Besides, the common rule leads us to this homanity, Whatsoever ye would that
other men should do unto you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and
the Prophets: Our forefathers have for the truths sake been driven from house
and home, and been constrained to forsake wife and children, lands and goods,
and have received comfort and relief in a strange land, where God inclined the
hearts of the magistrates to favor them: is it not then reason, that we now
should do the like, and show mercy? But how many wicked and envious men are
there among us, which murmr and grudge, that such should come over and dwell
among us, who have left their country for their conscience sake and the
Gospels? They pretend and plead that they grow rich and wealthy; they see it,
and grudge and grieve at the fight of it. For answer unto these, 1 Samuel 2.8.
observe these few points: First, who made them so? 1. Tim. 4.8.
Is it not God? he makes poor and makes rich, he brings low and lifts
up, and do we envy them, and repine at them? Or shall our eye be evil toward
them, because his is good? Secondly, it is Gods blessing upon them (no doubt)
for the faiths sake, because they have preferred the Gospel of God before their
own goods. And indeed godliness is profitable to all things, and has the
promise of the things of this life, and of that which is to come. To this
purpose our Savior teaches, Every one that has forsaken houses, Math. 19.29.
Luc. 18.29.30.
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my names sake, and for the kingdom of Gods sake, shall receive
manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting.
Thirdly Is it not better they should be rich, then poor? better, I say, not
for them only, but even for others? If they were poor, they must be releeved:
for we are debtors to Jew and Gentile, even to the Turks and infidels, so
far as we do not help them against Christ and Christianity. If they be
rich, they will not be chargable to any of us, but will rather be helpful unto
others. Fourthly, What is the cause they grow so rich? because they are
painful and industrious. And wherefore are many poor and in need among us,
but because they are idle and will not labor, nor use the means that these
do? Lastly, I am persuaded, that God blesses us and the land the better for
giving entertainment to the distressed members of the Churches scattered
abroad: We have done some good to them, but much more to our selves, as the
Shunamite that entertained the Prophet of God did him and his servant good, but
she did more to her self and her own house. Thus we see what sundry branches
there are of cruelty, all which as we should always consider, so most
especially in these days of our public humiliation, when we make solemn
profession of our unfeigned repentance.

Secondly, but serve Antichrist. They can suffer the Jews that daily blaspheme
Christ Jesus our blessed Savior to dwell among them: but they will not suffer
those to buy or sell or abide among them that profess Christ as well as
themselves, nay better, and look for salvation and eternal life wholly
through his merits and not their own. The souls that lie under the Altar cry
unto God without ceasing, day and night for vengeance against such
blood-suckers, saying, Revel. 6.10.
How long, Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth! Their kingkilling doctrine, is of the same stamp,
that Princes have forfeited their crown and Scepters, and their subjects
discharged of the duty of allegiance, whenever the Pope pleases to
pronounce them heretics, and to thunder against them his Excommunications.
The Gunpowder treason shall remain for ever as a monument of this unmatchable
cruelty. It is and has been ever otherwise with the true Church of God, there
shall no such murtherings and massacres be found and committed in all the
mountain of Lord: Esaias. 11.9.
but the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, they shall not hurt nor destroy in
all mine holy mountain, says the Lord.

Lastly, These. 3. It will be objected touching those of the Romish religion,
though they be enemies to the Gospel and to our profession, yet we see no such
matter in them, they live as peaceable men, and the quiet of the land, they
meddle not with others, or against others. fierce and cruel as ever he was.
Remember what they were when they bare sway: such as they were then, such they
are now in heart and affection; such as the fathers were, such are their
children; a cruel, a barbarous, a bloody generation, ever delighted with
shedding blood. Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
not given us as a pray unto their teeth: and let them fulfill the measure of
their sins, that upon them may come all the righteous blood which they have
shed upon the face of the earth.

Above all the Galileans, etc. or those eighteen, etc.) The examples of others
and the miserable event upon them are propounded to teach the Disciples and all
others to turn o God, these men judging these punishments to be the wages of
unrighteousness. Examplesf Gods judgments upon some, are profitable to others.
This teaches that the example of Gods judgments, which he uses and
executes upon nations, kingdoms, cities, families, houses, and particular
persons are profitable means to stay from that evil which God has chastised
in others. In the glass of others, we may look upon our own faces. We see
this Deuteronomy. 24. Remember Miriam, Deuteronomy. 24.9.
what the Lord thy God did upon her by the way, 2 Samuel 11.20 21.
after ye were come forth out of Egypt. the Like is noted 2 Samuel 11. Wherefore
approached ye so nigh the City when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would
shoot from the wall? who smote Abimelech the sons of Ierubesheth? 2 King.
9.31.
did not a woman cast a piece of a Mil-stone upon him from the wall that he
died, etc. Math. 24.37.
The words of Iezabel are grounded upon this foundation, Luc. 17.27.32.
Had Zimri peace, that slew his master? Christ our Savior charge all to
beware of excess, propounding the examples of Noah and Lot, to tie up their
hearts to look after the appearance of Christ in glory, and to draw them from
the love of the world: and afterward he adds to the same end, Remember Lots
wife. So that we see, Dan. 5.20.22
the examples of Gods judgment in former times are profitable to them that come
after to hold them in the ways of righteousness, and to keep them from the
paths of death.

This is proved plainly from the unchangable nature of God, Mat. 3.6. Iam.
1.17.
like a reed shaken with the wind hither and thither, but remains ever the
same, Psalm. 102.27. With him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning, he
is the Lord, he changes not, and his hatred against sin is no way
diminished. 1 Cor. 10.11 6.
Secondly, from the end of Gods chasticements, which is to respect others, as
well as those that are chasticed: for they are written for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the world are come, Romans 15.4.
and these things are our examples, to the intent we should not lust after
evil things as they also lusted. Now let us apply these things.

Behold here the great kindness of God, who teaches and instructs us many
ways, that we are brass and iron, a stubborn and stiff necked generation, a
people that are secure and senseless, and have our consciences as it were
seared with an hot iron! God has executed sundry judgments upon us, he has
given us cleanness of teeth and want of bread in all our places: Amos. 4.6.9.
yet we have not returned unto him; he has smitten our great Gardens and the
fruits of the earth with blasting and mildew, yet we have not returned unto
him: he has sent among us the pestilence after the manner of Egypt, and now
threatens us with the sword of the enemy, yet we have not returned unto him;
what marveill then when we profit by none of them, and nothing will do us
good, if he make us fearful examples to others? This we read Deuteronomy. 29. When
God has brought all the curses of the law upon the land, the generation to
come of their children that shall rise up after them (when they see the plagues
of the land, and the sicknesses which the Lord has laid upon it, made like the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorah) shall say, Deuteronomy. 29.24.25.
Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land? what means the heat of
this great anger? then men shall say, because they have forsake the Covenant of
the Lord God of their fathers, etc. The Lord God sets former examples before
our eyes to teach us, and he will teach our posterity by the examples of his
judgments before our eyes to teach us, and he will teach our posterity by the
examples of his judgments fallen upon us. When the generation to come shall
read and hear of his great judgments upon us, that he has smitten down many
thousands of us in his great wrath and heavy displeasure, so that the former
plagues will be forgotten in comparison of this, if yet we will not return and
repent, he will double and trebble his strokes, and increase his plagues yet
seven times more, and cause this to be forgotten in comparison of those to come
and when any shall ask, wherefore has the Lord done this unto his people?
shall not men say, as the truth is, because they were warned, and they would
not be warned? Is it not for the reigning sins in it, that cry to heaven? He
has spoken unto us and besought us by innumerable his mercies, but they will
not enter: now he is constrained to send his destroying Angel and to scourge us
with furious mortality, and yet our dull, nay dead hearts are still insensible;
we will not turn to him that smites us, neither prepare to meet our God by
timely repentance. Our Atheism, Libertinisme, Riot; Excess, Pride,
Drunkenness, Unthankfulness, and open Profaneness call for vengeance upon
our heads. The old sins in the common wealth, the new-sprung-up heresies and
false doctrines in the Church, what do they, but threaten our ruin and
destruction? Among all our fearful sins, none greater then the contempt of
his word, which commonly of the common sort is no more regarded then a very
tale that is told. The people of God were wont to tremble at it with fear,
Math. 11.20.21.
but we tread it under our feet. Our Savior upbraideth those Cities with
sundry woes, and reprocheth their unthankfulness, where he had preached the
Gospel, because they repented not. Ier. 7.12.13.14.
To this purpose the Prophet says, Go now to my palace which was at Shiloh,
where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness
of my people: I spoke unto you rising early, but ye heard not; and I called
you, but ye answered not: therefore I will do to this house as I have done to
Shiloh, etc. What can we then look for, but speedy desolation for this
contempt? May we not say the like of the profanation of the Sabbath? has not
God revenged the abuse thereof, and set before us examples of his judgments to
awaken us? Read it at large in Nehemiah, chap. 13. And whom does he reprove?
mark it and meditate upon it; not so much the sellers as the buyers: not so
much the Gentiles, as the Jews: the Jew first, Neh. 13.17.18
and then the Gentile, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the
Sabbath day? did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this
evil upon us and upon this City, yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by
profaning the Sabbath, A greater fault in buyers then in sellers on the
Sabbath day.
Let us not go about to wash away the filthiness of this offense by casting
the fault upon the seller, for if there were no buyers there would be no
sellers: withdraw our buying, and their selling will fall of it self. As
receivers cause thieves, so buyers cause these covetous Merchants to profane
the Lords day. Do not these things concern us? have not we the example of
that Godly governor written for our admonition? and may we not justly fear,
that among other crimes, the present judgment is fallen upon us for our
horrible profanation this way? The like I might say of drunkenness. Does not
the Lord set before us the example of the old world, to admonish us, Luc. 21.
Take heed to your selves, Luc. 21.34.
lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares, etc. The
companions of this are whordome and blasphemy; do not these help to kindle
the flame and fury of his wrath against us? and yet where is our repentance for
these sins? O let us labor to quench the fire of his anger with tears of
sorrow: let all that love and fear God, Ezekiel. 9.4.
and bear his mark in their foreheads sigh and cry out for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof? and let us not give over
weeping, praying, and repenting, until we have received a gracious answer,
till his ancient favors be recovered, his present judgments removed, and the
sins of our land remitted.

Secondly, wretched is their estate, should set them continually before us, and
in them as glasses to behold our selves, and thereby receive instruction. Thus
we heard how the Lord charge his people to look what he did to Shilo. ^er.
7.12.
Consider how he spared not the Angels in heaven, the habitation of God: nor
Adam in Eden, the garden of God; nor Jerusalem, the city of God: and shall we
dream he will spare us when we provoke him?

Lastly, Cor. 10. Where propounding sundry judgments and punishments brought
upon his own people, 1 Cor. 10.8.9.10.1.
some committed fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand:
others tempted Christ, and were destroyed of Serpents, others murmured and were
destroyed of the destroyer: touching all these, he says in the beginning of
the Chapter, Moreover brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant what
befell all our fathers, for this is to be repented and applied to those things
that follow after. This then serves justly to reprove the ignorance of our
times, that regard not this heavenly knowledge, because they know not the value
of this treasure, which is more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine
gold. By knowledge we bear the image of God. Col. 3.10.
Col. 3.10. but ignorance is the similitude of a beast, and the image of the
Ox and Ass, Esaias. 1. Psalm. 32. And hitherto of the first amplification of the
exhortation to repentance by the two examples: the one of the Galileans, the
other of the 18. upon whom the tower fell.

6 He spoke also this parable, A certain man had a fig tree planted in his
vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. 7 Then said
he to the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years, I come seeking
fruit on this fig tree and find none: cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground?
8 And he answering, said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I
shall digge-about it, and doung it: 9 And if it bear fruit, well: and if not,
then after that, thou shall cut it down.
The second enlargement of the former doctrine, that impenitent persons are
reserved to destruction, Wherefore Christ taught so often by parables.
is by a parable or similitude, a common form of teaching used by Christ our
Savior. If any ask, why he did teach in parables? I answer, for four causes:
First, Mark. 4.11.
that some might not understand, as Mark. 4. Unto them that are without, all
things are done in parables, that seeing they might see and not perceive, and
hearing, etc. Secondly, that others might more diligently enquire after them
and the interpretation of them, as Math. 13. Math. 13.36.
when he had propounded the parable of the Tares, his Disciples came unto him,
saying, declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field: and again,
Mark. 4.13. Know ye not this parable, Mar. 4.13.33
and how then will ye know all parables? Thirdly, that men might better carry
it away, when he framed himself to the understanding and capacity of every
one, as Mark. 4.33. Math. 13.35.
With many such parables, spoke he the word unto them, as they were able to
hear it. Fourthly, that the elect might be informed touching the marveilous
works of God, his goodness and justice, as our Savior proves out of the
Psalm, Math. 13. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, I
will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things which have been kept
secret from the foundation of the world. Here I might point out this doctrine,
It is lawful for the Ministers to use parables.
either for instruction or for reproof, it is lawful and fit for them to use
parables and familiar similtudes, that the people may the better conceive and
understand such things as they purpose to teach them. So did the Prophet Nathan
2 Samuel 12. So our Savior used sundry kinds of parables, some drawn from
things that have life, as from builders, Mtah. 7.24. Luc. 14.28. from children,
Math. 11.16. from friends Luc. 11. from sheepheards, from women, Luc. 15.8.
from birds, Math. 6.24. and 23.27. and such like. Others are drawn from
things without life, as from light, Math. 5.14 from leaven, from bread, Ioh.
6.48. from the drawnet, Math. 13.47. From treasures hid in the field Math. 13.
etc. Ioh. 3.12.
Ioh. 3.12. for similitudes are natural even to natural men, and they more
easily understand heavenly things by earthly. how to speak, does not fly aloft
above their reach, nor speak eloquently and learnedly unto them, which may
rather astonish them then teach them, or any way make them better: so ought the
Ministers of God to stoop down to the understanding of every man, remembering
that they speak to plain men for the most part, and such as are without
Schoole-learning. Thirdly, 1 Cor. 2.4.
they must not preach with entising words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit and of power. If it had pleased him, he could have
drawn comparisons from things out of our knowledge and sight, such as are in
the highest heavens, and in the center of the earth: but as our Savior
himself fetches all from things familiar and well known, so he has left the
same direction to his servants to follow. Lastly, Col. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and tell us
earthly things; and will we yet be without understanding and continue blind
and ignorant in the matters and mysteries of Salvation? May we not say of such,
now they have no cloak nor color for their sins?

He spoke also this parable.) Now let us come to the particular points to be
observed in this parable, wherein we must observe before we come to the
doctrines, both the method and the meaning; the course and order of the words,
and the right understanding of them.

This parable contains matter of Communication between The Owner of the
vineyard The dresser of it.


In the owner observe his Patience, behold these 3. years, etc. Commandment
Set down, Cut it down. Amplified by the reason, It cumbreth the ground.



In the dresser mark the prayer, Lord, etc Cnditioon If it bear fruit, Let it
alone If not, after that thou shall cut it down.



This is the order: now let us see the meaning. True it is that parables for
the most part aim at one maine point, and are not curiously to be stood upon
in particular, as if every point had his several signification: yet the
special parts of this parable do answer fitly to the doctrine it self. By
the vineyard we understand the Church and people of God, Esaias. 5.7. Psalm. 80.8.
Hos. 10.1.
as Esaias. 5. The vineyard of the Lord of hoastes is the house of Israel. The
fig tree planted in it is every man brought into the Church by the Word and
Sacraments, settled indeed in a pleasant place. The man that was owner of the
vineyard and Fig Tree is God himself: after he had planted it, be came and
looked for fruit, that is, obedience: he came again the second year, and
again the third year: This is the patience of God. The dresser of his
vineyard what it imports is not so certain. Brent. hom. 1. in Luc. 13.
Dionys. Carthus enarrat. in hunc locum
Some understand thereby Christ Jesus, who ever more appeaseth the wrath of his
father, and makes continual intercession for us: of this see more afterward.
The dunging of the Fig Tree is by praying, and by preaching of the Gospel,
which serves to make our barren hearts fruitful.

A certain man had a fig tree planted.) In general we see here what the
patience of God did look for, and what that parable aymeth at. God a long time
spared the Church; and wherefore? that it may bring for^h fruit: and when he is
ready to cut it down, yet he is ready to spare it, so long as is hope of
amendment: whereby we gather that Gods patience requires fruit, and repentance
or else we perish. Gods patirequireth fruit.
The end of his patience must lead us to repentance. While Noah a preacher of
righteousness was building an Arc, God spared the world an hundred and twenty
years. Genesis 6.3.
When Jonah preached to Niniveh, sorty days were granted to turn every one
from his evil ways, Ion. 3.8.
and from the violence that was in his hands. The purpose therefore of God was
to draw them to repentance, which when each one of the City practiced, he
turned from his wrath and spared them. Neh. 9.30. Dan. 9.6. Esaias. 5.4.
We may see this at large, Neh. 9.30. Dan. 9.6. So the Prophet Esaias, chap. 5.
What could I have done more for my vineyard, then that I have done in it? So
then Gods forbearance and longsuff^rance has this drift and purpose, to try
whether we will turn to him and repent, or not.

And no marveil. First, Esaias. 5.3.
Esaias 5. Judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard. Secondly, God
respects the clearing and justifying of himself in all his actions, that he
is not (as it is in the parable) an hard man, that reapeth where he has not
sown, and gathers where he has not strowed, Psalm. 51.4.
for he desires to receive the fruit of his own labor, as Psalm. 51. That
thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge. He
cannot be charged to be severe or unjust, or to have dealt too straightly, who
cries out again and again, Ezekiel. 18.31.32.
Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye and not live, O house of Israel: therefore
let God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3. So then, he takes this course
for these two ends, the one to convince us of his righteous judgments, the
other to give glory to his own name, that he has not been of unequal ways,
but has ever tendered our good and benefit.

Seeing patience looks for amendment of life, Luc. 1.5.7.10.
that joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents: how much more may
we say of God, as he is described in the father of the prodigal son, when he
was yet a great way off, his father saw him and had compassion on him, he ran
and fell on his neck and kissed him; even when he had done nothing, the Lord
only knew his purpose and willingness to humble himself and to say, father, I
have sinn^d against heaven and before thee, etc. he tarried not until he came
unto him and fell down before him, but prevented him and met him in the way.
If he were delighted in the destruction of us, and to make desolations in the
earth, and to trample us under his feet, how could we escape, seeing every
soul calls for justice and judgment, and he is provoked every day? As the
day is renewed, so are our sins renewed, as Ezekiel. 18. and 33. have I any
pleasure at all, Ezekiel. 18.23. and 33.11.
that the wicked should dye, says the Lord God, and not that he should return
from his ways and live? turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye O
house of Israel? Let us weigh and consider the wonderful kindness of the
Lord, and the difference that is between him and us. Alas, we upon every
occasion and every moment, how ready are we to work revenge, to take vengeance
to the full? Alas how soon are we provoked, and our anger once kinded is not
quickly turned away? This is our comfort, it is not so with God. If he were not
of another nature and affection then we are, who should be able to bear it and
abide it? He spoke the word in the beginning, and we were: he can speak the
word again, and our breath is soon stopped, and our days are ended.

Secondly, Jonah toward the Ninivites, when he saw that God repented of the
evil that he had threatened, Ion. 4.3.9.
he was angry even unto death, and besought the Lord to take his life from him.
Thus did the laborers repine and murmr, who boasted that they had borne the
burden and heat of the day, all those that were hired about the eleventh
hour, Math. 20.11.12.
and wrought but one hour, that they should be made equal unto them. Thus the
brother of the prodigal son was angry, when his father had received him into
his favor again, Luc. 15. Luc. 15.27.28. 2 Pet. 3.9.
This use the Apostle Peter concludes, God is not slack of his promise, as
some men count slacknesse, but is patient and long-suffering to us ward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

Lastly, seeing this is the end of his patience, Romans 2. Romans 2.4.5.
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance, but thou after thy hardness, etc. O that we would diligently enter
into the meditation of this use, and lay it up in our hearts. He has spoken
unto us early and late, but we have provoked him to wrath early and late, and
have heaped up one evil upon another: yet has the Lord spared us a long time,
yea and yet spares us. He might justly have begun with us, and have made us
examples to them, and who could have said unto him, why do thou thus? but we
hitherto remain untouched, and he makes others examples to us: and yet where
is our repentance? have we not cause to fear that his hand will make an end
with us?

Then said he to the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I
come, etc. Hitherto of the general scope of the parable: Bezae Annotat. in
hunc locum
now we come to the particular parts thereof in order as they lie. And first
there is propounded in the parable the greatness of Gods patience, waiting
long for fruit, the first, the second, and the third year. Some read the words
by warrant of an ancient copy after this manner, Behold there are three years
since the time I come, etc. and thus also the vulgar Edition reads the place.
Whereby it may appear that this communication was had in the beginning of the
fourth year after the baptism of Christ. And albeit he speak in the time
present, I come, God is very patient.
as Math. 26.23. From hence we learn that the favor of God to his Church, and
his patience is great and infinite, he is not easily moved, nor quickly
provoked. He is of much patience even toward them that obey not, much more
toward his dear children he is of a forbearing nature, and will not pour out
all his wrath, neither execute his justice upon offenders so soon as they
deserve it. He expects many days, months and years for the conversion of
sinners, Esaias, 65.2.3. and 48.9.
he spreads out his hand all the day long unto a rebellious people, which
walks in a way that is not good etc. Ier. 35.15. Math. 22.
a people that procures me to anger continually to my face: and chap. 4.8. for
my names sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for
thee, that I cut thee not off. His patience is so great, that it exceed^th the
height of heaven, Psalm. 103.11.13.
and goes beyond the love of women. We see it in the old world, nay we need
not seek far^e to prove it, nor go out of our selves, we have all good
experience thereof.

The reasons are plain. Deuteronomy. 32. I said, I would scatter them into corners,
Deuteronomy. 32.26.27.
I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men, were it not that
I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and should say; Our hand is high, and the Lord has not
done all this. Hence it is also that Moses groundeth his prayer upon such a
point as this, Exodus 32. Exodus 32.11.
Why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought out
of the land of Egypt, with great power, and with a mighty hand? Numb. 14.13.14.
wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, for mischief did he bring them
out to slay them from the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the
earth: and again in an another place, Then the Egyptians shall hear it and
they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land, etc. Secondly, that we are
nothing but dust and ashes, neither able to answer him one of a thousand; he
considers whereof we are made, he remembereth that we are but flesh, Psalm.
103.14.
yea as a wind that suddenly passes away, as Psalm. 103. So the Prophet Esaias
speaks chap. 57. I will not contend for ever, Esaias. 57.16.
neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit would fail before me, and the
souls which I have made. Thus God rejoices not to be always smiting, in
regard of our enemies, lest they should insult over the Church, and in regard
of our own frame and frailty, lest we should be consumed and come to nothing.

First, Hab. 3.2.
and when his people pray unto him, in judgment he remembers mercy: Or else
we should immediately be consumed: Heb. 12.29.
for why? our God is a consuming fire. Math. 17.5.
Secondly, he sent a Savior and redeemer as a remedy of our sins, in whom he
is well pleased, and he has appeased the wrath of his father: 1 Ioh. 2.1. and
1.7. Ioh. 3.16.
for we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and his
blood cleanses us from all sin. Is it then any marvel, if God be patient
toward his people, and do not keep his anger for ever? Esaias. 65.1.
Thirdly, he sends to his enemies an Embassage of peace before they seek to
him, and is found of them that never asked for him, he sets up his
ordinances among them, Psalm. 147.19.20.
as means to reclaim them: for he shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes
and judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with any nation, and as for
his judgments they have not known them. Hence it is, that he has committed
the word of reconciliation to his Ministers, who as the ambassadors of Christ
beseech us to be reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5.20.
Fourthly, he is infinitely patient in that he puts off the day of judgment
to so long a day, 2 Pet. 3.9.
as 2 Peter, 3. the Lord is not slack of his coming, but is long-suffering to
us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.

Secondly, Jacob for their refuge, because his mercy is endless, and his
compassion infinite. Such shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; happy
are they that put their trust in him, as Iam. Iam. 5.11.
5. Behold we count them happy that endure. we have seen the end of the Lord,
for he is very pitiful and merciful.

Lastly, Amos. 5. Seek the Lord and ye shall live, Amos. 5.6.14.15.
seek good and not evil, etc it may be that the Lord God of hosts will be
gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. The ungodly have no promise of his
patience, who hate the good and love the evil. Secondly, it behooves us to
repent us of our sins, withal our hearts, and that betimes. For albeit he be
patient, yet he is also just, and therefore we may not dream of such a
patience as shall destroy his justice. Mockers at Gods judgments.
This reproves such as make a mock of his threatenings, and fear them no
longer then they are upon them: The Lord threatened the Egyptians to rain down
a very grievous hail upon man and beast, Exodus 9. and willed them not to abide
abroad in the field: but what followed? Genesis 19.15.
he that feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh made his
servants and cattle fly into he houses: Exodus 9.20.21
but he that regarded not the word of the Lord, left them in the field; and
there they all, both man and beast perished. Is it any better with the most
sort? no, doubtless: for why has God executed his judgments, and does daily
cast them abroad as the firebrands of his wrath? is it not because we regard
neither his promises nor his threatenings? doubtless if we had taken his word,
he had never drawn his sword: and had we believed his threatenings, we had not
felt his punishments: if we had hearkened to his mouth to hear his voice, he
had not stretched out his hand to smite with his rod. So it was with the Jews,
when the Prophet denounced the 70. Ier. 25.12. and 29.10.
years captivity, they would not believe it, till the Babylonians came indeed
and carried them away. It is a great mercy of God to open our ears and to give
us believing hearts, before his plagues fall upon us: whereas others run on
and are p^nished. Thirdly, seeing our God is thus patient and gentle, even
toward us that provoke him every day, what ought we to be one toward an other?
As he is not soon provoked, so we should be kind toward those that provoke us,
and disturb our peace and patience, forgiving one another, as God has
forgiven us: and as he is called the God of patience, sow should approove our
selves to be the children of patience. It is our duty therefore to learn
meekness and mercy toward our brethren. As we are exhorted to be perfect,
Math. 5.48.
because our heavenly father is perfect, and to be merciful, because he is
merciful: so we should be patient, because he is the God of patience. This is
the exhortation of the Apostle, Luc. 6.36.
put on the bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, Romans 15.5.
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
against any: Col. 3.12.13
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Ephesians. 4.31.32
But on the other side, if we be given to hatred and revenge, and do not put
away all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and evil speaking, let us take
heed we do not make a law against our selves, and so find the same measure at
the hands of God which we show toward our brother.

Cut it down, etc.) Hitherto of the patience of God: now follows his
Commandment, directed to the dresser of the Vineyard to cut it down. When
once the days of his patience are expired, at the last he executes judgment,
Patience abnsed causes destruction.
he had waited for fruit three years, and yet finds none; now the time
approached, that it must be hewn down. For where the acceptable time of grace
is neglected, there judgment is most worthily called for. This reaches, that
patience neglected brings forth destruction. If we make not his patience to
work in us repentance, he will cause his patience to work out his judgments.
He does desire our amendment, that we should not deserve revengement. As then
Gods patience tends to this end to bring forth repentance, so his patience
and kindness abused and despised brings forth utter confusion. Thus the
Prophet speaks, Esaias 5. Esaias 5.5.
I will tell you wh^^ I will do to my Vineyard (that brings forth no fruit)
I will take away the hedge thereof, it shall be eaten up, trodden down, and
laid waste. This does Nathan preach to David in the name of God 2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 12.9.10.
I have given to thee the house of Judah and Israel, etc. if that had been too
little, I would have given unto thee such and such things: Wherefore then have
thou despised the commandment of the Lord to do evil in his sight? thou have
killed Vriah with the sword, etc. now therefore the sword shall never depart
from thy house, etc. We have examples hereof in the old world, in Sodom and
Gomorah, in Pharaoh and the Egyptians, yea in the Israelites themselves: Romans
2.5.
of them all we may say with the Apostle, Thou after thine hardness and heart
that cannot repent, heapest up wrath against the day of wrath, etc. behold here
a sharp and severe threatening of most heavy vengeance to come at the last upon
such as abuse the great lenity and long-sufferance of God, and are not bettered
but hardened thereby, and not made wiser, but worser by them.

And wherefore shall this abuse cause destruction? Genesis 18.25.
Thus do such deserve to be proceeded against: for shall not the judge of all
the earth do right? This is the reason rendered by the Apostle, where the
doctrine has his confirmation, Romans 2.6.
He will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2. Secondly there is
no respect of persons with him, it skilleth not whether we be rich or poor,
Jew or Gentile, bond or free: all that neglect his patience, ly with all under
his punishment, as it is concluded verse. Luc. 12.48.
as our Savior teaches. To whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required, and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.

This reproves the fond persuasion of such as imagine, Esaias. 1.6.
might I not say with the Prophet, from the sole of the foot, even unto the
head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying
sores: they have not been closed, neither mollified with ointment: and after
this might I not lead you a long in the spirit, Ezck. 8.6.15
as God did the Prophet Ezekiel, and after many sins and much profaneness,
say, Turn thee yet again, and behold greater abominations then these! I might
point out unto you such (not to speak of the greater and higher sort, whose
doings I know not) as make religion nothing else but a matter of policy, and
forget the high God that has set them up on high? but turn ye yet again, and
ye shall see other abomination. How many in this clear light of the Gospel
remain in darkness and blindness, and in the shadow of death, that know not
the right hand from the left, that is, truth from error, which know nothing of
God, neither can give any even the least account of their faith, worse then
children in understanding: yea how many say to God with the wicked, Job. 21.14.
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: what is the
almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray
unto him? and behold greater abominations then these! Others are wholly given
over to the world, men possessed with a spiritual dropsy, the more riches
increase, the more they desire, and the more they set their hearts upon them,
that they bury the remembrance of heaven and of heavenly things, as if they
should abide and continue upon the earth for ever: the cares of this world and
the deceitfulness of riches choke all good things. How many persuade
themselves to be highly in Gods favor, because they are blessed with outward
blessing: who shame not to say, I see God blesses us, as well as the purest
and precisest of them all. But understand, ye unwise among the people, must all
needs be well, because God forbeareth for a time to punish? or shall we
continue in our sins because he continues his mercies toward us? What
should I speak of the contempt of his word and the profanation of the
Sabbath? May we not turn our selves yet again, and see these greater
abominations then the former, which are common and capital crimes swarming in
every place? And might we not from these turn our selves to swearing and and
drunkenness in every street? A rare thing to find a parish without a common
drunkard: and as rare to find an house without a common swearer. These are the
principal causes of his visitations, these are the sins that bring the
pestilence among us: let us labor to keep out these, The ends of Gods lenity
and patience.
or all the care we can take, and diligence that we can use, shall not be able
to keep it from us. Let us not therefore flatter our selves in our sins, and
so abuse his patience, let us not think we are justified, because we are not
stricken. Genesis 15.16. Math. 23.32.
There are other end of Gods bounty and patience. First, to let us alone to
fill up the measure of of our sins, that then he may fill up the measure of
his judgments: from whence arise sundry profitable meditations: he desires
not the death of a sinner. Ye see that he is most just and never punishes
without our deserts: neither will he suffer sinners to go unpunished, albeit he
hold his peace and keep silence a long time. We see, that howsoever we offend,
Ioh. Feri. in Genesis 15. enarrat.
pressed down and running over, certain destruction might fall upon us. Let
us not account sins to be small or slight matters, for how light and little
soever they may seem to be, yet they add somewhat to the heap, as every
grain of corn serves to fill the bushel. We see it is a special token of
his mercy and favor, not his to be tempted above that they are able: so also
he is just and bears with the wicked until they proceed to a certain point
or period, beyond which they cannot pass. Thus he suffers sinners to grow to
their height, to teach us that our nature declineth from worse to worse,
unless we be stayed by a stronger hand. And this is the first end of his
lenity. Secondly, it may be, Job. 10. Other sheep I have that are not of thi^
fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, Ioh. 10.16.
and there shall be one fold and one Shepherd. Such then as belong unto him
must in his good time be brought to repentance. Fourthly, Sam. 2.24.

Secondly, Math. 11. Math. 11.22.42.
because it should be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment,
and more easy for the land of Sodom and Gomorah then for them. It shall not
be enough for us to say, Oh God is merciful! and Christ died for us. For,
because God is merciful, shall we be sinful? or because he has been more
merciful to us then to others, shall we be more sinful then others? Or
because Christ Jesus has died for us, shall we live in our sins, Heb. 10.29.
and by our profaneness crucify him again, and tread under our feet the
blood of the new Testament, as an unholy thing, and do despite to the spirit
of grace? God for bid.

Lastly, Psalm. Psalm. 7.12.13
7. If he turn not, he will whet his sword, he has bent his bow and made it
ready: he has also prepared for him the instruments of death, he ordains his
arrows against the persecuters. O that we could always, when we heareor read,
understand what we hear, and mark what we read, according to the commandment
of our Savior, who so reads, Math. 24.15.
let him understand. There the Prophet compares the Lord to A man of war,
Exodus 15.3.
that takes some time to scour up his sword bright, and to sharpen the edge
and point thereof, to strike and wound his enemy: as also to an archer, that
takes a certain time to bend his bow and to make ready his arrows: but in
the end he draws them up to the head, and never misseth his mark, being more
skillful then those Benjamites, that could sling stones at an hair breadth,
Judge. 20.16.
and not miss, so that he shoots sure and means to pierce deep to the
very heart of all his adversaries. Thus it is with the Lord, when we think him
forgetful oftentimes, or unmindfull of justice and judgment: we must thus
judge, that he is whetting his sword, and bending his bow, and drawing out his
arrows, and preparing to shoot, all which require some time: and therefore let
us fear before him, and not tarry until his judgments be upon us.

Why combereth it the ground.) Hitherto of the commandment to cut down the
figtree now we come to the reason. The owner propounds the justice of his
former doom or sentence. The word imports and signifies not only to make
unprofitable, fruitless, barraine, and good for nothing, but to hinder the
growth of other things which might be planted in the room thereof, that might
bring forth good fruit. They that profess the Gospel, if they be not fruitful
are unprofitable and hurtful to themselves and others. Evil minded men are
altogether unprofitable and full to the whole society where they remain.
Judge. 19.22. and 20.13. Josh. 7.11.12.
This teaches that evil minded men are noisome, hurtful, and unprofitable to
themselves and to others, wheresoever they abide, until they be removed. We
see this in the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, how hurtful they were
to the whole assembly. Numb. 16. in the shameless uncleanness of Zimri and
Cosbi, Chap. 25. A notable example hereof is at large expressed Judge. 20.15.
Those wicked Beniamites, the sons of Belial that committed folly in Israel,
were the causes of the ruin of many thousands, and brought the whole tribe to
a low ebb: yea this often falls out to the children of God, when they
provoke him to wrath. We see this in David, 2 Samuel 24. When he had numbered the
people in the pride of his own heart, 2 Samuel 24.17
and had exalted himself in his own strength, he said, I have sinned and have
done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? let thy hand, I pray thee,
be against me and against my fathers house. Hereby many thousands perished. The
like we see in Jonah, chap. 1. he forsook his calling, and the commandment of
God: he must be cast into the sea, or else the passengers in the ship must
perish: who had been almost drowned through his disobedience, Jonah. 1.11.
for the sea wrought and was tempestuous.

And no marveil. depart out of Babylon, Revel. 18.4.
the mother of fornications, that they be not partaker of her sins, and that
they receive not of her plagues, whereby we see, these follow each other,
infection, participation, destruction.

He that is infected himself, never rests till he have made other partakers
of his sin, and from them both follows the destruction of them both, as we
shall show afterward. Secondly, they are unprofitable, hurtful, and dangerous:
and why? because other vines and trees cannot prosper and flourish, or bring
forth fruit near unto them. When any part of the body is putrified, it passes
and spreads from joint to joint, and from one member to another, 2 Timothy 2.17.
as the canker or gangrene fretteth or eats the flesh next unto it: so where
loose livers are, many others are brought to the same looseness, and stand in
danger to go to wrack. 2 Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9.
To this purpose the Apostle says, Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth
the whole lump? Sin is fruitful, and compared to the child in the womb, it
grows apace: one sin begets another, and one sinner infecteth another,
which brings forth death. Iam. 1.15.


This reproves such as rejoice in the fellowship of the ungodly, and delight
wholly in their company. Genesis 3.15.
God in the beginning put enmity between the woman and the serpent, between
her seed and his seed: but these have broken down this hedge, and pulled away
the wall of partition, and have set them together again. The Apostle plainly
declares, Iam. 4.4.
that the friendship of the world is enmity with God: but these spiritual
adulterers and adulteresses (as he calls them) will have no enmity at all
between them, but will have the friends of God and the world shake hands and
kiss one another. The Prophet asks the Question, Amos. 3.3.
Can two walk together, except they be agreed, that is, they cannot: but these
answer otherwise, they can walk hand in hand together, or else they must
needs confess they are themselves at an agreement with hell. We must learn
to avoid these sinful practices, and know that danger always comes to the
better part by the evil: seldom or never any good to the worse sort. For when
the good and bad are joined together, the evil man is hardly made better by
the good, but he that is good is rather corrupted by the evil. It is an easy
thing to defile and make unclean; but the a matter of great difficulty to
cleanse and purify. And the reasons are, first because the wicked are wholly
carnal, and a lump of flesh, and run one way without any resistance: Why
the wicked sooner corrupt the godly, then the godly can correct the wicked.
but the Godly are only in part spiritual and regenerate; the wicked
therefore being altogether unregenerate, are but as one man, so that they draw
and pull the Godly with all their might and with full swinge of will: whereas
the Godly, being partly carnal and partly spiritual, as consisting of two
men, have their power and strength divided, the flesh drawing one way and the
spirit another, and consequently cannot have such force and virtue. Again, the
ungodly are as men that run down a steep hill, or swim down a swift
stream, and therefore if they catch hold on us, or we one them, it is a
thousand to one but we are carried smoothly away with them: on the other side,
the Godly are as men that climb up an high hill, or that swim up against the
stream, and therefore must put to all their strength, and yet they creep but
softly forward, because the flesh striveth to carry them another way. Moreover,
besides that the ungodly are apt of themselves to infect and corrupt, we must
consider that we are by nature apt to be corrupted and to receive infection, as
when fire and tow meet together, Psalm. 106.34.35.36.
Thus it was with the Israelites, as the Prophet teaches. They did not destroy
the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them: but were mingled among
the beathen, and learned their works, and they served their Idols, which were
a snare unto them: Such then are justly condemned, that think they may have
usual and familiar company with profane persons, a rash, presu^ptuous, and
desperate course, whereat they dash themselves as against a rock, and suffer
shipracke both of soul and body.

Secondly, Sodom, Genesis 13. He was first allured to so journe there by the
richness and rankness of the soil, when he saw all the coast fruitful as
the land of Egypt and beautiful as the garden of Eden, Genesis 13.10. and 14.14.
he made choice to inhabit there: but what followed? First, he was taken
prisoner in the sacking of Sodom and his goods made a pray to the enemy, so
that he lost both his substance and himself: yea, after he was recovered
again by the strength and power of Abraham out of their hands, and returned
together with the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.8.
they vexed his righteous soul from day to day by their unlawful deeds: but
was this all? no, he ran into a greater danger, for it had well near cost
him his life, had not God been merciful unto him, and pulled him as a brand
out of the fire, Amos. 3.12.
or as a shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs, or a piece
of an care. See this yet farther in the example of the Israelites going to
battle against their enemies, the host of the Lord could not prosper or
prevail, but turned their backs and fell by the edge of the sword, so long as
Achan was among them: the Lord said, I will not be with you any more, Josh.
7.12.
except ye destroy the accursed from among you. Numb. 16.26 1 King. 22.22 2
Chro. 20.37.
But when he was taken out of the way, then they had the upper hand. See more
in other places. The wicked oftentimes speed the better for the righteous
seek: so did Laban for Jacob, Genesis 30.27. So did Potaphar for Joseph, Chap.
39.3. so did the passengers in the ship for Paul. Act. 27.24. Yea God would
have spared Sodom, and not destroyed it, if ten righteous persons had been
found in it, Genesis 18.32. but the faithful evermore speed the worse for the
society of the wicked.

Thirdly, it is our duty to come out from among them, separated from them, and
to touch no unclean thing: then he promised to receive us, to be a father unto
us, and to account us as his sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 2 Cor. 6.17.18.
For certainly they are very pestes, and they have plague-sores running upon
them. Nay no sickness so contagious and noisome, as sin and the sinners are.
We shun infected persons and places for fear of bodily harms: but let us
learn to shun profane and wicked persons and places no less, nay rather
much more. The other may corrupt the body, but these endanger the soul: here
the commandment of our Savior takes place, Math. 10.28.
fear not them so much which can but kill the body, and do no more, but fear
especially those things and persons, which will be able to cast body and soul
into hell fire, I say unto you fear them. They are like to the spreading
leprosy, which beginning in one house proceeds to another, until it have
infected the greatest part of a town or City: or as the Lepers that were were
put apart for fear of their infection: Psalm. 119.115
Therefore the Prophet says, Depart from me ye evil doers: for I will keep
the Commandments of my God: 1 Cor. 5.
and the Apostle, Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump: and
afterward, put away from your selves that wicked person.

Lastly, Psalm. 101.3.4.6.7.
This made David to say, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate
the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me: I will not know
a wicked person: he that works deceit shall not dwell in mine house: he that
tells lies, shall not tarry in my fight: him that privily flandreth his
neighbor, will I cut off: him that has high looks will I not suffer: mine
eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me, be
that walks in a perfect way he shall serve me. This is profitable to be
considered of fathers and masters, yea of all house-holders and governors
whatsoever, that are in any place of superiority, and are set over others as a
City upon an hill: would we have our people obedient, our children dutiful,
our servants trusty, our families faithful and in good order: we must lead
them the way, and go before them in all uprightness: we must first of all be
faithful our selves, and behave our selves wisely in a perfect way: we must be
obedient to him and his word, and walk within our house in a perfect way. For
it is most certain, that none are greater enemies to their children and
posterities, pulling their houses down even with their own hands, and
bringing them to utter ruin and desolation, then such superiors or overseers
as are ungodly and disobedient unto God. Let us seek never so much to make our
names great upon the earth, and to leave our issue rich and wealthy in the
world; yet so long as we live in profaneness, we pull an heavy curse not
only upon our own heads, but upon our posterities, and make our names to
stink and rot, as we see in Jeroboam that made Israel to sin; 1 King. 14.10.
and 21.21.25.
the Lord threatened to bring evil upon his house, and to take away the remnant
thereof, as a man takes away dung till it be all gone. The like we see in Ahab
who sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord: who more
likely to make himself great upon the earth, and to have left a plentiful
issue behind him, yet were all swept away suddenly, as a man wipeth a dish and
turns it upside down. Pro. 14.1.
Wherefore that which Solomon teaches touching the wise and foolish woman,
Every wise woman builds her house, but the foolish plucketh it down with her
hands: we may extend and apply to the faithful man and the ungodly: the one
does by godliness lay a sure foundation in time to come, as Psalm. 112. Psalm.
112.1.2.3. etc.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord and delights greatly in his
Commandments: his seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the
upright shall be blessed, etc. the other sort by their infidelity, impiety, and
iniquity pull their houses quite down, that they are never raised up again,
whose children may curse such perverse and profane parents.

Verse. 8. And he answering, said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also.)
Hitherto of the first part of the communication concerning the Owner of the
Vineyard: now follows the second, touching the dresser thereof, wherein
consider first of all his prayer directed to the Owner, Lord, Gualt. in Luca^
hom. 237.
let it alone this year, Here we see the dresser of this Vineyard entreats
the Lord of it for the fig tree, and makes intercession to have it spared.
Heb. 13.20.
I will not precisely or peremptorily decide and determine, what part of the
Church, Hab. 2.1.
whether Christ the head and great shepherd of the sheep, Esaias. 62.6.7.
or the Ministers that stand in their watchtower, or other the faithful, as
the Lords remembrancers which give him no rest, this Dresser of the Vineyard in
the parable represents: only I will observe, that the prayer of him
continues yet one year longer the standing and abode of it in the Vineyard.
Gods children must pray for others, and God hears them
and their requests are powerful and available not only for the faithful,
but oftentimes for others, to remove judgments, and God hears them when they
pray. We see this touching Abimelech, who had taken away Abraham's wife. Genesis
20.7. and 17.20.
God sends him unto him, and said, He shall pray for thee, and thou shall
live: and God says to Abraham concerning Ishmael, I have heard thee. And our
Savior Christ and his faithful witness Stephen do commend their strongest
enemies and persecuters into the hands of God, Luc. 23.34. Act. 7.60.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do; lay not this sin to
their charge. To these infinite other testimonies might be joined.

The reasons are; Table to honor God by praying unto him, which we are no
less but rather more commanded to practice, then we are forbidden to kill or
to steal. If then we make conscience of these, 1 Samuel 12.19.23.
we ought in like manner to make conscience of the other. This appears in the
words of Samuel, when the people desired him, pray for thy servants unto the
Lord thy God, that we die not; he said, as for me God forbid that I should
sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you. what profit should we have,
if we pray unto him. Job, 21.15. nor with those shameless blasphemers, It is
in vain to serve God, Mal. 3.14. Our Savior, because we are weak in faith,
assures that Whosoever asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: Math.
7.8.
and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. And the Apostle James accords
hereunto, Iam. 5.16.
The Prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent. Would we have a
surer ground and foundation to build upon, then the faithful word and promise
of God, that cannot lie or deceive?

Seeing it is the duty of the Church to pray one for another, and that is
profitable and available, hence arises comfort and cheerfulness in all heavy
and sorrowful times (such as the present times are) when afflictions lie sore
upon sundry our brethren and sisters in other places, and press them down to
the ground, nay to the grave; remember the rest of the Church of God pray for
us; I say, Gods people, our fellow members commend us and and our causes day
and night with fasting and praying, and weeping, whom he has promised to
hear, they think upon us in their best meditations, and are earnest
remembrancers for us to him, as if it were their own case, and have a
fellow-feeling of all our miseries, Heb. 13.3.
as if themselves were afflicted. This in the mids of all our heaviness and
greatest weakness, is not our least comfort, that we have many strong servants
of God, strong in faith, that send up many strong cries to the throne of grace:
nay the strong God, that has commanded this duty to pray one for another, has
also promised to hear them. This no doubt was a comfort even to Peter himself
put in prison, that he knew, Act. 12.5. Heb. 12.5.12.13.
Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him and for his
deliverance. Let us not therefore faint under the Cross when we are rebuked of
him, neither despise the chastening of the Lord, who aymeth at our profit, that
we might be partakers of his holiness: but rather lift up the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees, and not cast away our confidence, which has great
recompense of reward. And let this be our comfort in these rerillous times,
that God hears us for our brethren, and our brethren for us, and our
elder-brother Christ Jesus our mediator for us all, who for his mercies sake,
for his truths sake, for his promise sake, for his sons sake will in his
good time send an happy deliverance, that albeit for a season we be kept in
affliction, 2 Cor. 1.5.12
yet as our sufferings have abounded in us, so our consolation should abound
through our restoring, when we had in a manner the sentence of death in us,
that thanks also may be given by many on our behalf:

Secondly, It is enough, 2 Samuel 24.16
stay now thy hand; and so repent him of the evil upon our repentance and
humiliation: if, I say, we have much matter of comfort offered unto us by the
public prayers of the Church often as it were with one mind and with one mouth
made and renewed on our behalf: how much more does peace and consolation arise
unto us by the mediation and intercession of Christ our Savior, the head of
the Church, the beloved son of God, Heb. 1.2.3. Math. 17.5.
the son of his love, the heir of all things, the brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person, in whom the father is well pleased.
Herein consists our chief comfort that we rest and repose our selves in him
as our Advocate, and rely upon the merit of his passion, Ioh. 11.42.
whom the father always hears. Indeed he commands that supplications,
prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men 1 Timothy 2.1.
and that we pray one for another, that we may be healed, Iam. 5.16. But if God
at any time vouchsafe to hear any of his children, it is for his sons sake,
not for any worthiness or merits in them, but for the Lords sake, that is, for
Christ's sake, Dan. 9.1.7.
for he is the Angel of the Covenant, Revel. 8.3.
to whom was given much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of
all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the throne. Therefore also
the Apostle says, Heb. 5.16.
In the days of his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications with strong
crying and tears, and was heard in that he feared, because he prayed to him
that was able to save him from death.

Lastly, Daniel, a man greatly beloved of God, who had many deep mysteries by
vision declared unto him; he spoke to his Companions, Dan. 2.18.
that they should desire the mercies of the God of heaven to reveal his secret
to him, that they might not perish. So the Apostle prayed the Church of the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
to pray for him and the rest of his f^llow-labourers, that the word of the
Lord, much hindered by the opposition of potent adversaries, might have a free
passage. As then he prayed before for the Thessalonians, so here he prays the
Thessalonians to pray for him, that he might be comforted together with them by
the mutual prayers both of them and of him. The use of mutual prayer
To this duty we should be stirred up in regard of the mutual profit that
proceeds from the practice and performance thereof. Solomon, 2 King.
8.33.35.37.44.
when the people of Israel be smitten down before their enemies, because they
have sinned against thee: when heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, etc.
if there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting, mildew,
locust, or caterpiller, etc. whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be,
hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive the sin of thy servants,
etc. Peter's faith was kept from failing, Luc. 22.32.
Luc. 22. and thus he prayed, not only for the rest of the Apostles, but for
all them that should believe on him through their word, Ioh. Job. 17.20.24.
17. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me, where I
am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me, etc. Prayer
therefore is a notable preseruative to keep the precious treasures and jewels
of grace in the Closets of our hearts, and serves to strengthen and increase
good things in us. For as it obtains blessings at Gods hands, so it procures
the increase of them: and it is no less virtue to keep and continue, to
enlarge and increase what we have obtained, then at the first to obtain it.
Iam. 5.15. Psalm. 19.13.
Iam. 5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. For the
cause of sickness and all diseases is sin, and therefore our Savior healing
the man sick of the Palsy, said unto him, Math. 9.2.
Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee, dealing like a good
Physician, who removes the cause that he may remove the effect. So then
faithful prayer and a purpose or resolution to continue in sin cannot
poffibly stand together. Lastly, Tim. 4.5. Our callings, our labors, our
actions, and the works of our hands are sanctified by it, as Psalm. 127. Except
the Lord keep the City, Psalm. 127.1.2
the watchman waketh but in vain: it is in vain for you to rise up early, to
sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows, etc. Seeing these things be thus,
that these be the fruits of prayer, Ezr. 9.6.10.11.13. Neh. 9.32.33. Psalm.
79.8.9. and 80.3. Dan. 9.7.8.18.19.
let us put it in practice, and double our zeal, and never cease to follow the
example of this Dresser, to cry to the Lord for our brethren, Lord, let them
alone this year also, spare thy people, and give them not over into the hands
of the destroyer: we are ashamed and blush to lift up our faces to thee, O our
God; for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespasses are
grown up unto the heavens. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this?
for we have forsaken thy Commandments, which thou have commanded: and all this
evil is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, for
as much as thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve; Now
therefore, O our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who keep
Covenant and mercy, let not all the troubles which are most heavy upon us and
our chief Cities seem little before thee: howbeit thou art just in all that
is brought upon us, for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly, and
dealt foolishly and frowardly with thee. O remember not against us former
iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very
low; help us, O God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy name; and deliver
us, and purge away our sins for thy names sake: wherefore should the enemies
of the Gospel say, where is their God? turn us again, O God, and cause thy
face to shine, and we shall be saved: O Lord God of hosts, how long will thou
be angry against the prayers of thy people! O Lord, righteousness belongs
unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, to our Princes, to our fathers, to
our people: incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the City which is called by thy name. For we do not present
our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great
mercies: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do: defer not for
thine own sake; for the City and thy people are called by thy name. Now is the
time of this humiliation: now God calls to us to call upon him: now is the
time of trouble and affliction: Let us give him no rest, you that are the Lords
remembrancers stand in the breach, which his right hand has made, Numb. 16.48
as it were between the living and the dead: let us never give over; neither
let him alone until we have received a gracious answer, that our iniquities be
pardoned, his present judgments removed, and his ancient favors recovered.

Till I shall dig about it, and dung it.) The labor of the Lord of the
Vineyard has been before expressed, so that the complaint of the Prophet may
be renewed, Esaias. 40.4. and 53.1. and 65.23.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain:
and in another place, who has believed our report? We must have hope touching
the salvation of others, albeit they run a^ stray.
yet the barren fig tree is not forsaken and given over, so long as there is
any hope, but the Dresser will still be digging about it and dunging of it. This
teaches, that we must not despair of the salvation of any, howsoever they
have long gone astray. We see this in the example of Manasses, he built altars
for all the host of heaven, he caused his children to pass through the fire,
he used Witchcraft and enchantment; he dealt with a familiar spirit, and with
wizards: 2 Chro. 33.5.6.
he shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to
another, and wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to
anger: yet the Lord was entreated of him, 2 King. 21.16
and heard his supplication, when he had learned by woeful experience that the
Lord was God. Act. 2.37. and 10.11.12.13.14.15.
Thus it was with those that crucified the Lord of life, they were pricked in
their hearts, and had Salvation preached unto them. Hereunto comes the vision
of Peter, he saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as
it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, wherein were all manner
of foure-footed beasts of the earth and wild beasts, and creeping things, and
souls of the air: and there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter, kill and eat.
And when he refused, because he had never eaten any thing that is common or
unclean: the same voice answered, What God has cleansed, that call not thou
unclean: This was the interpretation of the vision, that which is unclean God
is able to cleanse. Paul before his conversion was a blasphemer and a
persecuter and a great oppressor, 1. Tim. 1.13.
but he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly through unbeleefe. The
Gentiles wandered many years, even thousands of years in superstition and
Idolatry, yet at length when the time of their conversion was come, Genesis 9.27.
Ioh. 10.16.
God persuaded Iapheth to come and dwell in the tents of Shem, Genesis 9. and our
Savior speaking of them, says, Other sheep I have, 2 Timothy 2.25.
which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice, and there shall be one fold and one shepherd: So the servant of the
Lord must not strive, but be patient and gentle unto all, proving if God will
give them repentance.

The reasons are plain. First, hours of the day, who hoth the times and
seasons in his own power: Math. 20.3.5 6.
some at the third, some at the sixth, some at the ninth, and some at the
eleventh hour; and we have a notable example thereof in the penitent thief
converted by the powerful word of Christ upon the Cross: Luc. 23.34.
he that was running a pace to hell has promise to be carried into Paradise:
whereby the common proverb is verified, if in any thing else, that he runs
far which never returns, God waits the time that he may be gracious unto
us, Esaias 30.18.
and have mercy upon us, for he is a God of judgment: and blessed are all they
that wait for him, Esaias 30. ought not we therefore to follow his example, and
to hearken who will speak aright and repent him of his wickedness, saying,
what have I done?

This reproves the boldness and rashness of such as dare take upon them to
enter into the secrets of God, 2 Samuel 6.19.
as they that adventured to pry into the Arc were punished 1 Samuel 6. so such
as presume to read what is written in the book of life, and presume to open
the book that is clasped and sealed with many seals, may happily never find
their own names registered therein. For the farther reproof of such as dare
pronounce the sentence of damnation upon any, and judge others reprobates, and
the directing of our selves herein, let us observe these few rules for the
clearing of the point, and the keeping of us in the mean between two
extremes. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
First, it is a good rule which Moses gives, The secret things belong unto the
Lord our God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our
children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law. But the sentence
of reprobation is one of the secrets of God, or rather the secret of secrets,
the most hidden secret of all the rest. Secondly, it is noted of charity, it
thinks no evil, 1 Cro. 13.5.7
it believes all things, it hops all things, it endures all things: Such
then as despair of the conversion of others, do plainly declare they are
destitute of love which covers a multitude of sins. Thirdly, we must
notwithstanding learn the great folly of many men in the world, that build
awry or amiss upon a good foundation. For seeing we must not be as men without
hope of Salvation of others, much less of our selves, we see how diverse are
deceived that give an easy passage and entrance to commit sin, till they be
so caught and entangled, yea so enwrapped and fettered with it, as a foul in a
snare, or as a prisoner in chains, that they cannot easily break it off
again, neither rid themselves of it, as the wise Solomon speaks of the
strange woman, Pro. 2. Pro. 2.19.
None that go unto her return, again, neither take they hold of the paths
of life. True it is, this is an excessive and hyperbolicall speech often used
in Scripture, as Esaias, 59 4. and 64.7. Ier. 8.6. and sundry examples teach the
same, 2 Samuel 12.13. 1 Cor. 6.11. Heb. 11.31.32. Iam. 2.25. But the meaning is,
few come to repentance and to reform themselves, or take a better course of
life, that they might be saved. And this is another folly of the sinner, who,
being rebuked and threatened for sin, do by and by answer, Tush, we can leave
sin when we list: we will repent at leisure and help all. But Solomon will
teach these fools, that few or none compassed with the continual practice of
sin amend their ways, Pro. 6.22.27
but go as the Ox to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the
stocks, because they have set themselves in the way to hell, Ier. 13.23.
going down to the Chambers of death. For custom is as strong as nature, or
rather much stronger; It is as the Ethiopians skin and the Leopards spotts,
which cannot be changed. It is hard for a man to forget his natural language
and his mother tongue, but it is harder for the sinner to forsake his sinful
course. For a man by nature or birth is indifferent to any language, and
inclined to no one more then to another, because he has it by hearing and
imitation of others, as appears in such as are borne deaf: but we do not
only suck in sin with the mothers milk, but as the Prophet confesses,
Psalm. 51.5.
We were shapen in iniquity, and in sin did our mothers conceive us: which
is a great deal more then can be spoken of the language which we learn in our
youth. Besides, it is a great policy of Satan to cover his purpose at the
first, as the fisher does the hook, to deceive us the sooner; he begins
with lesser sins, until he have wrapped us in the greater, and our
consciences be hardened, and as it were seared with an hot iron. Fourthly, A
two fold favor of God to the sinner.
this shows the wonderful love and favor of God which he vouchsafes to
any, both when he preventeth sin that we do not fall into it, and when he
breaks off the course of it when we are overtaken with it; This is a twofold
grace. We are by nature prone to sin, and ready to yield to every tentation, as
we see in Peter that denied his Master at the word of a seely damsel: when
therefore the Lord puts his hand under us and stays us up, that we do not
stumble and fall, is not this a wonderful grace to keep us from sinning
against him, and wounding our own souls? As this is a great blessing, so the
other is yet greater, to pull us out of the snare, when we have one foot in
hell; as it is a greater work to stay a man that is running down a steep
hill, then to persuade him not to run at all. The truth of both these, we see
in David, a man after Gods own heart, for when he was purposed to shed blood,
1 Samuel 25.22.33.
and to destroy all that pertained to Nabal by the morning light: he blessed
God that had kept him from coming to shed blood, and from avenging himself
with his own hand. Lo here the preventing grace of God to stay him, that was
running and making haste to commit sin. Again, when he had given himself
over to commit one sin after another, Luc. 11.22.
as it were to add drunkenness unto thirst, the strong man bagan to possess
the house, but a stronger then he came, and overcame him, and took from him
all his armor wherein he trusted, and so recovered him out of the snare of the
Devil, which he laid to entrap him. He had, as much as lay in him, cast
himself into the mouth of the roaring Lion that gapeth after his prey: it was
therefore the special mercy of God to reclaim and recover him out of the
snare of the devil, who after a sort was taken captive by him at his will.
Lastly, we must labor that sin may not reign in our mortal bodies. For
albeit we cannot be without sin, because we carry about the flesh, yet we
must take heed it exercise not a kingdom in us: it has an easy entrance, an
easy continuance, but it is hard to get out and to rid our selves from the
tyranny thereof, as we may see in Esau, Genesis 26. in Saul, 1 Samuel 14 and 15. and
in Judas, who passed from one degree to another, till at last they filled up
the measure of their sin. It is an easy matter to pull up the banks and
throw down the walls, whereby as by fenses or bulwarks the sea is kept out
from overflowing the land, and so to let in the water: but it is not so easy
to let it out again: so it is with sin, it is no hard thing to make
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, and to pull up the banks of the
fear of God whereby sin is kept out: but we shall find it one of the hardest
things in the world to cast it out of the heart, when it has gotten firm
possession: and therefore it must be our labor and wisdom to prevent sin
in the beginning, lest by continuance it take root and be as a disease that is
incurable.

Secondly, Peter, when the Lord had said unto him Launch out into the deep,
and let down your nets for a draught, he answered, Master, Luke 5.5.
we have toyled all night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I
will let down the net: Matt. 13.27.
so must we cast out the net of the Gospel into the sea, and gather the good
into vessels, but cast the bad away. And if it fall out that we draw none to
the shore, 2 Cor. 2.15.
yet are we the sweet savor of God, as well in them that perish, as in them
that are saved: and God no less accounts of our labors, if we have been
faithful and conscionable, then if we had converted many thousand souls. To
this end, the Lord himself commands Paul not to hold his peace at Corinth,
Act. 18.10.
but to speak boldly, because he had much people in that City. The husbandman
must dig and dung his ground, and cast the seed into the earth, but he cannot
give the early and the latter rain: and albeit he find a thin harvest, he
may be greeved, yet het he is not discouraged. We are commanded to feed the
flock committed unto us, and woe to us if we preach not the Gospel: but we
must evermore commit the success to him, that has the hearts of all men in
his own power. Mat. 3.11.
John Baptist did baptize with water to the remission of sins, but he could
not Baptize with the holy Ghost: So we may teach and preach the word of the
kingdom, but as it fell out with the sower that went out to sow, some fell by
the high way side, Matt. 13.4.5.7.
some in stony ground, and other among thorns, so must we make our account it
will be with us: yet this is our comfort, our judgment is with with the Lord,
and the reward of our work with our God: Esa. 49.4. 1 Pet. 5.4.
and when the chief shepherd shall appear, we shall receive a crown of
glory that fades not away.

Lastly, it teaches generally a good duty and direction to all the faithful,
exhort one another daily, Heb. 3.13.
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Who accounts not him a merciless man, that having
escaped danger of robbing or drowning, yet gives not warning to him which
traveleth that way, lest he fall into the hands of thieves and be robbed, or
pass by the waters and be drowned? but much more is he without mercy, and
guilty of the blood of the soul, that seeing his brother overtaken in sin,
and taken in the snare of the Devil, ever seeks to set him at liberty? Now
we have sundry motives to move us to this work of mercy, far more profitable
to men, and acceptable to God then the sacrifice of Almes-giving that touches
the body, in respect of God, in respect of our selves, and in respect of
others. In respect of God, Romans 11.23
for it makes manifest his power to be infinite, that he is able to graft them
in again, as the Apostle speaks of the unbeleeving Jews, albeit through
unbeleefe they were broken off; and it turns to the greater praise of his
glory, and the honor of his name, which we ought to seek above all things.
The more dangerous the disease is, and the longer it has continued, the more
does the skill and learning of the Physician appear: Romans 5.20
so are we the more to magnify the mercy of God, in that where sin, bounded,
grace does much more abound. Touching our selves, we thereby exercise the
gifts that God has given, do not as wicked and sloathfull servants, Mat.
25.26.
dig them in the earth and hide our Lords money: besides, we know not how
soon it may be said to us, Come, give an account of thy steward-ship, Luke
16.1.
for thou may be no longer steward. Lastly, we shall free our own souls,
and not make our selves partakers of other men's sins: for by conuivence and
holding our peace, we draw guiltiness upon our own souls. In respect of
others, we may be means to save a soul, as Iam. 5. Iam. 5.19.20.
If any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that
he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

Verse. 9. And if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that, thou shall
cut it down.) We heard before of the entreaty and intercession of the Dresser:
now the condition follows, which is double: first, if after all his labor,
it bring forth fruit. Secondly, if it bring not forth fruit: one of the twain
it must of necessity do, there is no third: either it must be fruitful, or
unfruitful: either we must make the tree good, or evil. The first part of the
speech is defective, for there is nothing in the original to answer to the
Condition: the translaters have supplied the word, Well: and somewhat is
necessary to be supplied, to make the sense and sentence perfect. I would
think a word might be borrowed and supplied out of the former verse, where the
Vine-dresser says, Let it alone this year also; so in this place, If it bring
forth fruit, Let it alone, or thou shall let it alone: as also appears by the
contrary condition in the last words. If not, thou shall cut it down. He
expresses bearing fruit first, besore he mention the cutting of it down,
because it was the chief and principal in the dressers intention, and because
all his labor of digging and dunging tended to this end and purpose. Now he
entreats that it may be let alone, if it bring forth fruit: he yields to
the cutting of it down, Promises and threatenings are both of them
condicionall. 1 King. 8.25.
that as well the promises of grace and mercy, as all the threatenings of
judgments and punishments are conditional, and to be understood with
limitation. See this 1 King. 8. Now O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy
servant David my father, that thou promisedst him, saying, There shall not
fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel, so that their
children take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou have walked
before me. Of this did David himself put his son Solomon in mind, 1 Chro.
28.9.
Know thou the God of thy father and serve him with a perfect heart and with a
willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, etc. if thou seek him, he
will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.
So does our Savior threaten the Church of Ephesus to remove the Candlestick
out of his place, except it did repent. Revel. 2.5.
The reason is plain, both of the one and of the other. He promises mercy
with condition, that we should be stirred up to obedience, that no defect might
be on Gods behalf: and again he threatens judgment, that he might not enter
into judgment; and denounces punishment, that he might not punish, but that
we should repent and amend our lives, and remember from whence we are fallen.
Revel. 2.5.
This appears evidently in his threatening against Nineveh, who can tell,
Jonah. 3.9.
if God will turn and repent from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? When
we repent, he repents: we of the evil of sin, he of the evil of
punishment: but if we repent not of our sin, he will never repent him of the
punishment that he has threatened to bring upon us.

It reproves all such as remember what God has promised to us, but forget
what he requires of us. Abraham, Genesis 17.7.1.2.6.
and we bind our selves interchangably one to another. He said unto Abraham, I
will be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee: but how? on this condition,
Thou shall keep my Covenant; and what was that? Obedience, whereof
circumcision was a sign; walk before me and be upright. If Abraham had called
unto God to perform his part, to bless him as his God, and in the mean
season had never performed his own part of the Covenant, to walk before him
in the uprightness of his heart had he not dallied with God, and deceived
himself? But thus the case stands with us, we are ready to complain and
murmur, if the Lord do not bless us, when in the mean season we forget what
promise we have made to him. If we should deal so with men like unto our
selves, would not all accuse us of folly?

Secondly, two unchangable things, wherein it is unpossible that he should lie,
Heb. 6.18
we might have strong consolation: I say these promises are no promises to us,
if we do not keep the Covenant; it is all one as if they had never been
made. Mat. 6.25.33.
Our Savior wills us to take no thought what to eat or what to drink, or
wherewith to be clothed; he promises that he will never leave us nor forsake
us, but it is with condition, first seek the kingdom of God, and then all
these things shall be ministered unto us; then he says, my mercy will I keep
for them for evermore, my promise shall stand with them: my covenant will I not
break, Psalm. 89.28.34.
neither alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.

Lastly, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin, The Lord is with you, while ye be with
him: 2 Chr. 15.2
and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you. And is it not just with God to deal with us, as we deal with
him? and to measure to us again, as we have measured to him? Let us therefore
seek him while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near: let us
forsake our evil ways, and return unto the Lord: then he will have mercy
upon us, and he will abundantly pardon all our sins.

If it bear fruit, well.) The barren estate is very dangerous, near to be
burnt up.
The fig tree in this place is not said expressly to be dead, but to be barren
and to bring forth no fruit at all, which is all one. This teaches that the
barren condition has no life nor comfort in it, but is full of danger, even
near to burning. This John the Baptist teaches, Every tree which brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire, Math 3.10. Math. 3.10.
So the Apostle Heb. 6.6. The earth which bears thorns and briers is
rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, Heb. 6.7.8.
whose end is to be burned. A man may say of such, as the Disciples of the
figtree, Math. 21.29.
against which the curse was passed by the mouth of Christ, How soon is the
fig tree withered away? Such then do lie under an heavy curse. We think we
have said much in praise and commendation of many, and indeed of many it is too
much, to say they are harmless men, they do no man any hurt, you may live
long among them, and you shall receive no wrong nor jniury from them: but is
this enough? no doubtless: for what shall this profit, if we bring forth no
good fruit? Ier. 17.8. Ezekiel. 47.12.

The reasons are plain: for first, thou shall not kill, says also
inclusively. servant which will not do what his Master commands, Mal. 3.6.
(because a servant honors his Master) it is joined with open contempt of
him; no marveil therefore, if disobedience to God, be also a contempt against
God, as the Prophet says, If I be a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord
of hosts?

This teaches that doubtless many stand guilty of a multitude of sins which
they never thought of, Nehemiah desired the Lord to remember him concerning the
good deeds which he had done for the house of his God: Neh. 13.14.
It had been small comfort to him if he had only done them no hurt, and gone
no farther: for so much might be said of an image, or of the bruit beast; but
his comfort was, he had endeavored and employed himself to do them good. And
how did Obadiah show his religious heart in the days of persecution toward the
Lords Prophets? what, did he rest in this, that he had done them no hurt? No, 1
King. 18.13
he did an hundred of them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water. Or how did Rahab the harlot testify her faith toward the spies, that
were sent to search the land? did she content her self to offer them no
injury, and to bewray them, or deliver them into the hands of their enemy? No
doubtless, she was justified by her works, Iam. 225. Heb. 11.31.
when she had received the messengers with peace, and had sent them out another
way. But the religion of most men in our days is a negative religion, they
have little positive, you may sooner observe what they do not, Gal. 6.10.
then understand what they do. We must observe the rule of the Apostle, As we
have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of
the household of faith.

Secondly, Psalm. 1.3.
but we must be as trees of righteousness, planted by the rivers side which
bring forth fruit in their season: True it is, the Church has always had
such painted Sepulchers, or gilded tombs outwardly, as the Jews that had the
Temple of the Lord always in their mouths, who yet remained wicked and
profane persons in their lives. The sound Christian is not discerned by the
leaves of outward appearance, but by the precious fruits of the spirit: not by
his profession, but by his practice: and they are the true Israelites which are
so within, whose praise is of God and not of men. The fig tree had leaves good
flore which were seen a far off, Mar. 11.13.
and seemed to promise great store of fruit, but when Christ drew near and
looked for fruit, and found none, he said, Never more fruit grow upon thee. Let
us take heed, in time, of such a woeful sentence. For may not Christ Jesus,
trow you, find store of such fruitless fig trees in this Vineyard of his?
nay, when he comes to look upon his Vineyard, will it not be a rare thing
and an hard matter to see a fig tree with any fruit upon it? Nay, are we not
for the most part come to this pass, that we have scarce any leave at all to
be seen, that a man may take a Candle and search for leaves, and yet find none
upon them? This is the state and condition of sundry among us: how near are
such to the curse, and to be burned up, which have neither fruit nor leaves,
neither substance nor show, neither body nor shadow, neither truth nor
appearance: but openly and evidently make plain Demonstration of wild and
wicked fruit, Deuteronomy. 32.32.33.
their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter, their wine is the
poison of Dragons, and the cruel venime of Aspes: Such shall never be suffered
to remain within the Vineyard, the axe is laid to the root of the tree, to cut
them down.

Thirdly, Math. 5.16.
whereas we call upon the people to bring forth the fruits of the Gospel, and
to let our light so shine before men, that they may see our good works and
glorify our father which is heaven. Nay we teach a necessity of good works,
as well as they, to be in all true believers, that they which have believed in
God, might be careful to maintain good works, these things are good and
profitable unto men. Wherein then lies the difference between us! they teach
them to be the causes of our justification; we that they be lively fruits and
effects of faith: they do not go before him that is to be justified, but they
follow him that is already justified: they are not necessary in the act or
office of justification, but they are necessarily required to be in every
justified person.

Lastly, the first and great Commandments, Math. 22.38.
must have the first place, to love God above our selves, to fear him, to
believe in him, to trust in him, to pray unto him, to serve and worship him, to
reverence his name, and to sanctify his Sabbath: and the works of the second
Table are like; Gal. 5.22.23.
for the fruits of the spirit are manifest, love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, faith, meekness temperance, and such like. These belong to all,
and must be practiced of all persons, high and low, rich and poor, none may
excuse themselves. The special works are such as belong to every man in his
particular calling. For as we have all a general calling as we are Christians,
so we are set in several callings, such as are superiors and inferiors, as the
Magistrate and subject, the husband and wife, father and son, master and
servant: we must labor to be found faithful in these, how low so ever our
place be, if we be found careful and conscionable, even the meanest servant
that drudgeth in the Kitchen, if his calling be nothing but to scour spittes,
Ephesians. 6.6.7.
or to wipe shoes, yet if he be obedient to his Master as unto Christ, not
with eye-service, as men pleasers, but as the servant of Christ, doing the will
of God from the heart, with good will doing service as to the Lord and not to
men: he is no less accepted of God in his place, then he that preaches the
word, or he that rules a kingdom.

Well; or thou shall let it alone.) These words are expressly mentioned; but
they, or some such like must necessarily be understood, as if it were said, let
it stand and continue in the Vineyard, that it may bring forth more fruit, as
Ioh. Ioh. 15.2.
15. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away: and every
branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
Repentance obtains forgiveness of sins and the favor of God.
and prevent Gods wrath and judgments, and procure his love and favor. He
has made a sure promise of remission of former offenses to all such as truly
turn unto him. Thus the Prophet has, Wash you, make you clean, take away the
evil of your works from before mine eyes, etc. then though your sins were
as crimsin, Esaias, 1.16.18 and 55.6.7.
they shall be as wool; and though they were as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow: and chap 55. Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon
him while he is near: let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous
his own imaginations etc. let him return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him, Ezekiel. 18.23.
And the Prophet Ezekiel chap. 18. I will not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he repent and live: where he coupleth these two together. The truth of
this point is farther confirmed by sundry examples, as 2 Samuel 2 Samuel 12.13
12.13. When David had acknowledged his sin against the Lord, the Prophet
said for his comfort, The Lord also put away thy sin. The like we see in
Manasseth when he was carried away captive and clapped up in prison being in
great tribulation, prayed unto the Lord, 2 Chr. 33.12
and humbled himself greatly be fore the Lord God of his fathers, and God was
entreated of him and heard his prayer, and brought him back again to
Jerusalem, and set him upon the throne of his fathers. The Publican smote his
breast, saying, Lord, Luke 18.13.14.
be merciful to me a sinner: I tell you this man went down to his house,
justified rather then the proud Pharisee. The like I might say of Paul, 1 Timothy
1.13.
he obtained mercy and forgiveness when he was converted: so the penitent
thief upon the Cross, said to the Lord Jesus, Lord, Luke 23.42.43.
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom? and Jesus said unto him,
Verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Mar. 1.4.
Hence it is that the Evangelist witnesses that John did baptize in the
wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins:
where we see he knitieth repentance and forgiveness of sins together.

The reasons: first, Esaias, 1.17.17.18. For to speak properly, nothing can
cleanse us but Christ's blood, so foul and filthy we are; and therefore it is
called clean water, Ezekiel. 36.25. 1 Ioh. 1.7.9.
I will power clean water upon him: and thus the Apostle John says, If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins; and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Secondly, Esaias, 1.
Ye shall eat the good things of the land: Esaias 1.19.20
but if they refused and rebelled, they should be destroyed, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it.

Let us apply these things. First conclude, condition, Deuteronomy. 28.16.
to be cursed in the whole course of our life, at home and abroad, in the City
and in the field, in all that we put our hand unto, Deuteronomy. 28. The curse of God
brings with it all miseries of this life and of the life to come. If then we
repent not, we die.

Secondly, Psalm. 32.1.2. and 38.4.
whose transgressions are for given, and whose sin is covered: Blessed is the
man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. There cannot be a greater
blessing befall us in this world, then to get pardon of our finnes: for all the
burdens that we can bear, are not to be compared to the burden of sin, and
therefore to be lighted of it, is one of the greatest blessings: of all the
spots and stains that can stick unto us, Iam. 1.21.
sin is the filthiest, and therefore to be cleansed and washed from it, makes
us clean in his sight.

Lastly, The way and the means to attain to repentance.
to bring forth good fruit. They shall have God himself to help, strengthen,
and assist them, to cause them go through with that work. If any ask what is
the way, and what be the means to attain unto it, and to lead us by the hand
to enter into that course? I answer, draws iniquity with cords of vanity,
Esaias, 5.18.
and sin as it were with a cart-rope, to suppose it to be a slight thing,
that we may do a little, that we need not be so precise to stick at a
little, like the sluggard that gives way to a little sleep a little slumber,
Pro. 6.10.
a little folding of the hands to sleep: but we must assure our selves, that
though there be difference between sin, yet all finne is heinous, none to be
accounted little, Romans 6.23.
as Romans 6. the wages of (all) sin is death. Secondly, to avoyde all
occasions and allurements that may draw and entise us to sin, to abstain
from all appearance of evil: and Jude says, Others save with fear, 2 Thessalonians.
5.22 Jude verse. 23.
pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted with the flesh.
Thirdly, Solomon says, Pro. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always: but he that hardneth his heart shall
fall into mischief. Lastly, Psalm. 49.7.8.
No man can by any means redeem his brother, neither give to God a ransom
for him, so precious is the redemption of the Soul.

And if not, then after that thou shall, etc.) This latter clause of the
sentence is defective in the former part, as the former was in the latter part.
The meaning is, if this fig tree will not bring forth fruit, that is, of
repentance, after all the labor of digging and dunging bestowed upon it, after
this thou shall cut it down. All that are in the Church are not true members
of the true Church.
neither are all which are in the Church members of the Church; but many
hypocrites in it, as there are evil humors in the body, which are no parts of
the body. So it was in the house of Abraham; so it was in the house of Isaac:
for all are not Israel, which are of Israel: Romans 9.6.7. and 2.28.
neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called. So there is a Jew which is one outwardly, and
there is a Jew which is one inwardly; as there is a circumcision which is in
the flesh, and a circumcision of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

This will farther appear by the title given to the visible Church, It is the
garden of God; in a garden all are not good and wholesome herbs: and on the
tree, all is not fruit, but some leaves. The Church is the floor, where in is
both corn and chafe: Mat. 3.12. and 13.24.47.
the field wherein grows both wheat and tares: the net that catches all
sorts of fishes both good and bad: the pasture where in feed both sheep and
goats: some are sheep in show and semblance, that inwardly are ravening
wolves in sheep clothing, others are sheep indeed and in truth: some by
outward calling and profession and in the eye of the Church, others by grace
and inward regeneration and in the eye of God. Secondly, Math. 20.16.
therefore all cannot be believers: for many are called, but few are chosen. It
is the house of God, in a great a great house, 2 Timothy 2.30.
there are not only vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of wood and of
earth, some to honor and some to dishonor. Noah; wherein as there were both
clean beasts and unclean: and men clean and unclean: So all that are in
Church are not by and of the Church, 1 Ioh. 2.19.
as 1 John. 2. they went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, etc.

This serves for reproof, the servant cannot pluck up all the tares in this
life, Math. 13.28.29.
lest while they gather up the tares, they root up also the good seed with
them. This serves to pull up by the roots the dotage of the Anabaptists and
family of Love: for never was there such a Church in this life, as they dream
off, neither shall there be hereafter.

Secondly, is black both in regard of the affliction and infirmities thereof in
this life, albeit it be also comely: Cant. 1.5.
black in respect of it self, but comely or lovely in respect of Christ. But
after this life, all blackness and imperfections shall be done away, when
Christ Jesus shall present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27.
but that it should be holy and without blemish. No unrighteousness then shall
enter therein, Revel. 21.27.4.
neither any thing that is unclean or any thing that defiles* then God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former
things are passed away.

Lastly, it exhorts us never to give rest to our souls, Christ in word, Tit.
1.16. Revel. 3.1.2.
but deny him in their works, who have a name that they are alive, but indeed
are dead. Let us therefore be watchful, and strengthen the things which
remain, that are ready to die, and repent speedily, because we know not what
hour he will come upon us. This is the use that the Apostle teaches, having
showed that in a great house are sundry vessels, some to honor and some to
dishonor, he adds, 2 Timothy 2.21.
Let us purge our selves from these, that we may be vessels unto honor,
sanctified, and meet for the masters use, and prepared to every good work.
Math. 3.8.
Let us strive to bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God, and purging our consciences more and more from dead works,
that so we may gather comfort and assurance that we are vessels to honor, and
for our better assurance, let every one depart from iniquity, that names the
name of Christ. 2 Timothy 2.19.

After that thou shall cut it down) Here is the final doom of this fig tree
without any farther repriving or sparing thereof, Though the Lord suffer long,
yet he punishes at the last.
if it cannot be made fruitful. From whence I might observe, that the Lord,
howsoever he be very patient and does forbear long, yet at the last he will
come to visit and punish men for their sins, Ier. 5.7.9. How shall I pardon
thee for this? thy children have forsaken me and sworn by them that are no
gods: when I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and
assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses. So Esaias 42.14.15. 1 Samuel
Romans 2.6. and 3.5.6.
and give to every one according to his works, as Romans 3. Is God unrighteous
who takes vengeance? I speak as a man: God forbid: for then how shall God
judge the world?

This teaches the children of God, sword, and visit their iniquities to the
full: Exodus 34.7.
for he will by no means clearethe guilty. Secondly, Romans 2.

Thou shall cut it down.) Such as grow desperate are near to destruction.
and the dresser thereof obtained the continuance of the standing thereof
another year, if nothing will serve, none will entreat any farther, it must be
cut down. This teaches us, that when once we grow desperate without hope of
amendment, and past recovery, God is determined to destroy us, and to pull us
up by the roots, as trees that are altogether withered, dead, and rotten. Thus
it was with the sons of Eli, the sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 2.12.25.
they knew not the Lord, neither would they give ear to the warning of their
father: but what was the end? They hearkened not to the voice of their father,
because the Lord would slay them. This we see also 2 Chro. 36. the Lord gave
his people over into the hand of the Calde^s: but when came the wrath of the
Lord upon them to the uttermost? when there was no remedy. He had sent his
Prophets continually and successively one after another among them, 2 Cor.
36.15 16.
but they could do no good with them they grew worse, as those that are
desperately diseased, and cannot be healed. There was therefore no remedy,
neither other way with them, then to cut them off utterly. Thus our Savior
speaks, Math. 23.37.38.
I would have gathered you together, but ye would not: behold your house and
habitation is left unto you desolate, Esaias. 6.10
so that it came to pass as the Lord had threatened, Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: lest they see with
their eyes, and herewith their ears, and understand with their heart, and be
healed.

The reasons are; first because there is nothing left that can do them any
good. Ier. 17.6.
They are like the heath in the wilderness, which shall not see when any good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in a salt land and not inhabited.
The heath has good means coming upon it to make it good, the Summer comes,
the Sun shines, the rain falls, the influence of the heavens descends,
yet evermore it remains the same, a dry and barren heath: It is with the
barren soul as with the barren soil; the word, the Ministers, the Sabbathes,
the Sacraments, the days of grace, nay Christ Jesus himself can do them no
good: no good? nay the Word, which in it self is the savor of life to life,
becomes to them the savor of death to death: 2 Cor. 2.16.
Christ himself is a recke of offense, and a stone to stumble at: and all the
rest of the means ordained to Salvation turn to their final destruction. 1
Pet. 3.8.
Secondy, such have filled up the measure of their sin, Math. 23.32.
it is now come to the top, and his judgments lie even at the door, ready to
fall heavy upon them: then will God fill up the vials of his wrath, and power
them down upon their heads.

To apply these things to our selves, it ought to move us to turn to the Lord
betimes, That the Lord sent to us his servants rising up continually and
carefully, because, 2 Chro. 36.15.16.
he has compassion on his people: but we on the other side mock his
messengers and ministers, and despise his words; what remains but that the
wrath of the Lord arise against us, either by the plague and pestilence, as he
has upon our brethren, or by the sword of the enemy which will have no
compassion upon the young the maiden, or him that stooped for age. He has other
man or secret judgments which the world takes no knowledge of, neither
judges them to be any judgments at all, these, as they are more secret, so
they are more sharp: as when he takes away his word from us, or if he
continue it, yet makes it unprofitable through our abuse and contempt of it.

Secondly, Ier. 30.12.
Thus says the Lord, thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous, there
is none to plead thy cause that thou may be bound up, thou bast no healing
^^dicine: there is no Balm in Gilead to heal them, whom the Lord sees thus
without remedy, and thus past recovery. They are like a man desperately sick,
whom all the Physicians have forsaken: The husbandman takes his weeding
instruments, and labors to grubbe up the thorns and thistles and weeds out
of his ground, that the good corn might the better prosper and flourish; but
when once he sees there is no end of his work, nor fruit of his labor, but
the more he toyleth and moyleth, the more they grow and increase, he is without
hope to overcome them, and so withdraws himself, and lets all alone. For
why or to what end should he busy and bestirre himself in vain? Thus it is
with the Lord, he sends his messengers, and charge them to warn his people
in season, to admonish and exhort them: but when they stop their ears, and
pull away their shoulders, and refuse to hearken, what can we think but that
the Lord is determined to lay waste his Vineyard, that it shall not be pruned or
dug or dunged any longer, but there shall come upbries and thorns, Esaias,
5.5.
and to command the clouds that they rain down no more rain upon it; yea,
to take away the hedge thereof, that it may be eaten up: and to break down
the wall thereof, that it may be trodden down, as he threatened to the Vineyard
of the house of Is^ael, when he looked for judgment, but behold oppression:
and for righteousness, but behold a cry.

Thirdly, Esaias. 53.1. and 49.4.
that no man believed his report: and prophesying of the labors of Christ
Jesus to plant the Gospel, who was the best labourer in the field, and the best
shepherd of the sheep, he brings him in complaining, that he had labored
in vain, and spent all his strength in vain: nevertheless he was not
discouraged, but comforted himself in this, that the reward of his work was
laid up in heaven. Solomon giving directious for works of charity, Eccl.
11.1.6.
charge them that have this worlds good to cast their bread upon the waters,
because they should find it after many days: and afterward he adds to the
same purpose, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withdraw not
thine hand: for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
whether they both shall be alike good: much rather should it be thus with us;
we should cast the bread of life upon the waters, even when we have small hope
to find it again, as if a man should sow his seed in the sea, and use all
diligence, and take all occasions to do good, leaving the issue of our labors
to the chief husband man. And the rather we ought to do it, because we are
unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, 2 Cor. 2.15.
and in them that perish, that is, in all persons, because all men whatsoever,
either are such as shall be saved, or such as shall be condemned: and the
reward shall be according to the faithfulness of the Ministers teaching, not
according to the fruitfulness of the peoples hearing.

Lastly, it behooves us in time to take heed how we hear; what we hear
touching the matter, Mark 4.24. Mar. 4 24. Luke 8.18.
but also how we hear, touching the manner, Luke 8.18. and regard how it be
performed, as well as that it be performed. The more the word of God sounds
in our ears and we respect it but as a sound, the more our hearts are hardened,
like the anvill that is beaten and hardened by the continual strokes of the
hammer. Gods word is in regard of the effects resembled and compared to fire
and to an hammer, as Ier. 23. Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord,
Ier. 23.29.
and like an hammer that breaks the rooke in pieces? There is more hope of
men that never heard the word, and never lived under the ordinary ministry and
preaching of it, then of such as have had their ears beaten with it, and yet
it cannot enter into their hearts, as our Savior speaks to the chief
Priests and Elders of the people, Math. 21.31.
Verily I say unto you, that the publicanes and the harlots go into the
kingdom of God before you, If the word do not convert us, it does condemn us:
and if it make us not better, it makes us worse. A soft heart is a singular
blessing: they are thrice happy that have attained unto it: on the other side,
the sinner that is as brass and iron, and past feeling, lies under an heavy
curse. Pro. 20.12.
Hence it is, that Solomon says, The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the
Lord has made even both of them. We cannot see what is before us, until God
direct us, Genesis 21.19. Luke 24.16.31. We cannot hear the voice that sounds,
until he open our ears, Act. 22.9. If then he have opened our ears, that it
may be said of us, My sheep hear my voice, Ioh. 10 27.
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish: and if
withal he opened our hearts as he did the heart of Lydia, Act. 16.14.
that we may attend to the things which are spoken; We have received such a
blessing as many thousands do want, and for which we are bound to give
continual thanks to almighty God, to whom be praise in the Church for ever,
Amen.

FINIS.
A Recapitulation of the Doctrines handled in this Scripture.
THe way to prevent Gods judgments, is to repent. Doubtless such as continue
in sin without repentance shall perish. We are rather to look to our selves,
then to censure others. Outward judgments neither always seize upon the worst
sort, neither always free the best men. God has many ways to take away man's
life, and that suddenly, when pleases him. The wicked are by nature bloody
and cruel. Examples of Gods judgments upon some are profitable to others. It
is lawful for the Minister of God to use parables and similitudes. The end of
Gods patience ought to be our repentance. The favor and patience of God toward
his Church is infinite. Patience neglected and abused brings destruction.
Evil minded men are altogether unprofitable to themselves and others. Gods
children make intercession for others, and are heard. We should not utterly
despair of the salvation of others, howsoever they run astray. The promises
and threatenings of God are conditional. The barren estate is very dangerous,
near to the fire. Repentance obtains for givenesse of sins, and the favor
of God. All that are in the Church are not true members of the Church. The
Lrod, though he suffer long, punishes at last. Such as grow desperate and are
past recovery, God is determined to destroy.
FINIS.
PHYSIC AGAINST FAMINE. OR, A SOVEREIGN Preservative against all
distrustful thoughts and cares touching the things of this life, prescribed
and administered by the best Physicion of soul and body, Christ Jesus:

Comfortable in these days.

Opened and expounded in certain Sermons, by WILLIAM ATTERSOLL, Minister of
the Word of God.

PSALM. 37.25. I have been young, and now am old: yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. ROMANS 8.32. He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Michael Spark the
younger, dwelling at the blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and worthy Lady, the Lady DOROTHY SHVRLEY, all
happiness in this life, and in the life to come.
Madam;
THe saying of the Apostle is remarkable and never to be forgotten, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and 6.6.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come: and afterward in the same Epistle,
Godliness with co^tentment is great gain. For what can it profit a man, if he
should gain the whole world, and then lose his own soul? Now the drift of
this ensuing Treatise (as appears by the Title) is to show to a godly
Christian, received already into the love and favor of God in this life, and
looking for happiness in heaven after this life, by what holy means he may
support his heart, as posts do the house, with sufficient contentment against
all the miseries that do or may assault him in time of necessity. The crosses
and tentations, wherewith the life, especially of a poor Christian is
distressed, are manifold, and Satan works upon their several wants, to
surprise them, and make them often cry out, What shall we eat? Matthew. 6.31.
or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? Every calling in
the world, from the highest to the lowest, is assaulted with his proper and
peculiar tentations, and there are certain unlawful and ungodly courses
practiced by wicked man, which we may not unfitly call The special sins of
such a calling. Hence it is, that the Apostle among other precepts beats upon
this, Heb. 13.5, 6. Genesis 28.15. Deuteronomy. 31.6, 8. Josh. 1.5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee: so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what
man shall do unto me: and our Savior, to comfort us against fear of famine,
sends us sometimes to God, sometimes to our selves, sometimes to the Heaven,
sometimes to the earth, and sometimes to the Gentiles, that by all these we
might have strong consolation and rest in him, that has given us both our
lives and our bodies. Consider a little the History of the Creation, as it is
described in the Book of Genesis: God made all the Creatures to serve for man's
use, before he made man himself, wherein we may behold a perpetual pattern
of his providence, that he never brings any into the world, but that first
he ordains things needful for them, for the time allotted them to be there;
even as milk in the Mothers breasts for the child to suck, before ever the
child be borne to suck the same. A very gaod pattern always to have before
on eyes, against that distrust and infidelity which commonly hangs on, and
haunteth the nature of man in those matters. Let us also take heed of setting
our heart upon the world, and the things in the world, and be ready evermore to
confess in word, and show it by our, practice that we account our selves to be
but as Strangers and Pilgrims in this world: Heb 11.13. Psalm. 62.10.
if riches increase, we must look to it, that we set not our hearts upon them:
and we must use the world, as if we used it not, because the fashion thereof
passes away. And if we do not set our hearts and affections upon our riches,
much regard; but as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.8.
Having food and raiment, will therewith rest contented. Secondly, Job; who,
because he rejoiced not when his substance was great, Job 31.25. and 1 21.
and when his hand had gotten much, therefore he did not much grieve when his
wealth was taken away, but in his greatest loss praises the Lord. So also it
was with Paul, who, because he used this world as not abusing it, and esteemed
the best things thereof no better then dung in comparison of Christ and his
benefits, 1 Cor. 7.31. Phil. 3.7, 8. and 4.11, 12, 13.
it was no great pain to him to take forth a farther lesson, in what state
soever he was, therewithal to be content: he could be abased and abound, every
where in all things he was instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, to
abound, and to have want: yea, he could say, I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me. Thirdly, Jacob stood gazing one upon another,
that is, Genesis 42.1.
they fared as men amazed, and at their wits end, that they know not what to
do for themselves, their wives, and their children; then the Lord by his good
hand opened a way for their relief, that there was plenty of Corn in Egypt,
when there was none in the Land of Canaan, verifying his gracious promise, Genesis
8.22. So when the poor widow in time of a great famine was brought to that
extremity, 1. King. 17.12, 13.
that she had but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a
cruse, and was now going purposely to gather a few sticks to dress it for her
self and her son, that they might eat and die; when she was in this great
perplexity, necessity, and extremity, the Lord (that never leaves his) by his
good providence directed the Prophet Elijah (who immediately before had
himself been fed by Ravens that brought him bread and flesh in the morning,
verse 6.
and bread and flesh in the evening) to tell her good news, that the barrel
of meal should not waste, verse 14.
neither the cruse of oil fail, until the Day that the Lord sends rain
upon the earth. Thus it was with the widow of one of the sons of the
Prophets, she was left so far in debt, that her children were to be sold to
satisfy the griping and greediness of the merciless Creditor: and she had
nothing to discharge it, 2 Kings 4.2.
but a little pitcher of oil: yet she was provided for by wonderful means:
all which examples, as a cloud of witnesses, do verify the saying of the
Psalmist, Psa. 33.18, 19. and 37.25.
Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope
in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in
famine: and Psalm. 37. I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen
the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.

But if there were no other reasons or considerations, then such as are handled
in this Scripture, to be as a preservative or counterpoison against diffidence
and distrust, touching earthly things, which do more disquiet and disturb,
not only the natural man, but even the Regenerate themselves oftentimes, then
any thing in the world besides, herein we may find matter sufficient to take
from us the carnal fear of future wants: first, because we are his Flock,
The Lord is my Shepherd, Psalm. 23.1.
therefore I shall not want: how then can they assure themselves to be in the
number of the Sheep of Christ, that do not rely upon the care of this great
Shepherd? As then the Prophet says in another case, Esaias 40.11. Ezekiel. 34.2.
Should not the Shepherds feed the Flock? So we may be assured, that the
Shepherd of Israel, that leads Joseph like a Flock, will never be wanting
to his sheep, that call and cry unto him. Father. Psalm. 80.1, 2.
Will the father give over the care of his children, and forsake or forget the
fruit of his own body? nay, does not the Prophet say, Esaias 49.15.
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? yea, they may forget: yet will I not forget thee, whom
I have graven upon the palms of my hands. And Christ our Savior speaks to
the same purpose, What man is there of you, Matthew. 7.9.10.11.
whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish,
will he give him a Serpent? If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give
good things to them that ask him? Lastly, Kingdom, and of the glory of heaven
which is unspeakeable, incomprehensible, and everlasting. He that has promised
us a Kingdom, will he withold from us food and raiment? nay, Romans 8.32.
as the Apostle teaches us to reason, He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? So should we conclude, that seeing he has called us to an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven, 1
Pet. 1.4. He will never leave us nor forsake us in this life, but if we first
seek the Kingdom of God, Matthew 33.
all other things shall be added unto us. He that promises and provideth the
greater, can he fail us and not perform the less? He that makes us Kings
unto his Father, and has promised a Crown, August. de verb. Domini Qui dabit
regnum, non dabit viaticum?
will he deny us a bit of bread, and a cup of drink?

These points are more particularly discussed and opened in the ensuing
Treatise, which I have presumed to dedicate to your Lady-ship, and not without
good and weighty reasons. You heard the public preaching of them with special
attention, (though many years since,) and therefore I must needs acknowledge
you among my best hearers and friends, and withal consecrate unto you some
part of my labors, which I have bestowed in writing. Besides, considering your
earnest desire, to know that God, whose goodness you have always tried, your
zeal to glorify him, on whom you have always called, your care to walk in
his ways, whom you have always served, and the fruits of a lively faith, that
have plentifully flowed from you, whereof there are so many eyewitnesses among
us, the hearts of many distressed Ministers, and the loins of many poor
people being ready to bless you, and God for you: I cannot but beseech your
Lady-ship, to accept of this small testimony of my unfeigned observance of your
many praises in the Gospel, and as a pledge of my thankfulness, which I
leave behind me to the world, being now ready to go out of it. The God of
eternal glory, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, make you abound yet more
and more in all the riches of his saving graces in this life, and fill you with
the inward comforts of the blessed hope of the appearance of Jesus Christ.

Your Lady-ships in all Christian duties to command, WILLIAM ATTERSOLL.

PHYSIC AGAINST FAMINE.
LVKE 12.32. Fear not, little Flock: for it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give unto you the Kingdom.
THe occasion of these words is to be taken from the 15. The occasion of the
words.
verse of this Chapter, wherein our Savior exhorts to take heed and beware
of covetousness, for as much as no man's life stands in the abundance of
those things he possesses. True it is, this lesson is short, and set down in
few words: howbeit it is not so soon learned, and easily practiced, as it is
spoken and delivered. Wherefore, he propounds a parable, and tells what
happened to a certain rich man, who, in the plentiful increase of his goods and
fruits of his ground, blessed himself the possessor, but not the Lord the
giver of all: for he said to his soul, Luke 12.19, 20.
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry. But what said the Oracle of God unto him? Thou fool,
this night thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall these things
be, which thou have provided? This example he applies to all, the Ravens that
cry unto him, and clotheth the Lillies of the Field that cannot cry unto him;
Solomon in all his royalty was not arrayed like one of them. But what is all
this, if we make not use thereof? if we do not apply it unto our selves?
doubtless, it is no better then the covetous man's hidden treasure, which he
heapeth and hoardeth together, but does neither to himself nor to other any
good. We have therefore the direction of Christ himself, who draws and
deducteth sundry conclusions from hence. First of all seek the Kingdom of
God, and then all these things shall be added unto you. Another use is in these
words of the text, fear not, for you have a Kingdom prepared and provided for
you.

Thus we are come to the words that are to be handled, The interpretation of
the words.
being the use that the best Teacher and Master makes of his doctrine he had
delivered: Now let us see the meaning and interpretation thereof.

Fear not.) This is to be restrained according to the circumstances
aforegoing, the general being put for the special. We are sometimes commanded
to fear, Psalm. 34.9. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints: and Romans Psalm. 34.9.
Romans 11.20. Matthew. 10.26, 28. 1 Pet. 3.20. Psalm. 2.11. Luke 1.74.
11 Be not high-minded, but fear. And again sometimes, not to fear, Matthew.
10.26, 28. 1 Pet. 3.20. Sometimes we are charged to serve the Lord in fear,
and to rejoice in trembling, Psalm. 2. Likewise sometimes to serve him without
fear, Luke 1.74. These phrases may seem the one contrary to the other. But
they are easily reconciled, if the words going before, and following after be
diligently marked. In this place he means the fear of want of earthly
things, as if there were none in Heaven above to provide, nor promise made in
the Word to strengthen, nor example of the godly to direct, or as if every one
were left to shift and scamble for himself. So then he means a corrupt and
carnal fear, whereby a man fears lest he lack such things as are needful
for the maintenance of this life, and thereby is so distracted in the service
of God, that he employeth all his time in the business and affairs of this
present world.

Flock) That is, my people, whom I have undertaken to maintain, nourish,
keep, preserve, and feed, as a good Shepherd does his Flock: for these are
as it were the sheep of his pasture.

Little) Gods heritage is called little in three respects: first, in regard
they are few in number, because the multitude of the wicked world is the gnats,
and replenisheth all palces of the earth. Secondly, in regard of the small
account and estimation wherein they are; there is little reckoning made of
them: Matthew. 10.42. 1 Cor. 4.13.
for in the judgment of the ungodly, they are as the filth of the world, and
the off-scowring of all things unto this day. Hence it is, that Christ says,
Matthew. 18.14. Matthew. 18.14.
It is the will of your heavenly Father, that none of these little ones should
perish. Thirdly, they are little in their own eyes, and think more lowly of
themselves, then any other, or then of any other, 2 Samuel 6.22. 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

Fathers.) That is, God, the Father of his Church, whom he tendreth as the
apple of his eye, and loves as a Father does his Children, and therefore
cannot see nor suffer them to want any thing that is good.

Kingdom.) That is, the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of glory, for Christ's
Kingdom is not of this world, John 18.36. Touching the good pleasure of God
see more afterward.

In these words observe two points: The division of the words.
first, the counsel or commandment of Christ which is delivered. Secondly, a
reason whereby it is enforced. In the counsel consider these particulars.

First, an earnest dehortation or disswasion, fear not. Secondly, a loving
appellation by way of an Apostrophe, or a turning of his speech, belonging to
those hearers that are called from fear, the Flock of God.

Thirdly, a strict limitation, or word of restraint, it is a little Flock,
that God takes charge and care of. The Shepherd regards not the Goats and
wild beasts of the field and forest: it is enough for the Shepherd, that he
feed his Sheep and his Lambs.

The second point is a reason, and that reason is a promise, and that promise
is of a Kingdom. For so gracious is our good God unto us, that he annexeth his
promise to our obedience, to give us encouragement in doing our duty. And
herein observe diverse branches; for the promise contains the Author, the
application, the groundwork, the manner, the object, and the subject.

First, the Author of the promise, who also is as able to perform it. Many men
do make large and fair promises, but are not able oftentimes to make them
good. This promiser is God, described unto us by a word of relation, he is in
nature a Father.

Secondly, the special application thereof to our selves, he is our Father, so
that as he is able, so likewise he is willing to perform his promise, because
he loves us. For what Father will forsake his children?

Thirdly, the ground and original of it, his own good pleasure, and not any
thing in our selves as of our selves to move him to favor us.

Fourthly, the manner of it, he gives it, he does not sell it, or exchange and
barter with us, to receive the like again, or the worth of his promise in some
other commodity at our hands; it is his free gift, it is not for any merits
done, or works and worthiness foreseen: so that we cannot say to God, as
Abraham did to the Hittites, Give it me for so much money as it is worth, Genesis
Genesis 23.9.
23.9. and if any be so foolish, Acts 8.20.
we may answer them as Peter does to Simon Magus, Act. 8. Thy money perish with
thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money.

Fifthly, the object of the promise, to wit, the persons to whom it is given, to
You: but to what You? not to the wise and prudent of this world, but to babes
and simple ones: not neither to all in general, for he has made no such
large promise to all the sons of men, but to You, called before, the little
Flock.

Lastly, the subject or matter of the promise, the Kingdom of Heaven, without
which, all other promises are of no value. This is promised and bestowed upon a
few only. And thus much touching the occasion; the interpretation, and the
division of the words. Now let us come to the particular handling of them in
order as they have been unfolded unto us.

Fear not) The first point that comes to be considered, is the dehortation,
wherein our Savior shows what we may not do. This is the ground of all
diffidence and distrust, a causeless and needless fear. This is the root of
all doubting and distraction, and therefore he labors first of all to pull
it up by the root, and to cut it off with the sword of Gods providence. Moses,
not without a bitter taunt likewise, Exodus 14.10.11.
Exodus 14.10. Because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to
dye in the wilderness? Wherefore have thou dealt thus with us to carry us forth
out of Egypt? then Moses said unto them, Fear ye not, stand still and see the
salvation which he will show to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have
seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever: the Lord shall fight
for you, and you shall hold your peace. Thus the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 34.9,
10.
Psalm. 34. They that fear the Lord, shall need to fear no lack: the Lions
lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord, shall want nothing that
is good. Where no fear of God is, no marvel if there be fear of all things
else: but where the fear of his name is, there is a counterpoyson to expel
all other fear. Hereunto accords the saying of Christ, I say unto you,
Matthew. 6.25.
be not careful for your life what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,
nor for your body what ye shall put on: is not the life more worth then meat,
and the body then raiment? It is the manner of the most sort, when they begin
to feel any want, especially in times of famine, to cry out, Oh, we are
undone! what shall we do? how shall we live? wherewithal shall we maintain
our families and households? As if there were no God in Israel that looked upon
us, or cared for us, or knew our wants. But who is it that gave thee thy life?
or from whence receivedst thou thy body? have we not our breath and being from
God? doubtless he will therefore maintain our lives, and cloth our bodies,
so that we may say with the Apostle, Phil 4.6.
Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thankesgiving, let your request be made known unto God.

This truth receives farther strength from the titles given to God. Is not he
the Husband, the Shepherd, Ephesians. 5 31.
For no man hates his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, Ephesians.
5.31. Will a good Shepherd take charge of a flock, and then starve it? God
has taken charge of all that are his: when we are once become his Sheep, in
that very moment, we live under his protection, as Psalm. 23.1, 2. The Lord is
my Shepherd, Psalm 23.1. and 80.1.
and he makes me lie down in green pastures, he leads me beside the still
waters, and Psalm. 80.1. Give ear, O thou Shepherd of Israel, thou that
leadest Joseph like a Flock. Will not natural Fathers and Mothers sustain
their Children, and supply all their wants? can Parents see them perish, or
miscarry, and never be moved at it? Our Savior tells us, What man is there,
if his son ask him bread, Matthew. 7 9, 10, 11.
will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how
much more shall your Father which is in Heaven, give good things to them that
ask him? And the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet, Esaias 49.15, 16.
Can a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb! yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Esaias
49.15. The love of God therefore toward his, is greater then the love of men
is, or can be to their Children: he that touches them, touches the apple of
his eye, and shall not escape his hand, his revenging hand.

Secondly, Manna for the space of 40. Exodus 16.15. Numb. 20.8.
years, and opened the hard Rock to give them water, whereof they and their
Cattle drank, Exodus 16. Numb. 20. Consider this further in the example of
Eliah, 1 King. 19. when he was constrained to fly for his life from the
persecution of Jezabel, and desired to dye, the Angel of the Lord came unto
him and said, 1 King 19.^. and 17.6.
Arise, and eat: and he went in the strength of that meat 40. days and 40.
hights unto Horeb the mountain of God. The like we read before, that is, The
Word of the Lord came unto him, Hide thy self in the brook Charith, and thou
shall drink of the brook, and I have commanded the Ravens to feed thee. So
he did according to the Word of the Lord, for he dwelt by the brook, and the
Ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the
evening, and he drank of the brook. But be hold how the Lord tried him! for
he had not tarryed there long, but the brook dried up, because no rain fell
in the Land. What then did the Prophet of the Lord? did he murmr against God?
No, he waited with patience his leisure, and he sent him other means for his
maintenance; he directed him to the widow of Sarepta, where he was fed in that
famine. She had indeed but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil
in a cruse, and he says unto her, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, The
barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until
the day that the Lord sends rain upon the earth. Thus he commands to lay
aside fear, and to submit her self to the will and pleasure of Almighty God.
Thus also the Lord dealt with her, that had been the wife of one of the
children of the Prophets, after his decease, 2 King. 2 King. 4.1, 43, 44. Ioh.
6.5, 6, 10, 11.
4. he dying indebted, the merciless Creditor came to take unto him her two
sons to be his bondmen: but the mercy of God was such in her extremity, that
having in her house a pot of oil only, it was so increased and multiplied,
that she received more then she desired, through his abundant blessing that
gives more then is asked, so that she, not only paid the debt, but her self
and children lived of the residue.

Thirdly, God will sanctify a little, Moses teaches, Deuteronomy. 8. Man lives not
by bread only, but by every Word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord
does man live. We have a lively example hereof in Daniel and his fellows that
did eat nothing but pulse (a grain that bears his fruit in poddes) yet were
they fairer and fresher, fuller and fatter at the end of ten days, Dan. 1.15.
then all the children which did eat the portion of the Kings meat, Dan.
1.15. This also we may see by experience in rich men's and poor men's children,
and in themselves also as well as in their children. For whereas the poorer
sort have scarce one good meals meat in a month, but keep a perpetual Lent,
not eating a bit of flesh in their own houses once in a year, and feed hardly
and homely with brown bread, and yet have not enough of that neither: Eccles.
5.12.
yet is their labor pleasant, and their sleep sweet: whereas the richer sort
that fare deliciously every day, are many times oppressed with raw humors, and
are neither so strong and healthy as the other.

Fourthly, Romans 8.28.
Romans 8. But all things shall fall out for the best to them that love him. For
what shall separate us from the love of God? shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or perils? no doubtless: forasmuch
as we are more then conquerours through him that loved us. Psalm. 90.5, 6, 7.
So likewise, Psalm. 90. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor
for the arrow that flies by day, neither for the pestilence that walks in
darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at noone day, a thousand shall
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh
thee: there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling. are evil, and the punishments of evil; but to Gods children they
are only chastisements and correction of a good and gentle Father, and that
for their further good, to prevent sins to come. Contrariwise, to the wicked,
they are the heavy strokes of a just Judge, or of a revenging enemy. Secondly,
God pulls out the sting of them, that they cannot hurt them. True it is, 1
Cor. 15.55.
all things fall out alike to the godly and ungodly, to him that swears, and
to him that fears an oath, so that no man knows love or hatred by these
outward things, yet the venom and poison is pulled out from these Scorpions,
so that albeit they may hiss at us, yet they shall never hurt us. Genesis 2.17.
Romans 6.23.
Death is of it self the wages of sin, Genesis 2. Romans 6. It came into the
world by sin, and is the last enemy that shall be subdued: howbeit it has
already received his deaths-wound, and the nature of it is quite changed to the
godly. Indeed death remains as a cup that all must taste off: but behold the
difference, to the ungodly it is the reward of sin, the suburbs of hell, the
separation of the soul from God, and the guide that conducteth them into
everlasting torments. To the godly it is no punishment of sin, but the
abolishing of sin, the path and passage to a better life, the haven of our
rest, the end of all our labors, and the way by which we must come into the
presence of Christ. He is become the death of death, so that they are bold in
him to look death in the face, because they look beyond death. For he that
will not fear it, must cast his eye further then it; as they feared not the
fiery Serpents, that lifted up their eyes to the brazen Serpent. Thirdly, if
any means to uphold their life be wanting, the Lord does strengthen and arm
those that are his, with patience, contentedness, and inward comfort and
consolation, that he makes them able to bear them; he lays heavy burdens
upon them, yet he supporteth the^ with his hand, that they sink not under the
weight thereof. Albeit famine do pinch and press hard upon their bodies, he
feeds their souls with the precious food of his Word to eternal life, and
they are ready to answer with their Lord and Master, Ioh. 4.32. I have meant to
eat, John 4 32.
that ye know not of. Albeit they be vexed with war, yet he gives them
peace of conscience that passes all understanding, even peace with himself,
which the world cannot take away from them. Albeit they fall into times of
perils and dangers, yet are they made to dwell in the secret place of the most
high, Psalm. 91.1.
and to abide under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. The name of the
Lord is a most strong tower and place of refuge, the righteous fly unto it,
and are preserved. Albeit they be sometimes enforced to endure nakedness, yet
even then he clotheth them with the precious robes of Christ's righteousness,
Psalm. 45.8.
all whose graces smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, whereby they are more
adorned, then with all the silver and gold in the world. Lastly, if he take
away this temporal life, he recompenseth the loss thereof with eternal life
and happiness.

We learn from hence first of all, 1 Timothy 4.8. and 6.6.
but faith? Indeed godliness is profitable to all things, and has the
promises of this life, as well as of the life to come. Of this life, with
condition, so far as it shall be good for us: of the life to come, without any
condition. This godliness is great gain, nay, the greatest of all other. But
what of all this, if we have not the hand of faith to receive them? Offer meat
never so much to the hungry soul, yet if the hand be closed, and the mouth
stopped, he can receive nothing. Power water upon a Vessel all the day long,
it remains empty, if the entrance thereof be shut up: so let us hear of the
promises of God to sustain us in times of famine, want, loss, and nec^ssity;
yet it is all one as if you spoke to a dead man, except we have faith to
quicken us, and to put life into the soul. For as the Apostle concludes from
the suffering of the Saints, Hebr. 10.34.
who endured with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing they had a better
inheritance reserved for them in the Heavens, that we have all need of
patience, that after we have done the will of God, we may receive the promise,
Hebr. 10. So from this consideration that we are ready every foot to faint,
and to fear want and beggary (or else this dehortation were vain and
needless) we are to gather, that we may not cast away our confidence in God,
which has great recompense of reward. The just shall live by faith, Hebr. 11.1.
which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen. Take heed therefore, and beware of infidelity. For as covetousness is
the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 1 Timothy 6.10.
so is infidelity the root of covetousness. What is the cause that we fear
the lacking of earthly things, which the greatest sort do more fear then the
lack or loss or lessening of the feeding of the love and favor of God?
Doubtless this is nothing but the want of faith. Let them lose but a trifle,
or the least pin and profit that comes to the purse, what crying and
complaining have we? how much ado have we to persuade them to be contented?
to be resolved to submit themselves to the pleasure of Almighty God? and to
believe that he is able to give them more then that? All the armor and
furniture that we can bring out of the Storehouse of the Scripture, is too
little to settle their unbeleeving hearts upon the promises of God. But these
men can be content without any scruple or touch of conscience to absent
themselves from the house of God, to lose many Sermons, and much wholesome
doctrine which is according to godliness, many exhortations, many
instructions, many comforts: nay, they may apparently feel their decaying and
declining in knowledge, in faith, and in obedience, yet it troubles them no
more then it did that profane Esau, Genesis 25.34.
who when he had sold his birthright, contemned and despised it. The true
cause of our carnal and corrupt fear is this want of a true lively faith,
when we dare not believe him that has promised, who yet is able to perform,
and is not as man that he should lie, or as the son of man that he should
deceive. Hence proceeds fear of the loss of life and living, that we are
afraid to commit our state and standing to the safe garding of God, as
manifestly appears by the contrary, Psalm. 27.1, 2.
Psalm. 27. The Lord is my light and salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is
the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though an host shall
encampe against me, my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against
me, in this will I be confident. What made the Prophet bold to overstride all
dangers, that he could not be dismayed by them, but because his heart was fixed
in God to depend upon him, and to look for salvation from him? On the other
side, what does discomfort and dis-harten many men, what makes them to doubt,
to murmr, and many times to blaspheme, but because they imagine the Lords
hand is shortened, Numb. 11.23.
and is not able to supply their wants? It is an easy matter, when we have
store and abundance, when the Lord blesses us on every side, and our substance
is increased, when he washes our steps with butter, Job 29.6.
and the rock powers out rivers of oil upon us, to flatter our selves that
we have a strong faith, and a full persuasion and assurance of his love, that
we put our whole trust and affiance in him, and will never be brought to rapine
against him. But be not deceived, these are not the days of trial of our
faith, these are not the times of the patience of the Saints. Before trial,
Peter was most confident; but in the brunt of the battle he was a coward, and
gave over in the plain field. So do we triumph before the victory: but when
we see persecution, famine, peril, and sword, we give over fighting, and
fear possesses our hearts. When Elisha the man of God was sent with a
comfortable message at the siege of Samaria, that two measures of barley should
be sold for a shekell, and a measure of fine flower for a shekell to morrow
about that time, one of the Princes believed not the Word of the Lord, Behold,
2 King. 7.1, 2.
if the Lord would make windows in Heaven, would this thing be? the Prophet
answered, Because thou say so, thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall
not eat thereof: and according to his Word so it came to pass. The Disciples
being in danger to be drowned, when a storm arose, they came to Christ their
Master for help, and he says, Why are ye fearful, Ma^th. 8.26.
O ye of little faith? He accuses them not to be faithless men, or to have
no faith at all: for believing and doubting, faith and fear may stand together
in one subject, as they met together in these, but he lays to their charge to
have little faith. The like we read touching Peter, when he saw the winds
blow, and the waves arise, he was sore afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried
out, O Master, save me! Matthew. 14.30, 31, and 6.30.
Then Christ stretched out his hand, caught him, and said, O thou of little
faith, wherefore did thou doubt? And in a like case wherein we deal, he
says, If God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day flourishes, and
to morrow is cast into the Oven, will he not much more cloathe you, O ye of
little faith? Thus does Christ evermore upbraid such as are fearful,
doubtful, and distrustful, with want or with weakness of faith to rest upon
him. For as the Apostle speaks of perfect love: 1 Ioh. 4.18.
so may I say of perfect faith, that it casts out fear. Where such fear is,
there is little faith. These testimonies teach us, where to seek and find the
true cause of all our wavering and doubting: it springs from an evil heart
and unfaithful, Hebr. 3.12. 1 Ioh. 5.4, 5.
to depart away from the living God, this is the ground of all. Therefore this
shifting for our selves, and pensiveness for worldly things, is a strong
argument of a weak faith: for whatsoever is borne of God, overcommeth the
world, and this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith: and
who is he that overcommeth the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the
Son of God? 1 John 5.4, 5.

Secondly, Abraham speaks to his Son. When Isaac said, My Father, where is
the sacrifice? he answered with words of faith, Genesis 22.8.
My Son, God will provide. Do we not see how little Children, albeit they
have nothing, and know not to day what they shall have to morrow, never
disquiet themselves what they shall eat, or what they shall drink, or
wherewith they shall be clothed? And the reason is, because they know, their
Parents provide for them, and will not see them want. Shall we rely less upon
our heavenly Father, then these do upon their earthly? or shall we think that
God has less care of his Children, then the sons of men have of theirs?
Nay, as great as the difference is between that which is infinite, and that
which is finite; so much greater is his love then the love of men, Psalm.
103.11, ^3.
and consequently so much greater ought our dependence to be upon him. His
love is infinite as himself is: for the love of God is God, and every way as
great as himself, nay, it is himself: it is no quality in him, as it is in
us. To work this resting upon God as upon a rock, we have sundry exhortations
in holy Scripture, all of them tending to the same purpose, Commit thy way to
the Lord, Psalm. 37.5. 1 Cor. 10.13.
and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass, to wit, when we can see no
end or issue out of our dangers, yet he can: we see but before our eyes, he
sees the most hidden things of the world. And again, Psalm. 35.22.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Let us not
therefore content our selves to depend upon him in light and slight troubles,
but even then, when we have the greatest tentations and afflictions upon us:
and let us not cry out in anguish of spirit, O what an heavy burden do I
bear! no man is so troubled as I am. No man knows what sorrow I sustain,
what misery I feel! But be it never so tedious and toilsome, as weighty and
wearisome as a mountain to carry, cast thy care and cross upon the Lords
shoulders, he is able to bear it, albeit we be not, and he has promised to
help us to bear it, who never fails of his promise in time of need. Thus
Solomon speaks, Prove. 16.3. Prove. 16.3.
Commit thy ways unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. And 1
Pet. 5.7. Cast all your care on him, 1 Pet. 5.7.
for he cares for you. If a Prince should utter any such gracious words of
comfort to any of his poor people, and give such a precept accompanied with
such a promise, O how would they accept of it, and rejoice in it, as we see an
example in Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19. David promising to show kindness to his
Son, I will do to him whatsoever thou shall require of me, 2 Samuel 19.38.
and whatsoever shall seem good to thee: how did his heart rest in the Kings
word? and how willing was he to trust the King with him? God has made a
faithful promise to us to care for us, and shall not we cast all our care upon
him? or shall we think he will, or can falsify his Word? True it is, the
chief promise that we lay hold upon, is touching the remission of sins and
eternal life: but when by a true faith we lay hold upon the principal promise
of God, and believe it, touching salvation in Christ, we apprehend by virtue
thereof the promise of God for temporal blessings also, as food, raiment,
health, peace, liberty (all which depend upon the former maine promise of
Christ) so far forth as God sees them behoovefull for us. This we see in
Abraham, who, believing in God and having his faith imputed unto him for
righte-ousnesse, doubted not of the particular promise that God would give him
a Son, Genesis 15.6. Heb. 11.12.
and that his seed should be as the Stars in Heaven for multitude, and as the
sand upon the Seashore that cannot be numbered. The heart that has truly
learned to say by faith, God will pardon my sins and save my soul; will
easily also say by force of the same faith, God will give me food and raiment,
provide things necessary for my body, and sufficient for this present life. If
we have not learned to believe in God touching his mercy in feeding and in
clothing of us, which are matters of far lesser moment and importance, we
have not yet learned to depend upon him for the remission of our sins, and
the imputation of Christ's righteousness, which are of infinite more price and
value then the other. If we will not trust him for our bodies, how should we
trust and rest in him for our souls? And if we commit not to him the things of
this life, how can we credit him with heavenly things? We must all therefore
learn to say with the Apostle, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12.
and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto
him against that day.

Lastly, the Heavens, vouchsafe to look down so low, and to abase himself to
order every creature serving for the safety of our bodies, doubtless he will
not pass over the provision for our souls: he, I say, who has forbidden to
tithe mint, and rue, and all manner of herbs, Matthew. 23.23.
and then pass over judgment, and the waightier matters of the law. If he
will not deny us the lesser, certainly he will bestow upon us the greater
blessings, without which it cannot go well with us. For as he knows what we
have need of, so he knows, we may better be without earthly then spiritual
blessings. What folly were it for a man to be careful for the garment, and
careless of the body it self? to respect the shoo, and to neglect the foot?
We must therefore all of us, from this fatherly care of God for our bodies
which are transitory and must turn to dust, learn to ascend higher, to see
his care toward our souls, which bear the lively prints of his image, and
come nearer to his nature. Earthly blessings indeed are special pledges of his
love, whereby he takes us by the hand, and leads us farther to behold his
eternal favor in his own Son: but if we do not make this use of them, his
blessings cease to be blessings to us, whatsoever they are in their own
nature.

Flock.) In this word we have the second point in the Counsel, which is the
appellation or title of the people of God, being called the Sheep of God.
Properly a Flock is a company of Sheep gathered together into one pasture. A
Flock presupposes a Shepherd, a Sheepfold, and the Sheep themselves. The
Shepherd is God: the Sheepfold is the Church: the Sheep are the faithful.
Christ Jesus is the door of the Sheep, by him if any man enter, he shall be
saved, Ioh. 10.7, 9. Ephesians. 3.12.
and shall go in and out, and find pasture, Ioh. 10.7, 9. The wrath of God
against sin has clozed up against us all entrance into Heaven, and has shut
us up under sin and damnation. The death of Christ has opened the door, and
not only satisfied the wrath of God, but merited for us mercy and
forgiveness, grace and favor for ever. This is the preeminence of the passion
of Christ. Now they enter by him that believe in him. The Sheep of Christ are
of two sorts: one outward in the account of the visible Church consisting both
of good and bad: the other inward, consisting only of the Elect, being members
of the invisible or Catholic Church. Cant. 1.7. Joh. 10.14. Heb. 13.20. many
other testimonies do follow after. The reasons are plain.

First, Act. 20.28.
as Act. 20. He purchased the Flock with his precious blood: precious indeed,
because it was the blood of him that is God, as well as man, and therefore of
infinite value and estimation, sufficient for the whole world.

Secondly, Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.25.
Ye are as Sheep going astray through ignorance of the doctrine of salvation,
and prone to be surprised by the Devil that great wolf, but are now returned
to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. Act. 20.28, 29.
Secondly, Sheep oftentimes wander out of the right way, so that there seems
small hope of their safety, and in the judgment of man, they are esteemed to
be as good as utterly lost without any redress, or recovery: so it is among
such as are the Sheep of Christ, some do so far swarve, and are so
entangled in the snare of the enemy, as a Sheep in the brambles, that their
estate seems desparate and forlorn: Hereunto comes the parable, Matthew. 18.
How think ye? Matthew. 18.22. Luke 15.4.
If a man have an hundred Sheep, and one of them be gone astray, does he not
leave the ninety and nine which went not astray, and go after that which is
lost, till he find it? Such a Sheep was Manasseh, that filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood, 2 King. 21.16. 2 Chronicles. 33.6.
and did much evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to anger: yet he
found mercy upon his prayer and humiliation. Such a Sheep was Paul, who had
been an oppressor and blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
yet he was called and converted to the faith, and of a persecuter became a
Preacher, because he did it ignorantly, through unbeleefe. Such were the
hearers of Peter, Act. 3. who denied the holy One and just, and desired a
murderer to be granted unto them, They killed the Prince of life, Act. 3.14,
19.
when Pilate was determined to let him go; yet when they repented, their
sins (albeit most heinous) were blotted out, when the times of refreshing
came from the presence of the Lord. Such Sheep were the Gentiles, Ioh. 10.10.
Other Sheep I have which are not of this fold, John. 10.10.
them also I must bring. He runs far that never returns: so does the
sinner that never repents, Such God calls at all hours, Matthew. 20. That
where sin abounds, grace may abound much more, Romans 5.20. Thirdly, Sheep
do hear and know the voice of their own Shepherd, but the voice of a
stranger they will neither know nor hear, after they be once thoroughly
acquainted with the voice of their own Shepherd: so men Elect in the Church,
when they have had the voice of their Shepherd sounding in their ears rightly
circumcised, they know it and discern it, Ioh. 10.27, 28.
and they follow him, who before their regeneration were as wild beasts and
savage creatures. For no man is borne a Sheep of Christ, but a Goat of the
Devil. When he is become a Sheep, he is by regeneration formed or reformed to
be so: forasmuch as by nature we are no better then others, but the children of
wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.3.
we are rather of our selves wolves, living in malice and envy, hateful and
hating one another, Tit. 3.3. Lastly, the resemblance stands in meekness,
gentleness, simplicity, innocence, harmelesnesse, being profitable to many,
hurtful to none, subject to the injuries of other creatures to be rent and
torn in pieces of them, but of all other most patient in bearing: so the
faithful in the Church, are a people innocent, 2 Samuel 14.17.
and harmless, 2 Samuel 24. These Sheep what have they done? they profit such
as hurt them, they do good to those that do them evil, they forgive their
enemies, they pray for their persecuters, they lie open to open wrongs, and yet
possess their souls with patience when they are wronged. Hence it is, that
Christ himself is said to be led as a Sheep to the slaughter, Act. 8.32.
Esaias 53.8.
and like a Lamb dumb before his shearer, not to open his mouth.
Nevertheless, the Sheep of Christ must be in such sort simple as Doves, that
they be also wise and prudent as serpents, in taking heed of the wiles of their
enemies, who can abide neither Shepherd, nor Sheep, nor Sheepfold.

Acknowledge from hence to our great and endless comfort, Genesis 31.40. Luke 2.8.
Genesis 31. Luke 2. But what is this to the love of Christ the Arch-pastor of his
Sheep, who guides them to eternal life, and suffers no man to do them
harm, but often rebukes Princes and people for their sakes? Howsoever
therefore no creature lies open to more dangers and disadvantages then they
do, yet Christ is their guide and governor that will judge between the
Lambs and the Goats, Ezech. 34.17.
As the Shepherd seeks out his Flock in the day that he is among his Sheep
that are scattered, so will I seek out my Sheep, says the Lord. The like we
read in the prophecy of Amos, Amos 3.12.
As a Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs or a piece of an
ear: so shall the Children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria: and
so will our Shepherd take his Sheep out of the jaws of our adversary the
Devil, who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: 1
Pet. 5.8.
Indeed it cannot be denied, some of them are often in pitiful case, some
lost, Matthew. 10. some broken, Gal. 6. Matthew. 10.6. Gal. 6.1. Romans 14.1. and
15.1.
some weak, Romans 14.1. some sick, and some driven away, Ezekiel. 34. But here is
matter of much comfort, he will seek that which is lost, he will bind up that
which is broken, he will strengthen that which is weak, he will bring again
that which is driven away, and he will cure that which is sick. Woe then to
all such as are any way injurious to this Flock. The more the servants of God
lie open to injuries, the more will God be in the midst of them ready to
uphold them. This we see in Paul, whiles as a ravening Wolf he preied upon
the poor Sheep, the Shepherd cried out unto him from Heaven, Saul, Saul, Act
9.4.
why persecutest thou me? All such therefore as are the enemies of this Flock
must understand, that they have to do, not only with the Sheep that may be
massacred, but with the Shepherd himself that cannot be overmastered. Be it
that they may overcome them, yet it is impossible to overcome him. The Apostles
were sent out as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, Matthew. 10.16. Matthew, 10.16.
yet nevertheless they prospered and prevailed in the work whereunto they are
employed: and when the faithful, that believed through their word, were
carried as Sheep to the slaughter, they multiplied and increased even under
the cross, as the Israelites did in Egypt when they were oppressed.

Secondly, Judas, Ioh. 6.70. and 17.12.
Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? Some of the
Disciples were Sheep, were Elect, were Saints; one of them was a Goat, a
Reprobate, a Devil, the son of perdition. The properties of Christ's Sheep.
Ioh. 8.47.
Now the Sheep of Christ are known by these properties. First, they hear his
voice, and follow him. This is as it were their eare-marke, as Ioh. 8.47. He
that is of God, hears Gods Word: ye therefore hear it not, because ye are
not of God. Every man has some mark whereby to know his Sheep. This is Gods
mark whereby he knows his, to hear him, and to obey him. As the Sheep are
Gods, so the Goats are the Devils, and belong to him, to whom they shall be
sent at the last day: he knows his vassals by the contrary, they will not
hear the Word of God, nor follow after it: they will hear his voice, and obey
him as their lord and master, but Gods voice they cannot abide, neither will
they hear it, and he rejoices in it. Secondly, they are profitable to many,
they do every way what good they can, as Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity,
Gal. 6.10.
let us do good to all men, especially unto them who are of the Household of
Faith. They consider they are borne to do good to others, much more that they
are borne again to that end. This is the nature and property of love, 1 Cor.
13.3.
It seeks not her own. It is a corrupt love so to live, as if we were borne
for our selves alone, which the very Heathen abhorred. Thirdly, we must be
patient in bearing wrongs, we must not be desirous of revenge. This was in the
Shepherd of the Sheep himself, 1 Pet. 2.23. When he was reviled, he reviled
not again: 1 Pet. 2.23.
when he suffered, he threatened not: but committed himself to him that
judges righteously; These are notes of the nature of the true Sheep: the
contrary are evident signs and marks of stinking and unsavory Goats. And if
we will try and prove our selves, and examine others by these badges of
Christian profession, we shall find many jetting up and down like Sheep, who
challenge to themselves the name, but are not indeed the Sheep of Christ,
because we cannot find the former properties in them. For few hear his voice
with diligence, and yield obedience with conscience. Few labor to do service
to the Saints, while they have time, but are idle and unfruitful. Now it is
day, we know not how long it will last: The night comes, wherein no man can
work. Ioh. 9.4.
Alas, when the Lord shall demand an account of his Stewards, what good they
have done; what will they answer? shall they not be taken speechless? Few can
put up the least injury and disgrace, every one of us is ready to breathe out
threatenings, or to dissemble our malice until we may revenge, as we see in
Esau, Genesis Genesis 27.41.
27.41. and in Absalom, 1 Samuel We are taught another lesson of our Lord and
Master, to be meek and gentle, Matthew. 11.29. Esaias 11.9, 10. and 65.25.
and lowly in heart, that we may find rest to our souls. I never knew or have
observed any meek and mild in spirit, ready as a Lamb to endure wrongs, and
unmindfull of injuries for Christ's sake, but he bare a deep impression of
grace, and a lively character of Gods Spirit in his heart. This we may see in
all the Saints as in a glass, the Scripture having set before us a cloud of
witnesses, that in them we should behold our faces. Consider Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, how they behaved themselves patiently, when their enemies oppressed
them, and filled up the wells, which they with great labor and industry had
found and dug, Genesis 26. Genesis 26.18.
How often did the unthankful Israelites murmr against Moses, and sought
sometimes to stone him to death, Numb. 12.3.
yet was he the meekest man upon the face of the earth? He never desired fire
to come down upon the heads of his enemies to destroy them, but oftentimes
prayed for them. Genesis 50.19. 1 Samuel 24.12 and 26.10, 11. 2 Samuel 16.10. Psalm.
7.4. Acts 7.60. Heb. 12.2. Luke 23.34.
What should I say more? for the time would fail me to tell of Joseph
pardoning the treachery of his brethren; of David, passing over the injuries of
Saul, and the curses of Shemei; of Stephen, praying for them that stoned him to
death; of Christ himself, an example far above all these, the Author and
finisher of our faith, enduring mockes, buffetting, and crucifying, and yet he
prayed to his Father to forgive them. The contrary to all these are evident
marks and signs of Goats. And if we search into the ways of men by these
former notes, we shall find few Sheep indeed, but store and plenty of Goats
every where. Gedeon seemed to have many stout Soldiers in his Army, Judge. 7.3.
but after they were once tried, there remained few with him: so many are
disguised in Sheep clothing, but when they come to be proved, they appear
to be rather ravening Wolves, or filthy Goats, wild Beasts of the forest, or
cruel Boares out of the wood; then any true Sheep. How rare are they that
hear the voice of Christ with diligence, attention and obedience? The Word is
no more regarded of the most, then if it were a tale or a toy, as appears by
their palpable ignorance, ordinary absence, and notable disobedience. Every
light pleasure, every slight profit, every foolish occasion, every frivolous
business is sufficient to lead them from the house of God, and yet they would
be accounted such Sheep of Christ as hear his voice. How rare are they that
labor to do what good they can to the Church of God, albeit God have enabled
them with plentiful means to do much! Where are they that can say with godly
Nehemiah, Think upon me, my God, for good, Nehem. 5.19.
according to all that I have done for this people; or if they should, what do
they but pray fearfully against themselves? When the Lord Jesus shall come to
judgment, and all flesh shall appear before him, will he enquire of them,
what goods they have gotten, or how much ground they have purchased, or what
lands they have left to their posterity, and how richly they have provided for
their heirs? No, no, we must give up unto Christ Jesus other accounts, and
that of other things, to wit, what good we have done with our goods, what
members of his we have fed, clothed, harbored, or visited. O what an heavy
reckoning then have thousands to make, when they must give up an account of
their Stewardship! and yet they would be accounted the Sheep of Christ? O that
they could think of these things betimes, before it be too late! How rare also
are they, almost as black Swannes, that will forbear, forgive, and forget the
wrongs that are offered, Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.12, 13.
as Christ forgiveth them that offend him? but if any of us have a quarrel
against another, we are ready to pursue it with all greediness, and watch all
occasions of advantage many years sometimes, as we see in the example of
Absalom, 2 Samuel 2 Sa^. 13.22, 23.
13.22, 23. and yet they would be accounted the Sheep of Christ. There cannot
be a more fearful mark and cognizance of a Goat then this is; beware of it.

Thirdly, John 10.28.
for who shall be able to take them out of his hand, Ioh. 10.28. or who shall
fight against his Sheep, and the Flock of his pasture, and prevail? This the
Prophet teaches, Ier. 2.3.
Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase: all
that devour him, shall offend, evil shall come upon them, says the Lord.
Ier. Job 1.3.
2 3. The Sheep of Job are reckoned in the account of his substance: so are
Gods Sheep a part of his substance which he chose to himself: so great is the
kindness and mercy of God toward us, For why does he take them for his
Sheep, and let the rest go as Goats, being by nature no better? Is it any
worthiness, or excellency in them before others? Romans 2.12, 19.
No, we are all gone out of the way, there is none that does good, no not one,
that every mouth might be stopped, and that all the world may become guilty
before God. Is it for their multitude? John 14.6.
No, they are called by Christ in this place, a little Flock, and he is the
truth it self that speaks it. Thus Moses shows, that the Lord did not set
his love upon Israel, neither choose them, because they were more in number then
any people, Deuteronomy. 7.7.
For they were the fewest of all people, Deuteronomy. 7.7. Is it for their strength,
might, and power they have? Ezekiel. 16.5, 6.
No, he found them weak and wallowing in their blood, none eye pitied them to
have compassion upon them; so that we may not say in our hearts, Deuteronomy. 8.17,
18.
My power and the might of mine hand has gotten me this wealth, but we must
remember the Lord our God, for it is he from whom we receive all good things.
What then? is it because we are more righteous? The Israelites are charged not
to speak so in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5.
because It was not for their righteousness or uprightness of heart that they
entered to possess the Land, but for the wickedness of those Nations which
were driven out before them. Who is it among the sons of men, that will not
spend land, and limme, and life it self, to defend that which he has bought
and purchased with a great price, and at a dear rate? And will not God defend
and avenge his Children, whom he knew to be his before the foundation of the
world was laid, though they be oppressed for a time, and he bear long with
the vessels of wrath, who cry out against them, Down with them, down with
them, even to the ground? 2 Timothy 2.19. Romans 11.1, 2, 3
howbeit the foundation remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows
who are his, and he will not cast off the care of them for ever.

Fourthly, Psalm. 100.3, 4.
It is the Lord that has made us, and not we ourselves: for we are his people,
and the Sheep of his pasture. What follows? he makes this use thereupon,
Enter into his Gates with thankesgiving, and into his Courts with praise, be
thankful unto him, and bless his Name. It is no small token of his love
toward us, to make us to be his Sheep, that are by nature Lions, Leopards,
Bears, Bulls, Dogs, Psalm. 22.12, 13, 16, 21. Matthew. 15.26.
Wolves, and wild Beasts, and what not? Is not his love (who loved us first)
worth our love to him again? If it be a great blessing, that we are made to
be reasonable men, how much greater is it to be received and regarded as his
own inheritance, then which nothing is dearer to him, nothing ought to be
better to us? The unfaithful are the work of God by natural generation, but
they are the new-worke of God by spiritual regeneration. It is not our own
free will that can frame and fashion us to be the people of God, for then we
might say, It is we our selves that have made us, and not the Lord. Particular
branches of thankfulness.
This thankfulness consists not in words only, but in diverse other
particular branches noted by the Prophet in that place. First, let us give to
him our hearts, that our tongues may be guided thereby: let us first offer him
all that is within us, and then all that is without us will follow also; for
other worship God accepts not. In vain they worship him, Matthew. 15.8.
that draw near unto him with their mouth, and honor him with their lips,
when their hearts are far from him. Secondly, we must never be ashamed to
praise the Lord, and to confess his wonderful works to the children of men.
We see how men are not ashamed to sin before the Lord, openly, publicly,
proudly, presumptuously, and profanely, and they blush at nothing but at
godliness, prayer, profession, hearing the Word, and such like works of
Christian piety. These men glory in their own shame, Phil. 3.19. Ier. 6.15.
but they are ashamed of their glory, nay of Gods glory, and even of their own
good. Thirdly, the service which we perform to God, we must yield willingly,
readily, joyfully, 2 Cor. 9.6.
and with a glad heart, for he loves a cheerful giver. Thanks constrained,
or wrung and wrested from us, are rejected of God. We must give unto him back
again, as he gives to us. But how is that? and in what manner bestows he
upon us? he gives us his gifts freely, we must therefore return to him our
thanks frankly. Lastly, he calls us to the assembly of his Saints, which he
names the Court and presence of God, which was the place appointed for his
public service and worship. Indeed God is not confined to a certain place,
Act. 7.48. John 4.21.
neither is there any place wherein he is not to be worshipped: nevertheless,
such as are endued with true faith, must follow the communion of the Saints, as
Sheep that feed not alone, but with their fellows. Gods Sheep and servants
must show themselves in the public Assemblies, being publicly thankful for
public benefits received at his merciful hands, Psalm. 84.10.
considering that one day in (a) his Courts is better then a thousandelsewhere.

Fifthly, Paul gives to the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20. Take heed unto your
selves, and to all the Flock, Act. 20.28.
over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Where he reasons thus, It
is the Flock of God, therefore feed it: for he makes the Church of God and
the Flock of God all one. So when the Lord Jesus ascended, and led captivity
captive, he gave gifts to men, and appointed Vnder-pastors and Vnder-teachers,
Ephesians. 4.11.
for the work of the ministry, and the edification of the whole body. This is
the charge he gave to Peter, To feed his Sheep: as if he should say, Feed
them, because they are my Sheep. 2 Timothy 2.2.
Now as Paul speaks to Timothy; The things that thou have learned of me, the
same commit to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also: so Peter
having received so earnest a charge himself, is careful to deliver the same
to others, himself an Elder, to the Elders, 1 Pet. 5. 1 Pet. 5.2.
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not
by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, etc.
And that we may perform this the better, we must consider that we are sundry
ways provoked to our duties by this title. For as we have showed that the
people must resemble the Sheep, Wherein the Minister is to resemble a
Shepherd. Matthew. 18.12.
so we must remember that spiritual Pastors and Teachers must be like to other
Shepherds, bestowing great labor and pains among the sheep, for that is not
an idle calling. First, the Shepherd overseeth the whole flock in general,
and every part in particular; forasmuch as to overlooke one, and overslip
another, is the part of a loose and careless Shepherd. Thus must the Minister
of God look to all, and exempt himself from instructing of none that are of
his fold. For as the soul quickneth every member of the body from the highest
to the lowest, from the greatest to the least: so must he seek the good of
all, both high and low, great and small, one and other, so far as lies in
him to the utmost. Hence it is, that Paul wills the Elders to take heed to
all the flock. Whosoever scorneth in his deeper skill to stoop down to teach
the least, the lowest, the poorest, the simplest, and to be familiar with them
to win them to God, serves not his Master Christ, neither savoureth of his
Spirit, Comment. on Numb. page 699.
but rather of the spirit of Antichrist. But of this more at large elsewhere.
Secondly, the Shepherd looks to the lambs as well as to the sheep, which are
as the hope of the flock, as we see in Jacob, Genesis 33.13. So is the Minister
to teach the youth, that he may have comfort of them in their age, as Moses
would not go out of Egypt without their little ones to offer sacifice to the
Lord, Exodus 10.9.
Exo. 10.9. As Christ wills the Disciples to suffer little children to come
unto him, Mark. 10.14.
because to such belongs the Kingdom of God, Mark. 10.14. And he wills
Peter to feed his Lambs as well as his Sheep, Ioh. 21.15. Prove. 22.6.
Joh. 21.15. If a child be taught what trade to take when he is young, he will
not forget it when he is old; as a vessel retains the taste of that liquor
wherewith it was seasoned when it was new. Thirdly, we see that as the
Shepherd feeds the flock, so it feeds him again, whereby the Minister of
the Word has warrant to live of the Gospel, as he preaches the Gospel. This
similitude is pressed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. Who goes a warfare any time at
his own charges? 1 Cor. 9.7.
who planteth a vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? If we feed the flock, we
have warrant to be fed therewith? but we have no power and authority given us
from God to eat thereof, if we labor not. 1 These. 3.10.
For he sets us to work, he calls us not to idleness. Fourthly, the
Shepherd looks to the sheep that are weak and feeble, and labors to
cure them, and therefore is never without his remedies and medicines to heal
them: so the Minister of God must receive the weak, restore such as are
fallen, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the
tenderhearted, and be patient toward all men, 2 Timothy 2.26.
proving if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may come out
of the snares of the Devil, of whom they are holden captive to do his will.
These do especially stand in need of the help of the spiritual Shepherd.
Fifthly, as the Shepherd preserves the sheep from the violence and invasion
of the Lion and the Bear, 1 Samuel 17.34.
of the Wolf and the Fox, that would prey upon both the sheep and lambs; so
must the Minister keep his hearers from the infection and contagion of
seducers and false teachers, who oftentimes come in sheep clothing, Matthew.
7.15.
but inwardly are either crafty Foxes, or ravening Wolves. To this purpose it
is said, Cant. Cant. 2.15.
2 Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the vines: for our vines
have tender grapes. Thus we must give all diligence, earnestly contending for
the faith, Jude 3.
which was once delivered to the Saints. Sixthly, as the Shepherd is to give an
account of his sheep, Genesis 31.39.
as appears in Jacob, so is the office of the Minister an office of account,
and therefore woe unto us if we preach not the Gospel, because a necessity is
laid upon us, 1 Cor. 9.16. Ezekiel. 34.2.
1 Cor. 9. Eze. 34. Thus says the Lord God unto the Shepherds, Woe be to the
Shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves, should not the Sheepheards feed
the flocks? On the other side, if we feed the flock willingly, and readily,
we shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. Dan. 12.3.
when the chief Shepherd shall appear in glory. If this great Day of the
Lord were always before us, it were su^ficient to make them that are idle to
be diligent, and such as are diligent, to be yet more diligent; and such as are
faithful, to be yet more faithful.

Lastly, Sheep belonging to their All-sufficient Shepherd, serves to assure
them of his never-failing care toward them. For albeit they be simple and
innocent, yet their Shepherd is wise and full of discretion to search and see
into their wants, as Esaias 40.11. Esaias 40.11.
He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with
young. They are his chief treasure, a royal Priesthood, a chosen generation:
they are chosen of him to life, and distinguished from all people of the world,
Revel. 2.17.
graven in the palm of his hands: They have a new name set upon them, which no
man knows saving such as have received it. How then can they be forgotten of
him that knows them all by their names? Thus David reasons, Psalm. 23.1.
Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. Observe the conclusion
of the Prophet in this place: the Lord was his Shepherd, and he one of his
sheep, therefore he is assured he shall never want, therefore he will have a
special care of him. For what, I pray you, can they want, who have God to be
their Shepherd? Hence it is, that he says elsewhere, I am poor and needy,
Psalm. 10.17.
yet the Lord thinks upon me. But it will be objected, Cor. 11.27. Heb.
11.37. I answer, Phil. 4 11, 12.
I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content: I know both
how to be abased, and know how to abound: every where and in all things I am
instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer
need. This he expresses more at large, 2 Cor. 6.8, 9, 10. What then? is there
nothing required on our behalf? Yes doubtless, for we have no promise of
earthly things, Matthew. 6 32.
except we seek first of all the Kingdom of God and his righteousness. If
our chiefest care be of heavenly things, all these temporal things shall be
added unto us. And this must be our chiefest care for these causes. First, the
soul is of more excelelnt price then the body by many degrees, Matthew. 16.26.
and draws nearer to the nature of God, because it is a Spirit immortal, and
invisible. Secondly, corporal and earthly blessings are common blessings, Luke
12.16. and 16.19, 23. and 18.18, 23.
the ungodly are partakers of them as well as the godly, nay oftentimes they
have the greatest share and portion of them, Luke 12.16. and 16.19. and 18.23.
Thirdly, temporal blessings serve only for this present life, but spiritual
belong to the life to come. As then the life to come ought more to be desired
which never shall have end, then this present which is transitory and cannot
continue, but passes away we know not how soon: so we should much more
desire the blessings of the next life which abide for ever, 2 Cor. 4.18.
2 Cor. 4. For the things that are seen, are temporal, but the things that
are not seen, are eternal. Fourthly, we may have earthly blessings, and yet
they may lie dead by us, and we have no use at all of them, either to our
selves or to others: it is not so with heavenly blessings, such as possess
them, always do good with them. Fifthly, spiritual things are simply and
absolutely necessary to salvation, so that without them we cannot be saved: the
other not so. For albeit they be required for the use of this life, yet they
are not necessarily requisite to bring us to salvation. Nay, sometimes through
the abuse of them, and sometimes through the want of a special sanctifying
grace, they become hindrances, and clogs, and snares, and thorns unto us, as
lamentable experience in the world teaches. Lastly, spiritual blessings once
received shall never be taken away from us, because his own, John 13.1. Romans
11.29. Luke 22.32.
whom he loved in the world, he loves to the end, his gifts and graces are
without repentance; and their faith shall never fail; whereas temporal things
are only left and lent unto us, but the time shall come when they must leave
us, and we them. These two points last remembered, are concluded out of the
words of Christ himself, Luke 10.42.
Luke 10. touching the necessity and perpetuity of spiritual graces; as for
temporal blessings, they are indeed convenient and profitable, but not simply
necessary, so that we may be saved without them, as many are condemned with
them. For the soul of Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom, that wanted
them, and the soul of the rich man to hell and torments that had them. Lastly,
we are moved to seek Gods Kingdom before and above all earthly things,
because as earthly things are Gods gifts, so they belong rightly and properly
to the faithful. They only have the promise, that they shall not want, and
therefore they have the truest title and tenure whereby they hold them, as Esaias
65.13. This made the Prophet say, Psalm. 37.25. I have been young, and now am
old, Psalm. 37.25.
yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. The
Lord has made no such promise to ungodly men. True it is, they have earthly
blessings oftentimes more then the godly, to make them without excuse, but they
have them not by virtue of his promise. For where has he given to them any
such promise? or how can they show us their charter? nay, they and their
children have a contrary judgment waiting upon them, Psalm. 109 9, 20.
Let his children be continually vagabonds and beg, Psalm. 109. Such as will
not hearken unto the voice of the Lord to observe all his Commandments, shall
be cursed in the City and in the Field, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, etc. 2 Samuel 3.29. 1
Cor. 3.22. Romans 8.32. Matthew. 5.5.
in their basket and store, in all their fruit and increase, Deuteronomy. 28. 2 Samuel
3.29. As for the godly, it is not so with them, Christ Jesus is theirs, and
therefore no marvel, if all things else be theirs, and that they shall
inherit the earth. The Sheep of Christ have all by a right of donation, the
ungodly hold all by a wrong of usurpation. Can there be a better or truer title
then Gods gift, by which Israel possessed the Land of Canaan? or can there be a
meaner or worser hold, then to usurp that which is not their own, as the
thief does the true man's purse? All that the godly man has, is his freehold
touching the Conscience, John 8.36. Gal. 4.26.
as themselves are made free by the Son, and as his service is perfect
freedom: his food is free, his house and land (if he have any) is free, his
dwelling is free, all that he puts on, or any way belongs unto him, is of
a free tenure. Howbeit understand thus much, that this freedom of the faith
full exempteth them not from Princes laws, but is wholly spiritual; and this
is their advantage, that which they have, is their own, and they may use it to
their comfort. For they have an interest both from God and man; from Heaven and
earth, to enjoy the things of this life. It is not so with the ungodly, who are
in bondage to sin, to Satan, to their own lusts and corruptions, which
brings all that they possess into bondage with them. True it is, they may
show their warrant from men, and bring forth their evidences, or leases, their
writings and seals, their bonds and indentures; but what is all this to their
right and claim from God, and to a sound sanctified use of them before him?
For the bondage of their persons brings with it the bondage of their
possessions. All therefore that they have and hold, is a bad and a bond hold.
They can fetch their title no further then from men, and from their courts and
customs. Howsoever such are ready to cry out with the Jews, John 8.33.
We were never in bondage to any, yet while they take themselves to be the
freest men upon the earth, and to have liberty to make others free, 2 Pet. 2.19.
they are themselves the servants, nay slaves to their own corruption: for of
whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into bondage.

Flock.) Another observation arising from the number here used.
Another observation fitly arises from the name and number here used; as the
former did from the borrowed speech, and title ascribed to the faithful. For
he calls not his people flocks, as speaking of many, but he singleth them
out in the singular number, as speaking of one only by the name of a flock,
my little flock; one flock, not many or several flocks. True it is, there
are many sheep, yet they make but one flock or sheepfold. This teaches us,
there is one Shepherd, and one Sheepfold. John 10.16.
The Shepherd is but one, so the flocks are not many. Thus also the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 12.12. Ephesians. 1.10. and 2.16.
There be many members, yet but one body. This we find often repeated in him
in many places, he purposed to gather together in one all things both which are
in Heaven and in earth, Ephesians. 1.10. we being many, are one body in Christ,
Romans Romans 12.5. Gal. 3.28. 1 Cor. 10.17. John 17.21.
12.5. Ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28. We being many are on bread
and one body, 1 Cor. 10.17. This is the effect of our Saviors prayer, That
they all may be one, as thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us. This also Solomon sets down, Cant. 6. My Dove, my
undefiled is but one, Cant. 6.9.
she is the only one of her Mother, she is the chief one of her that bare her.

The tr^th hereof better appears, Psalm. 87.2. and 48.2. Cant. 4.9, 12. and
5.2. Esaias 2.2. and. 5.7. 1 Cor. 6.19. Numb. 12.7. Heb. 3.2. Ephesians. 3.15. G^l.
4.26. 1 Timothy 3.15.
It is called the City of God, Psalm. 87.2. The City of the great King, and the
joy of the whole world, Psalm. 48 2. The body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and
5.23. 1 Cor. 12.27. Col. 1.18. The spouse of Christ, Cant. 4.9. The Mountain
of the Lord, Esaias 2.2. The Temple of God, 1 Cor. 6.19. The house of God, Numb.
12.7. Heb. 3.2. The pillar and ground of the Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. The vineyard
of the Lord of Hosts. Esaias 5.7. The whole family in Heaven and Earth, Ephesians.
3.15. A garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. as Christ also oftentimes in that Book
calls it his Sister, his Love, his Dove, his Undefiled, chap. 5.2. The
heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. and many other such like
titles, all singular signifying one, none plural as pointing out many.

Again, the same: for albeit there be many Citizens in this City, many
subjects in this Kingdom, many members in this Body, many dwellers in this
House, many plants in this Vineyard, many Sons and Daughters in this Family,
many trees in this Garden, and many children of this Mother, yet the milk they
suck, the meat they eat, the garments they put on are one and the same, as
Ephesians. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
4.4, There is one God, one Head, one Savior, one Redeemer, one Sanctifier,
one Husband, one Hope, one Heaven, one Way, one Door, one Lord, one Baptism,
one Supper, one Faith, and one Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all. Here are many unities, which make the Church fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, etc.

But it may be objected, Cor. 11.16. Likewise of the seven Churches of Asia,
Revel. 1.4, 13. as also of the Churches of the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians,
etc. I answer, Psalm. 122.3.
as the Prophet teaches, that Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact
together in it self, Psalm. 122.3.

Acknowledge from hence a difference between the true Church, Judge. 7.22.
as the swords of the Midianites were drawn out against the Midianites their
own fellows. This use is concluded in the song of Solomon, chap. 6. There are
threescore Queens, Cant. 6.8, 9.
and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number: yet my Dove, my
Undefiled is but one, the only one of her Mother. Here is an objection and an
answer to it. As if it were said, There are indeed multitudes of other
assemblies in the world, which seem to be in more favor with God then the
true Church, by reason of their multitudes, by reason of their pomp and glory,
by reason of their flourishing estate, and freedom from inward and outward
terrors: nevertheless, though there be such an innumerable sort of Queens
and Concubines as these, yet the true Church is only one, and indeed the only
one dearly beloved, and tenderly regarded of the true God, as that which
walks in the truth, and professes the Word truly. As for all other
societies, they are no better then as routes of Rebels, and conspiracies of
wicked men gathered together, and risen up against the Lord, and against his
Anointed, breaking the bonds, Psalm. 2.3, 9.
and casting away the cords of doctrine and discipline, who in the end shall be
broken to shivers with a rod of Iron, and dashed in pieces like a Potters
vessel. Such are all the assemblies of the Turks, Sarazens, Savages, Jews,
Persians, Pagans, and the like, who are no Churches. Such are the congregations
of the Papists, the meetings of the Arrians, Anabaptists, Libertines,
Familists, Antinomies, Tritheits, Samosatenians, Swinkfieldians, all which are
false Churches, some like the Israelites or ten tribes, after they were fallen
from the house of David, and others worse: all of them no true Churches of God,
but multitudes of horrible Infidels, detestable Idolaters, and abominable
Heretics departed out of the true Church, with whom we must hold no
communion, with whom we must have nothing to do, but rather shun them, and
separate from them, nay abhor and abjure them, as men that walk in the
pathway that leads to death and destruction. A man will not willingly go
into an infectious house, but these assemblies are a rout and receptacle of
pestilent and profane persons, who have made shipwreck of faith and of a good
conscience. Hence it is that the Church speaks in respect of such, Cant. 1.7.
Cant. 1.7. Why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy
companions? she means swarms of Idolaters, heaps of false Worshippers, and
societies of Schismatickes and Heretics, 2 Timothy 2.17.
whose doctrine fretteth as a canker, sowreth as a leaven, and spreads as a
leprosy over the whole body. Therefore he calls these evil companies
flocks, because they are many in number, and not that one flock, which has
Christ Jesus to be the only Master, the only Shepherd, the only Teacher of
the true service of God. There always have been, and now are, Revel. 3.9.
such as are no other, nor no better then the synagogue of Satan, who say they
are virgins, but are harlots: who say they are Jews, that is, the true Church
and people of God, and are not, but do lie.

Secondly, the Church being but one, this point and principle is to be holden,
that there is no salvation out of the Church, as there is no condemnation to
them that are of the Church, and consequently every one that looks to be
saved by Christ, must necessarily range himself in that number, that so he may
become a member and Citizen of this one Catholic Church. For as out of the
Sheepfold are Goats, Dogs, Swine, Wolves, and such like, Revel. 21.15.
so out of the Church are Sorcerers, and Whore mongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes lies, Revel. 22. Such albeit they
may be in the Church for a season, yet are not of the Church, for they remain
not in it. They that were not in the Arc of Noah, perished in the waters: so
out of the Church, and out of this flock and sheepfold all are condemned.
Hence it is that Luke teaches, Acts 2.47. Cant. 4.12.
The Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be saved. So
Solomon, Cant. 4. A garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, a Spring shut up,
a Fountain sealed. This is plain in these four respects. First, Why there is
no salvation out of the Church.
because Christ Jesus is the only head of the Church, by whom all parts as by
certain joints and sinews are knit and coupled together: but out of the
militant Church there is no Christ, Revel. 1.13.
for he always walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes: out of
the Church there is no faith in Christ, no obedience to Christ, no
justification through Christ. This reason may be thus concluded, Where no
Savior is, there can be no salvation.
But out of the Church there is no Savior: Therefore
Out of the Church there can be no salvation.
So then where no head is to quicken or make alive, there can be no body or
members that are alive: but out of the Church there is no head to quicken or
make alive: therefore there is no body or members quickened or made alive, but
dead members which are so only in name. 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2.
but the prince of the air, and god of this world, that rules in the hearts
of the children of disobedience? and therefore such as are justly cast out of
the Church by the censure of excommunication, and cut off by that spiritual
sword of discipline, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20.
are said to be delivered to Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1
Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. This reason may be thus framed. Where Satan rules,
nothing bears sway but destruction:
But out of the Church Satan rules, Therefore
Out of the Church nothing bears sway but destruction,
and consequently there can be no salvation. Acts 2.42.
Act. 2. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Where these are not, John 17.9, 14.
Ephesians. 5.27. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Christ prays not for the world, as he does for the Church, and for all the
parts and members of it, John 17.9, 14. the whole world lies in wickedness,
only the Church is an holy company, which follows the ways, and practices
the works of godliness.

Lastly, labor to be of this Church, Lo, the people shall dwell alone, Numb.
23 9.
and shall not be reckoned among the Nations; If then we join our selves with
the world, we disjoyne our selves from the Church. Secondly, Tit. 3.5. Tit.
3.5. 2 Pet. 1.10. Matthew. 5.16.
Hereby we make our election and calling sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Matthew. 5.16. No
sanctification, no salvation. Thirdly, the holiness of Christ and his
righteousness is imputed unto them, Heb. 10.10.
being washed and bathed in his blood, Heb. 10.10. These rely wholly upon his
merits for their righteousness and salvation, not upon themselves. Fourthly,
Romans Romans 12.5.
12.5. For as they are one in Christ, so they are one among themselves, and
love one another in deed and in truth, as fellow servants of the same family,
as fellow berthren of the same Father, and as fellow Citizens of the same City,
with all meekness, patience, gentleness, lowliness, long-suffering, love,
concord, and unity. As sheep will not be alone, so neither will they sort with
Swine, or Bears, or Lions, or Wolves. Let all our delight therefore be in the
Saints, Psalm. 16. 2 Cor. 6.16. 2 These. 3.14. Heb. 10.39.
On the other side, let us avoid the society of the wicked, Come out from among
them, and touch no unclean thing, separate from them, 1 Pet. 2.9. Phil. 2.15.
that these may see their good works, and glorify their Father which is in
Heaven. For except our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, Matthew. 5.20.
we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Our works, not our words only
must speak for us, and witness with us, that we are of this one Church. And
let us take heed, lest by our sinful lives we slander our profession,
blaspheme the Name of God our Father, dishonor Christ our Head, and disgrace
the Church our Mother, Ephesians. 1.4. Lastly, we must acknowledge our selves to
be Pilgrims and strangers in this world, Heb. 11.9, 10.
as the Patriarchs and holy men of God did. For albeit we are in the world, yet
we are none of the world: and albeit we live on the earth, yet we must not be
earthly-minded, Phil. 3.20.
but have our conversation in Heaven, and from thence look for our Savior, to
change our vile bodies, and to fashion them like to his glorious body. We live
here as in a strange Country, but we look for a City which has foundations,
whose builder and maker is God. We must therefore use this world as though we
used it not. 1 Cor. 7.31.
And thus being members of the Church militant in this life, we shall be parts
of the Church triumphant in the life to come, there to remain with Christ
Jesus our Head for ever.

Little flock.) The third point of the division follows, which is the
limitation, it is little. Though it be a flock, yet it is but a little flock.
It is a company, yet but a small company. Touching the company or compass of
the Church, we are to consider two things: First, the errors that stand on both
sides, and the strength of the reason that Christ makes against all carnal
fear of want and famine. Touching the errors on both hands, as well on the
right hand as on the left, some go about to shrink up the sinews of this
little flock, and so contract it into a lesser room then Christ himself has
folded it into. True it is, he has shut it up into a narrow fold, but many
have gone about to pin it up, and to tie it shorter then he has done. Thus the
Jews that were of the Circumcision offended, who went about to gather it into
a shorter sum then they ought to have done: for they contended with Peter,
and took it grievously, Acts 11.2, 3.
that he went in to men uncircumcised, and did eat with them. They falsely
persuaded themselves, that the promises concerning the Messiah pertained to
themselves alone, because they heard in the Scriptures that they were called
the peculiar people to whom pertained the adoption, Romans 9.4, 5.
the covenants, the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and so they
dreamed that the Gentiles were quite excluded from salvation, and severed from
the Church of God. Howbeit this is contrary to the ancient promise and
prophecy, that God will enlarge Iaphet, Genesis 9.27.
that he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem: and hereunto do other Prophets
accord. Thus also did the Donatists shut up the Church into a corner of the
world only, to wit, in Africa, August. De Haeres. cap. 69.
as if it had been utterly perished out of the whole earth besides. Thus do
the Anabaptists and sundry of the Separation, as if there were no true Church
upon the earth, but among themselves, who in truth are the true Donatists of
our time, as whosoever knows the history of them will easily acknowledge. For
these Sectaries were Separatists, who had their Conventicles apart under color
of great corruptions in other places, persons, and Churches, and they imagined
contagion and infection to arise by communicating with all others. This is a
generation that say as it is in the Prophet, Esaias 65.5.
Stand by thy self, Come not near to me, for I am holier then thou. But here
good and evil are mingled together, as clean and unclean in the Arc, as
wheat and chafe in the floor, and must so continue to the end of the World.
So likewise do the Romanists abridge it, who fasten the Church to the sleeve
of the Sea of Rome, and therefore define it to be a company of men under one
Pastor, Bellar. lib. 3. De Eccles. cap. 2.
and subject to the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome: so that let men believe
never so orthodoxally and soundly otherwise, yet they hold them out of the
account of the Church, and brand them to be no better then damnable Heretics,
who do not acknowledge their lord god the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ, the
head of the Church, and their chief, nay universal Pastor. Thus Catholic and
Roman with them, general and particular shall be all one; which Church when
it was at the best, Romans 1.8.
and their faith spread abroad thorowout the whole world, was never taken to be
the Catholic Church, but a part thereof, which now is no sound part or member
thereof, being fallen from that faith. For neither did that Roman Church
believe as this does, neither yet this as that did, as it were easy to show by
sundry particulars. But to leave all these, the Jews, the Donatists, the
Anabaptists, the Separatists, and the Romanists that thus restrain the Church:
on the other side there are others, who pull up the fence, and dig down the
wall wherewith it is fenced and defended, and lay it out as common ground, and
set it wide open to the beasts of the field. Now they stretch it too wide, and
extend it too far, who will have all men saved in their religion (whatsoever
it be, true or false) so that they be zealous, and serve God with a good
intention and devotion. These err on the contrary part, who lest they should
seem to condemn any rashly, they proclaim a general pardon, and offer
salvation unto all. They see and confess that there are manifold contentions
touching faith and religion, but because all aim at one and the same end, and
desire both to serve God, and to be saved by him, therefore they hold that
their error and ignorance shall be no hindrance or impeachment unto them. This
perverse and peevish opinion is very plausible, and well-pleasing to flesh and
blood, and to the politic wise men of the world, and therefore finds many
followers: the ground whereof they take out of the Words of Christ, There shall
be one Shepherd, and one Sheepfold. But this he understands not of all men
generally, but of the Elect only, or sheep gathered of Jews and Gentiles;
whereby he represseth the vain boasting of the Jews, who presumed that they
were the Children of Abraham, and that the promises of salvation belonged to
themselves alone. These do indeed pretend devotion, and think it enough to
serve God with a good intention: howbeit neither are they devout, neither yet
have they any good intent. For how unreasonable is it once to imagine, that God
will be pleased with good intents, that says by the Prophet, Who required
these things at your hands? Esaias 1.12.
or as though the Church were a kennell of Dogs, or a stye of Swine, or a den
of wild Beasts, which receives a mixture or confusion of all sorts without
difference or distinction. If God be God, we must follow him alone, there is no
dallying with him, nor halting between two opinions: 1 King. 18.21
and if the Scripture be the Word of God inspired by him, we must follow the
direction thereof. The Christian religion is the only true religion, Acts 4.12.
there is no name under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but by Christ Jesus,
the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Revel. 13.8.
neither is there salvation by any other then through him alone.

Now concerning the reason that Christ uses in this place, it is indeed
contrary to carnal reason, and seems rather to destroy that which he would
persuade, then persuade that which he would destroy. For he shows in this
place, to whom he makes this dehortation, even to his little flock: whereby
he may seem rather to discourage them, then to encourage them; and to work
distrust and infidelity in them, then to draw them from their fear, forasmuch
as the reason stands thus, Fear not: Wherefore? Because ye are a little
flock. If a Captain should say thus to his Soldiers, Ye are a little Army,
and your Enemies are many, therefore fear not their fear, neither be ye
discouraged, what comfort could be gathered by such reasoning? But God uses
not reasons according to man's reason; his Works are contrary to the wisdom
of men, John 9 6.
as Christ cured the blind man by making clay of the spittle, and by anointing
his eyes therewith. Thus also are his arguments, his promises, his threatenings,
and his punishments oftentimes contrary to humane understanding. We are ready
to judge them to be no promises, which notwithstanding are great and precious
promises, if we consider of them aright. As for example, Psalm 89.32.
Psalm. 89.32. If thy children forsake my Law, then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, but my loving kindness I will not utterly take
from him: and this God would do in mercy, 1 Cor. 11.32.
as 1 Cor. 11. that we should not be condemned with the world. So David's
afflictions were medicines and blessings unto him, and as a precious balm,
Psalm. 119.67, 71. Again, we many times suppose those to be no threatenings,
nor punishments at all, which nevertheless are deep and grievous judgments,
as Hos. Hos. 4.14.
4.14. I will not punish your daughters, when they commit whoredom. Where he
threatens to let them alone, so that he will not punish them, but suffer them
to run on without punishment, that thereby he may punish them the more
sharply and irrecoverably. His hand is most heavy, when it is thought most
light; and he strikes us with a deadly blow, while we are senseless and feel
nothing. Thus the wound is deepest, when it is not seen at all. These do
seem paradoxes to natural men.
And as sometimes he will not punish, that he may punish: so sometimes he will
bless, that he may not bless. Thus no punishments become punishments, and
blessings become no blessings, but curses upon us. These considerations may
seem paradoxes and strange positions to natural men, Psalm. 92.7. Mal. 2.2.
but the regenerate understand them well enough, and feel the truth of them by
experience, and wonder at the unsearchable wisdom of God, and tremble under
the stroke and deep judgment of his right hand upon the world. To escape
scotfree whiles other men smart for their sins, the most sort interpret to be
no punishment at all, but rather a special privilege, and notable blessing:
howbeit such shall know and feel in the end to their eternal woe and
destruction, that it had been a thousand times better, they had lain under the
rod, and been chastened of the Lord all the day long For as it is said of an
earthly Father, Prove. 13.24. and 19.18.
He which loves his child, chasteneth him betimes, Prove. 13.24. and 19.18. so
it is with God, those whom he loves, he also chasteneth betimes, Heb. 12.
which made David say, Psalm. 119.67, 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes: because, before he was afflicted, he went astray. In like manner, the
reasons that the holy Ghost uses in his Word, are not like our reasonings, as
his thoughts are not like our thoughts, neither his ways like our ways. If we
consult with flesh and blood, we shall never allow this for a strong and a
substantial reason, Ye are a little flock, therefore fear not: but rather
conclude the contrary, therefore fear. We would rather argue on this manner;
as they did in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.24.
We are many, therefore fear not, Ezekiel. 33.24. We are wealthy, therefore
fear not. We have many friends, therefore fear not. We have houses and
lands, therefore fear not. We have much laid up for many years, and we want
nothing, therefore fear not. But the reason stands otherwise with God. He
will draw faith from the consideration of our frailty; hope out of despair;
and strength out of weakness; as once he brought light out of darkness, Genesis
1.2, 3. Romans 4.17. Heb. 11.3. 2 Cor. 12.9.
and all things out of nothing. As if he should say, Ye are few and little
regarded of the world, therefore ye shall be the more regarded of me, my power
shall be perfected in your weakness, and the more ye lie open to the wide
world, the more ye shall be under my protection, and the less ye shall need
to fear: so that howsoever ye be every way little in the judgment of men,
yet ye are every way great in mine eyes. Thus does Christ our Savior
understand more then he expresses. Now to come to the words themselves, we
have showed before in what sense the flock of God is called little. The first
consideration is in regard of the number; ye are a few in number, yea a very
few, and as it were a little handful: yet notwithstanding as a little corn is
more of worth then great heaps of chafe, and one sheep then many goats: so
this small company is more precious in Gods sight then all the multitudes of
the ungodly. Genesis 4.8, 25.
The family of Adam the first man was little, and he remained childlesse a long
time after Abel was made away by his own brother, while the posterity of Cain
(a carnal and cursed seed) increased in power, in strength, in number, and in
estimation of the wicked world. When the flood came, the house of Noah only
(whom he saw righteous in that generation) consisting of eight persons was
saved, Genesis 6.9. and 7.1 1 Pet. 3.20. 2 Pet. 2.5. Genesis 19.24. 2 Pet. 2 6.
whiles all the rest were miserably drowned in the waters. When Sodom was
destroyed with fire and brimstone from Heaven, all the rest of the City were
consumed and burnt to ashes, and only the house of Lot escaped with their
lives as a prey. Of all the multitude that came out of Egypt amounting to six
hundred thousand, none entered into the Land of Canaan, but Caleb and Joshua.
Numb. 14.22, 23.
True it is, all the rest were not condemned: howbeit if we consider their
often provocations, disc^^^entments, murmurings, and open rebellious against
God, we shall easily discern that the fewest number did truly believe, and
soundly cleave to God, and entered into the heavenly Canaan, as Jude 5. Jude 5.
The Lord having saved the people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward destroyed
them that obeyed not. The holy Scripture is full of such testimonies, examples,
parables, and comparisons both in the old and new Testament. Those whom God
reserveth as a portion to himself, are called a tenth: Esaias 6.13. and 17.6.
and 24.13.
they are compared to the shaking of an Olive tree, Two or three berries are in
the top of the utmost boughs, and four or five in the high branches. The
Church it self complains, that it is as the Summer gatherings, Mic. 7.1.
and as the grapes of the Vintage, there is no cluster to eat. If there be
four sorts of hearers, Matthew. 13.23. Luke 18.18.
one only among them all is the saving hearer that has a good and honest
heart. And if ten leapers be cleansed, one of them only among them all is found
to return back to give glory to God. Genesis 18.32. Ier. 5.5. Matthew. 7.13. Luke
13.24. Romans 21.3, 4. 1 King. 19.14.
When Abraham made intercession for Sodom, if ten righteous persons had been
found in it, the whole City had been spared for their sakes; See more, Jer.
5.5. Matthew. 7.13. Luke 13.24. Romans 11.3, 4. compared with 1 King. 19.14. Romans
Romans 9.27, 28. Esaias 10.22, 23. and 1.9. Revel. 3.4.
9.27, 28. Though the number of the Children of Israel be as the sand of the
Sea, yet a remnant shall be saved: for he will finish the work, and cut it
short in righteousness, because a short work will the Lord make upon the
earth. And as this has been in former times, so is it in our days. If we
would take a view of the state of the world as it is known and daily
discovered in our days, and sever from places where the face of a Church is,
the state of Mahometans, Barbarians, Savages, Jews, and Idolaters, what is it
but a poor handful, as a brand taken out of the midst of the fire, or as a
little flock driven into a corner of the world? Again, to leave out the
rabble of those that are without, experience teaches that where the face of a
Church is settled and established, and Christ Jesus is professed, if you take
away such as are open enemies, Libertines, Epicures, lukewarm Professors,
profane men, Atheists, Newters, Halters, carnal Gospellers, ignorant persons,
hypocrites, Antichristians, Anabaptists, false-brethren, mere civil men, that
trouble not themselves with God or godliness, and such like, that meddle not
any way with matters of religion; we may truly cry out with Christ our
Savior, Matthew. 20.16. Luke 18.8.
Many are called, but few are chosen. Neither may we think it will be better
or otherwise hereafter: for Christ Jesus admonishes us, that when the Son of
man comes, he shall scarce find faith on the earth.

This will farther appear by reasons; narrow, Matthew. 7.13, 14.
and the gate straight, and that in diverse respects. It suffers not a man to
sleep soundly in his sin, and to wander whither he lists, but shuts
him up within the close bounds of the Word of God, which tells him that he
must suffer persecution, deny himself, Matthew. 16.24. Col. 3.5.
mortify and crucify the old man, and all the affections of the flesh, which
is as irksome and unpleasant to the flesh, as if a man should betake himself
to perpetual imprisonment, put manacles and fetters upon hands and feet, and
thrust himself into the Stocks or Jail, whereas he might live abroad at
liberty without restraint and resistance, or without controlement and
contradiction of any man whatsoever,

Secondly, such as are faithful and fear God, Ismael did at Isaac, so do
they that are borne after the flesh, Gal. 4.29.
persecute them that are borne after the Spirit, and therefore they must take
up their Cross, and follow after their Master. They are chosen out of the
world, no marvel then if the world hate them, Ioh. 15.18, 19.
which hated Christ before ever it hated them. The world loves only her own,
the godly must be ready to be under the cross, and to suffer persecutions, 2 Timothy 3.12. Acts 14.21.
knowing that through manifold tribulations they must enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. The Head is gone before that way, and all the members must follow
after him, bearing his Cross.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man knows not the things of God: but whatsoever we are ignorant
off, we do not heartily desire, or earnestly delight in: Matthew. 10.37. Luke
14.26.
whereas we should be willing to leave and lose all, when the Lord calls
and commands us, as Abraham did, Genesis 22.4. rather then forsake him and the
Gospel.

Lastly, in his green pastures, Psalm. 1.2. and 23.2. and 27.4. and 119.24. and
26.8.
to delight in the Word above all things, to be patient in adversities, and
toward their adversaries, and to call upon God in the day of trouble. When a
sheep sticks in bushes and brambles, and is any way holden in thorns and
thickets, it bleateth and cries, and the Shepherd, hearing the voice thereof,
soon delivers it: so when we are in any distress and calamity, or want of
earthly things, we must show our selves the sheep of Christ by calling to our
great Shepherd: if he once hear us cry unto him out of the depths, he will
deliver us out of our distress, and set us in safe places.

If it be objected, many are said to be redeemed by Christ, Matthew. 26.28.
Revel. 7.9.
Matthew. 26. and that an infinite number not to be reckoned, are sealed up for
the Lords servants, Revel. 7. Now many are not few: a great multitude is not a
little company: Esaias 53.1^.
if no man can number them, they cannot be a small number. How then can these
things stand together? flock imports that they are many, the word little
that they are few.

First, The first reproof.
which stands upon outward pomp and glory, upon universality and multitudes
of men, all which are no sure and certain marks of the Church of Christ,
Bellarmine. lib. 4. De Eccles. cap. 4.
but rather badges of the synagogue of Satan and his eldest son Antichrist.
For why may not Turks and Infidels boast of this, as well as the Romanists? In
all societies for the most part the least number is the best, the greatest
number is the worst. Secondly, The second reproof.
it checketh such as are offended with the fewness of the godly, because they
are no more in number, as if Adam should repine that the Garden, wherein God had
planted, and wherein he was placed, was no greater: or the Jews murmr that
the Church was bounded within the Territories of Judea: or as if earthly men
should complain that the world was created in no greater compass. These would
as soon be offended with Christ himself, if he were among them, and lived
upon the earth: for in the days of his flesh, few followed him and his
doctrine, He came to his own, John 1.11.
and his own received him not, but for the most part rejected him, nay, in the
end they crucified the Lord of glory, and preferred a robber and murderer
before him. John 18.40. Luke 23.19.
And those few that did cleave unto him, as wisdom is always justified of
her children, what, I pray you were they? were they Kings and Princes, and
Potentates, and Priests, and Prelates? were they the chiefest, the choicest,
the highest, the noblest, the richest, and those in greatest authority? was it
Herod, or Pilate, or the Scribes, and Pharisees, the Rabbis and great Doctors
of the Law? No, no, these above all others were his deadly enemies, and
persecuted him and his Disciples unto death. Who then were his followers?
Verily the poorest, the lowest, Matthew 11.5.
and such as were the basest in the eyes and estimation of the former fellows;
these were they that received the Gospel, these were they that believed in
him; Matthew. 2.16.
Indeed one Herod wished to find him, but it was not to worship him, but to
kill him. Luke 23.8.
Another of them had desired of a long time to see him, and when he saw him,
rejoiced, but it was for his miracles, not for his doctrine. The Pharisees
indeed came unto him to hear him, but it was to tempt him and entangle him in
his words: so that they say, and not only confess, John 7.48, 49.
but glory in it, Ioh. 7. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed
in him? but this people that knows not the Law, are cursed. Blessed are they
therefore that are not offended at him. Matthew. 11.6. The third reproof.
Thirdly, they are reprooved, which are troubled and disquieted at the great
company and prosperity of the ungodly, whereat the faith of the Elect has
oftentimes staggered and started back, never remembering that God is ever good
to Israel, Psalm. 73.1, 12, 13.
even to the pure in heart, though they be very few in number, as Psalm 73.12,
13. and Jer. 5.1, 2. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are
all they happy that deal very treacherously? Ier. 12.1.
So Hab. 1.13. Wherefore hold thou thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the
man that is more righteous then himself? Hab. 1.13.
Howbeit they are set in slippery places, albeit for a time they may flourish,
and spread themselves like a green Bay tree, Psalm. 37.35. The fourth reproof.
and in the end shall be horribly consumed, as a dream when one awaketh.
Fourthly, such as lay the fault where it is not, and not where it is. Some upon
Christ, as Adam did upon God, as if he were tied to give repentance: who
notwithstanding offers the means to draw them, but they will not be drawn;
Matthew. 23.37.
he would, but they would not, albeit he be bound to none. Some upon the
Word, as if it were of no force and power, or at least not sufficient to
convert the soul; which notwithstanding has the working of the Spirit joined
with it in all that are saved. Some upon the Minister, as if it were in him to
convert the heart: he sows the seed as the spiritual Husbandman, but he
cannot make it grow, as also he washes the body, Matthew. 3.11. and 13, 19, 20.
but cannot baptize with the holy Ghost, and cleanse the soul. But the Parable
of the Sower serves to rectify and reform our judgment and understanding,
that the fault is not in the Seedman, nor in the seed, nor in the sowing, but
in the ground of men's hearts, so that we may say with the Prophet, Hos. 13.9.
The fifth reproof.
Thy destruction (O Israel) is of thy self. Fifthly, such as will stay till all
men be agreed. For if the number of the sheep be few, we may look long
enough, before all will meet in the unity of the Spirit. Woe then to such as
wait for the coming in of all to join together, and will resolve upon
nothing, so long as any remain unresolved, as if they strove to be the last
that should be added to the Sheepfold. When all men think one thing, then will
they join and jumpe with them in practice and opinion: but in the mean season
they will hang and hover in the air in suspense, and expect a general
agreement. And that they may do, until their eyes fall out of their heads,
and be never the wiser, but rather the worser, and the wickeder. For this is to
look for Heaven upon earth. Thus indeed it shall be when we come to know,
even as we are known: then we shall have and hear a perfect harmony of all
voices, singing with one mind, and with one mouth, Hallelu-iah: Revel. 19.1, 3.
but here our music has many jarres, and we meet with sundry rubbes in our
way: for we know only in part, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.
and we prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be done away. Howbeit, it avails little, to speak to
such of spiritual things, being wholly carnal themselves: and therefore set
us deal with them in their own language, that is, speak to earthly-minded
men of earthly things, and so keep our selves within their own element. If
these would never buy or sell, until all men be agreed of the due price and
just value, they should never have any doings or dealings in the world, that
now overburden themselves with the world. If they would never purchase foot of
land, neither husband their ground, or plough, or mow, or sow, until all men
were consenting about the matter, or manner, or time, when to begin, and where
to make an end, or other like circumstances; their fields would be all grown
over with thorns, and thistles; and nettles would cover the face thereof. How
then are these so senseless and sottish as not to consider that there never
was, nor never will be a general concord in any thing under the Sun? If then
there will never be a full agreement, no, not in temporal things, wherein
notwithstanding the senses of carnal and worldly men are expert and wholly
exercised: how much less is it to be looked for in heavenly things, which are
supernatural, and cannot be conceived of mere natural men? I may therefore
say unto such, according as our Savior reasons, John 3.12.
Ioh. 3. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not; how shall ye
believe, if I tell you of heavenly things? If these had lived in the days of
Christ, when some spoke one thing of him, and some another according to their
several fancy and folly, John 7.12, 40, 41, 43.
some said he was a good man; some, of a truth he is a Prophet; some, this is
the Christ; but others, nay, for he deceives the people, so that there was a
murmuring, and a division among them because of him; doubtless they would have
denied and refused him, at least till they had seen the Scribes and Pharisees,
and other learned Lawyers among the Jews, wholly to receive him. But how many
among them, think you, were damned for this device, albeit they had fully as
much to plead for themselves as these men have? And if Noah had never set upon
the Arc to build it, until the whole world of the ungodly had consented unto
him, and counseled him, he had perished with them in the waters. The sixth
reproof.
What good thing ever was there, that all men allowed and approved? Lastly,
another sort (the worst of all the rest) are here reprooved, who make a scoff
and derision at these Words of Christ, as Pilate did, when Christ Jesus showed,
that he came for this cause into the world, that he might bear witness unto
the truth, he said, What is truth? John 19 20.
So do profane persons upbraid the faithful servants of God with this title
as with a taunt, O, you are of the godly ones! O, you are one of these holy
folk! you have the Spirit of God, and are one of the little flock! thereby
scorning and deriding such as honor the Word, and frequent the hearing of it;
nay mocking at the preaching of Christ, and bringing the Word it self into
contempt, and as it were flouting God to his face. But he that sits in the
Heavens, shall laugh at them, Psalm. 2.4.
the Lord shall have them in derision, nay in detestation. For this differs
not from open blasphemy, nor these from wretched blasphemers, who make scoffs
and jests at Gods Word, whereby they shall be judged, nay condemned at the last
day, except they repent. It is ill jesting with a sharp two-edgedsword that
cutteth as a razor, Heb. 4.12.
which in the end shall cut them in pieces. These raise a nickname upon the
Word, Psalm. 138.2.
which He has magnified above all his other Names, and are come to the height
and top of sin, and take the name of God in vain in the highest degree, not
only walking in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm. 1.1.
and standing in the way of sinners, but even sitting down in the seat of the
scornful, whereby they fill up the measure of their sin, that God may fill
to them the full vial of his fierce wrath and indignation. These do
notoriously belch out their own shame, and manifestly renounce their own
salvation, and prove with their own mouths, that they look for no other, but
the portion of reprobates, together with the Devil and his angels. For I would
gladly be informed, and receive answer from them, whether they believe in their
hearts, that themselves have any true holiness in them, and are in the number
of this little flock, or not? If they do, then their own words convince
them, and by their own mouths (as the evil servant) they shall be condemned.
If they do not, then they must be foul and filthy goats that shall stand at
the left hand, as damned creatures, and receive an horrible curse denounced and
executed against them: and all this by their own verdict and confession. For
as Christ Jesus at the last Day shall say to the reprobate, Inasmuch as they
showed no mercy to his brethren, they did it not to him; so may I say to these
scoffers, In as much as they do it against the Word, they do it against the
Lord himself, whose Word it is. To conclude, I will speak to them in the words
of the Prophet, Esaias 57.3, 4.
Draw near hither, ye sons of the Sorceresse, the seed of the Adulterer and
the Whore, against whom do ye sport your selves? against whom make ye a wide
mouth? and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of
falsehood?

Secondly, a sign and wonder in Israel, Esaias 8.28.
yea as a monster among men, yet let us not be discouraged, but remember that
the Lords portion has been but as the tenth, that is, in comparison of the
multitude in all ages the least part, as it were an handful. If then we have
heretofore run into all excess of riot with the world of the ungodly, and made
conscience of nothing that is good or pleasing to God, and now have learned
better things by the direction of the Word, to refrain from every evil way,
to have respect to all the Commandments of God, and to make conscience of all,
even the least sins: albeit we find our selves left alone, as Eliah the
Prophet did, when they had killed the Prophets of the Lord, and dug down
his Altars; and walk in a rugged and untrodden path like Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer, having few to follow us, 1 Samuel 14 13.
or to accompany us, many to dissuade and discourage us, and some ready to
hinder us, and to pull us back; yet let us say with Peter, Though all men
should forsake thee, Matthew. 26.32. John 6.68.
yet will I never leave thee: and elsewhere, Whither shall we go? thou have
the Words of eternal life; when Jesus said unto the Twelve, Will ye also go
away? And let this be our comfort, and give us rest, that thus it has gone
evermore with the faithful, this has been the state of Religion, and few in
comparison of the rest have found the true pathway that leads to life and
salvation to their endless comfort.

Thirdly, Matthew. 7.14.
and many there be that enter in thereat, Matthew. 7. We are ready to follow a
multitude to evil, but Christ Jesus gives us counsel to shun that way, as a
dangerous rock, which the multitude treads. Hence it is, that the Apostle
teaches, 1 Cor. 1. Not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, 1 Cor.
1.26, 27.
not many noble are called, but the foolish things, weak, and base, and
despised, and things which are not, has God chosen, to confound and bring to
naught the glory of the world. The worst courses have commonly the most
followers, and the worst number is for the most part the greatest number:
forasmuch as the greatest part are left out of the Book of Life, and the
Catalogue of Gods election. And as in the old world, when the flood came, 2
Pet. 2.5. Genesis 6.22. Luke 18.8.
all flesh had corrupted his ways upon the earth; so at the coming of the
Son of man, shall he find faith upon the earth? The greatest part shall be
given to carnal security, and worldly profits, without any respect to heavenly
things. Such as came out of Egypt, were for the most part of them murmurers,
and therefore perished. There were four hundred and fifty false prophets
standing to plead Baals cause, 1 King. 18.19.
when one only Elias stood for the honor and glory of the true God of Israel.
1 King. 22.6.
There were also four hundred flattering prophets against one plain Preacher
Michaiah, that spoke the truth from his heart, yea even for the good of the
King himself, if he had known the things that belonged to his own peace, but
they were hidden from him. Hereby then we learn the vanity of all such as go
about to excuse themselves, because they have many fellows that are followers
of their folly, and multitudes of companions in throngs and heaps, partakers
of their evil courses. They say, We are not alone, We have a world of people in
the same case. If this be all they can allege for themselves, and their
sins, and their consorts, woe unto them: for as they have many join with
them in evil, so they shall have multitudes partake with them in punishment.
God will judge all the ungodly, he regards neither might nor multitude. What
store of carcasses perished in the waters, and what heaps went to Hell among
them? and at the last Day the Lord will give judgment against all men, Jude 15.
and rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds which they
have ungodlily committed, and of all their cruel speaking, which wicked
sinners have spoken against him. Every man shall receive the things which are
done in his body, 2 Cor. 5.10.
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5.10. He
has evermore plagued multitudes as well as a few persons, with whom it is
easy to do execution, inasmuch as he comes with thousands of his Saints and
Angels, Jude 14. The worst ways have evermore found the greatest applause,
consent, and countenance of the world. When it was agreed to compass Lots
house, they assembled together both young and old, Gen 19.4.
all the people from every quarter, Genesis 19. When the golden calfe was to be
made, Exodus 32.3.
all the people brake off the golden earings which were in their ears, Exodus
32. When Pilate demanded what should be done with Christ, Matthew. 27.22.
they all cried out, Let him be crucified, Matthew. 27. So in maintenance of
Idolatry, the zeal was so great, Acts 19.34.
that all with one voice cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Every
place is full of evil; the greatest part ready to back and bolster it; to
uphold and countenance it; Esaias 59.15.
and such as never so little oppose against it, make themselves a prey. Who
sees not what plenty is every where of Atheists, unbeleevers, ignorant
persons, disobedient, swearers, blasphemers, profane, breakers of the Sabbath,
contemners of the Gospel, and what not? It is not their multitudes that can
protect and patronize them, but shall rather increase their sorrow and
punishment.

Lastly, it is our duty to seek, nay, little flock, and join with those few
that live well. And the rather, because many will seek to enter in, and shall
not be able, because it is too late, Luke 13.23.
like the foolish Virgins, who, when the Bridegroom had shut the doors,
desired to have them opened: but the Lord answered, Verily, I say unto you, I
know you not. Matthew. 25 12.
It must be our study to be in this little number. We commonly and for the most
part sit still as a secure and senseless people, No easy matter to come to
Heaven.
as though it were the easiest matter in the world to step to Heaven, or as if
all the world should be saved. If multitudes were not of this mind, they would
not spend all their days in vanity, in pleasures and pastimes, in chambering
and wantonness, in playing, in gaming and rioting, in eating and drinking, in
surfeting and drunkenness, and idleness, which was the life of the Sodomites;
Ezekiel. 16.49.
as if they were borne to no other end: or as if they should continue here for
ever; or as if this were their vocation and calling; or as if there were no
other Heaven; or as if this were the way to the Kingdom, which is the beaten
path to Hell; or as if diverse passing this way, were not now already in
torments. It is commonly thought of these, that Heaven is as easily gotten and
obtained, as for a man to open his mouth and breathe, and receive in the common
air; their loose practice discovers their opinion to be no other. What then,
I beseech you, is become of the Words and warning of Christ? is his counsel
and wisdom any way disprooved? what is now become of the narrow way? where is
the straight gate that we have given us in charge to search after? is the way
now grown at last to be wide and broad, when there are a few only that tread
in it? Doubtless, either it is so, or else these men glory in themselves that
they are wiser then He, who is Wisdom it self, and that they have found a
nearer cut, and shorter passage to Heaven, then He ever knew or commended to
men. But if he be the wisdom of the Father, 1 Cor. 10.30. Col. 2.3.
and have all the treasures of wisdom dwelling in him, certainly these men
are stark fools, and wholly ignorant of the right Way that leads to
salvation. Facilis d^scensus Averni: at superare gradum, superasque evadere ad
auras, hic labor, hoc opus est. Aeneid. lib. 6.
It is an easy matter to go to Hell: we are all by nature in the way unto it,
and we have many helps and guides that offer themselves to take us by the
hand, and to conduct us, ^^d to accompany us thither. It is the hardest matter
that can be in the world, to come to Heaven. All excellent things are hard,
the more excellent the harder: but nothing more excellent then a Kingdom. It
is a difficult matter and very uneasy to climb up to the top of an high
mountain, or a steep rock; it requires puffing and blowing, and laboring,
and striving, and struggling, and sweating; contrariwise it is an easy matter
to run down an hill without any staying and stopping, without any
hinderance, or interruption, or intermission. So is it the easiest matter in
the world to throw our selves down, and to plunge our selves headlong into the
pit of Hell, as it was to throw ones self down from the pinnacle of the
Temple: but to get up to the holy Hill of God, and to attain to the Kingdom
of Heaven, this is a labor, this is a work indeed; this cannot be done
without taking up of the Cross, without denying of our selves, without
mortifying of the old man, Hebr. 12 1.
without laying aside the sin that does so easily beset us, without using
violence to shake off the hindrances that stand in the way: so that I may say
with the Apostles, If the righteous scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.18.

Little Flock.) Another observation from this limiting and restraining title,
that the flock is little, is, that it is so called, because it is little
regarded in the world. Now observe in this place, that the Scripture speaks
of things, sometimes as they are in themselves and in their own nature; Tolet.
in Luc. 9. page 788.
and sometimes according to the account and estimation of men. A lively example
of them both we have, 1 Cor. 1. concerning the preaching of the Word. For when
the Apostle speaks of it as it is by the ordinance of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 23,
2^, 25, 18, 2^
he calls it the power of God, and the wisdom of God, Verse 24. but when
he speaks of it as it is in the corrupt account of the sinful world, he
calls it a stumbling block and foolishness, Verse 23. and the foolishness
of preaching, Verse 21. the foolishness of God, and the weakness of God,
Verse 25. What then? is the publishing of the Gospel in it self either a
stumbling block, or foolishness, or weakness? No, in no wise, being mighty
to throw down all strong holds: but thus the men of this world account and
judge of it. Romans 1.16.
To whom then is it the power of God? To them that are called, Verse 24. to
them that believe, Romans 1.16. And to whom is it foolishness? To them that
perish, 1 Cor. 1.18. So touching the flock of God, in the estimation of God it
is great, but in the estimation of the world it is as little. Thus the
faithful are called by Christ our Savior, Matthew. 10.42. and 18.6.
The little ones that believe in him, Matthew. 10.42. and 18.6. But howsoever
they be tendered of God, and highly in his favor, yet they find hard
entertainment at the hands of the profane men of the world. Zach. 2.8.
they that touch them, touch the apple of his eye, yet the ungodly account
basely and vilely of them, as if they were the scumme and filth of the world,
or unworthy to live, or to breathe among men, or to tread upon the earth. Psalm.
22.6.
Thus the Prophet David complains concerning himself, Psalm. 22. I am as a
worm, and a wonder among many, a reproach of men, and despised of the people.
Thus also speaks the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 8. Behold, I and the children whom
the Lord has given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel, from the Lord
of Hosts which dwells in mount Sion. So the Prophet Zachary complains,
speaking of the Priests and Levites that were earnest to lay open the sins of
the people before God, Zach. 3.8.
Thou and thy fellows are men wondered at, or they are accounted as monsters
among men. Thus Christ speaks, Ioh. 16.2.
They shall put you out of their synagogue, yea the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service. The Apostle Paul
was no sooner converted, but by and by he was hated, reviled, and persecuted,
who before lived in peace and preferment, in credit and countenance, in favor
and friendship with the greatest men. Whereupon he says, 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4.9,
13. 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.
I think that God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to
death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angels, and to men,
even the offscouring of all things unto this day. And thus it is with others
also.

And no marvel. For first they follow goodness, Psalm. 38.19, 20.
They that hate me wrongfully, are multiplied, they also that render evil for
good, are mine adversaries, because I follow the thing that good is. If he had
followed evil, he had been loved of the evil.

Secondly, they run not with them into all excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4, 5.
and they speak evil, because they are evil, of such as are better then
themselves: but they shall give an account to him that is ready to judge the
quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4. If we were of the world, the world would love
his own, but because we are not of the world, but we are chosen out of world,
therefore the world hates us, John 15.19.
John 15.19. As then, the friends of the world are the enemies of God, so the
enemies of the world are the friends of God, Jam. 4.

Thirdly, the servant is not greater then his Lord, John 13.16. and 15.20. Luke
11 18. Matthew. 10.25. Luke 7.34. and 23.32.
greater then him that sent him, John 13.16. and 15.20. If then they have
called the master of the house Beelzebub, a Samaritane, a Wine-bibber, a friend
of Publicans and sinners, Luke 7.34. How much more shall they call them of his
household? And if they do these things to the green tree, what shall be done
to the dry and barren? Luke 23.32. and if they have persecuted him, they will
also persecute them that belong unto him.

Fourthly, Ioh. 15.21. and 16.3.
Joh. 15.21. and 1 John 3.1. God is not their Father, neither they his
children, and therefore his children are strange to them.

Lastly, John 8.44.
the children of the Devil, and he their father, whose lusts and will they
perform, and whose express Image they represent, Joh. 8. This the Lord says,
Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. To
this purpose Solomon speaks, Prove. 29.27. Prove. 29.27. and 28.4.
and 28.4. An unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he that is upright
in the way, is abomination to the wicked. The wicked hate the godly wrongfully,
and without cause, the godly hate them worthily, (not simply their persons, but
so far as Gods Image is defaced) as the old Serpents brood, and therefore
account of them no otherwise then they do of their Father. For as every one
that loves him that begat, 1 John 5.1.
loves him also that is begotten of him: so they that hate him that begets
to his corrupt image, hate them also that are begotten of him. The hatred of
the ungodly, whereby they abhor the faithful, for their faiths sake, which
is good: nay, for their Fathers sake, which is God, is implacable, and never
can they be reconciled; it may not therefore seem strange, if the godly do
not only hate ungodliness, but the desperate ungodly also themselves for
their ungodliness, as we hate not only the poison of the Serpent, but the
Serpent for the poisons sake. But it will be said, Matthew. 5. If then we must
love them, Matthew. 5.44.
we may not hate them. I answer, It is true, Genesis 1.31.
seeing he saw them all to be very good? and are we not charged to love all
men as they are men? 2 Pet. 1.7.
and not only to embrace brotherly kindness, but love in general? I answer,
It is true, Romans 9.13. Mal. 1.3.
God himself hates the wicked with a perfect hatred, Romans 9. Mal. 1. Now we
are entered into a covenant with God, to have the same friends, and the same
enemies: his friends must be our friends, and his enemies must be our enemies.
This made the Prophet say, Do not I hate them, O Lord, Psalm. 139.21, 22.
that hate thee? and am I not grieved with those that rise up against thee? I
hate them with perfect hatred, I account them mine enemies, Psalm. 139. We must
therefore be at peace with them that are at peace with him, and we must have
continual war with them that are at war with him, even as the Lord
himself professes to Abraham, Genesis 12 3.
that he will bless them that bless him, and curse them that curse him, Genesis
12.3.

First, sit upon seats, Matthew. 18.10. 1 Cor. 62, 3.
and judge the Angels, nay the world. There are sundry motives to move us to
beware of hating and despising them, all of them of great force and moment.
First, their Angels in Heaven do always behold the face of the Father which
is in Heaven, and they are ready, Heb. 1.14.
as ministering spirits, to minister for them that shall be heirs of salvation,
and are armed with power against them that are their enemies, and heirs of
wrath and destruction. For wherefore are they said to behold the face of God,
but because they stand about the Throne of God as their King, waiting his
appointment to do his will, and to send them to safeguard his servants that are
so smally set by of the world? Secondly, the Son of man came to save them,
Matthew. 18.11.
therefore we may not condemn them; he loved them with perfect love,
therefore we may not hate them with perfect hatred, Mat. 18.11. It is God that
justifies? who shall dare to condemn? Matthew. 18.5.
Thirdly, such as receive them, do receive him; and contrariwise, such as hate
them, do hate him: such as persecute them, Acts 9.5.
do persecute him: such as revile them, do revile him, because he accounts
this as done to himself, and esteems himself wounded through their sides.
Fourthly, woe to such as any way offend these, though they be little ones, it
were better that a millstone were hung about their neck, Matthew. 18.6.
and that they were drowned in the depth of the Sea. An offense is sometimes
taken, and sometimes given. An offense only taken, is not to be regarded, as
not being given, Matthew. 15.14. neither yet in it self any sin. The Pharisees
were offended, but Christ Jesus gives a precept, to let them alone. Matthew.
15.14.
For no man must be hindered from doing his duty, because offense is taken
thereby, forasmuch as that were to subject the Precepts of God to the pleasure
of man. Christ himself and his Gospel were a rock of offense, and a stone to
stumble at, Esaias 8.14, Esaias 8.14, 15. Romans 9.32. 1 Pet. 2.6. Luke 2.34. 1 Cor.
1.23.
15. Romans 9.32, etc. Offense was taken sometimes at the meannesse of his
person, and sometimes at the matter, or manner of his doctrine, howbeit the
fault was not in Christ, but in the Jews and Pharisees themselves, who looked
for a Messiah, not such as is described in the Scripture, but such as they had
framed and hammered in their own brains by misunderstanding the Scriptures.
An offense given is in the nature thereof a sin, of which Christ Jesus
speaks in that place of offending the little ones. This is sometimes barely
given, but not taken, God preveting the evil that might come thereof, and
sanctifying those with his grace that behold the offense, that they are not
corrupted by it, or entangled in it: and sometimes it is both given and taken,
so that others are taken and overtaken in the same manner. This is a sin
against God and man, which becomes so much the greater, when it is both
offered and accepted, of which Paul gives a charge, 1 Cor. 10. Give none
offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 10.3^.
nor to the Church of God, that is, to none, either within or without, to
believers or unbeleevers. I answer, Elies sons, who by their evil life
caused the people to abhor the offerings of God: yet notwithstanding God
threatens to bring an heavy judgment upon Israel, at which, 1 Samuel 3.11.
both the ears of every one that hears it should tingle. As then a woe is
denounced against such as give offense, so is a woe due to such as take it when
it is given. For the Commandment of God ought to be of more force with us, to
keep us within the compass of our duty, then all the evil examples of men to
corrupt us, and hinder us from it, that so we may show our selves to be the
Sons of God in the midst of a froward and crooked generation, among whom we
must shine as lights in the world, Phil. 2.15.

Secondly, wonder concerning the fiery trial, 1 Ioh. 3.13. 1 Pet. 1.7. and
4.12.
which is to try us, and to make our faith much more precious then gold that
perishes, as though some strange thing had happened unto us: but rather let us
rejoice, inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 1.13.
Such is our weakness and infirmity, yea such is our love and liking to our
selves, and our own ease, that we desire freedom from all troubles, and
rather are ready to join with the wicked, then we would willingly suffer any
thing, or be hated of them. We are prone to say in our prosperity, Psalm. 30.6.
I shall never be moved; and therefore when we begin to be evil spoken off
for righteousness sake, and hear slanders and reproaches on every side, we
take the matter so heavily and hainously, and look so strangely upon it, as if
we had never heard of any such condition; or as if the Saints of God had never
endured like persecution; or as if the Word of God had never spoken word of
enduring affliction; or as if it were not the beaten path that brings us to
salvation; or as if Satan and his instruments had put on a new affection, and
altered their former disposition. How have we forgotten, that all the servants
of God from righteous Abel to these present times have suffered tribulation?
and therefore it may not be thought any novelty, Matthew. 5.12.
forasmuch as they have done this to the Prophets and people that were before
us. We have forgotten what befell our Lord and Master, who endured the Cross,
and despised the shame, Heb. 12.2.
and is set down at the right hand of his Father. We have forgotten that we
must walk through good report, and evil report, through honor and dishonor.
2 Cor. 6.8.
We have forgotten that the holy Apostles went away from the Council
rejoicing, Acts 5.41.
that they were accounted worthy to suffer any thing for Christ's sake. Heb.
10.34.
We have forgotten that the believing Hebrews suffered with joy the spoiling
of their goods, knowing that they had a better inheritance reserved for them in
the Heavens, and an enduring substance that should never fade, nor fail, nor
fall away.

Thirdly, to cut off occasions from them that seek occasions, 2. Cor. 11. 2
Cor. 11.11.
And he warns young women to guide their houses, 1 Timothy 5.14.
and to give no occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully, 1 Timothy 5.
These are they that watch for our halting and slipping, as the Fowler does for
the Bird, or the Hawke for his prey. They lay nets and snares to catch the
simple and heedlesse soul. It is meat and drink to them, if they can take
them at any advantage. If we suffer reproof and reproach wrongfully, happy
are we, and great is our comfort, we have no cause of grief and sorrow, but
rather of rejoicing, resting in the testimony of a good conscience, Psalm. 37.
and 44.11, 12, 13, 17.
and the approbation of Gods Spirit, who shall bring forth thy righteousness
as the light, and thy judgment as the noone day. Thus we see in the
faithful, Psalm. 44. Thou have given us like sheep appointed for me^t, thou
make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are
round about us; thou make us a byword among the Heathen, a shaking of the
head among the people, etc. all this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten
thee; neither have we dealt falsely with thy Covenant, etc. But if we suffer as
evil doers, we have no comfort at all in any such sufferings, but rather much
discomfort, and matter of sorrow and mourning.

Fourthly, Ioh. 15.17, 18. and 17.26.
John 15.17, 18. who commands us to love one another; Hence it is that Christ
says, I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it, that the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Touching this
brotherly kindness, observe these three circumstances, the manner, the time,
and the persons. The manner of it must be earnestly, fervently, constantly,
and in truth: not faintly, not coldly, not hypocritically, not in show only;
for so did Cain love his brother. The time must be at all times, every season
is the season thereof fit to practice it: not in prosperity only, and when
they have little or no need at all of us, but chiefly and especially in
adversity, in time of dearth, and famine, which is the time of the trial of
our love, as Pro. 17.17. and 18.24. Prove. 17.17. and 18.24.
A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity. And
touching the persons, whom are we to love? all the brethren, not only the
rich and wealthy, but the least, the lowest, the meanest, the poorest, among
them especially, whom the Lord has chosen to be rich in faith, Iam. 2.1, 2, 5.
and heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. To this end, we are warned not to have
the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons, forbidding
us to despise poor Christians, and to respect only the richer sort of higher
places that abound in earthly blessings. Now, to effect this brotherly love the
better, Motives to work true love in us.
and to work it the sooner in our hearts, we must consider sundry motives to
move us thereunto, laid before us in holy Scripture. First, the Disciples of
Christ by this charity, Ioh. 13.35.
as a servant is by his livery to what Master he belongs, John 13.35.
Secondly, are translated from death to life, 1 Ioh. 3.14.
and from the state of damnation to salvation, because we love the brethren.
They are all no better then dead men, stark dead in sins and trespasses, and
lying under condemnation, that are destitute of this love. Thirdly, whosoever
hates his brother, Cain, a very murderer: 1 Ioh. 3.15.
and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. If we would
scorn to be blotted and branded with such an odious name, it behooveth us to
avoid and beware the like practice, as well as the title. It is in vain for us
to go about to shun and shake from us the name, so long as we resemble his
nature. Nay we are like the Devil himself, John 8.44.
who was a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. When the Prophet told Hazael
of his barbarous and horrible cruelty that he should show against the children
of Israel, he seemed to scorn it, and to startle at it, as at an hideous
matter, Is thy servant a dog, 2 King. 8.13.
that he should do this great thing? but what availed this? or was he one inch
the further from it, because he put it away from him? No doubtless. So what
shall it profit these men to cast from them those names of Cain and his father
the Devil, and think they have wrong offered them to be so esteemed: when in
the mean season they nourish malice and mischief in their sinful hearts? of
the truth, 1 Ioh. 3.19.
and shall assure our hearts before him, by the opposition of the world, 1 John
3.19. so that from hence we should gather great consolation and assurance to
our selves, that we are not married to the world, but are divorsed from the
world. Iam. 4.4.
If we be the friends of the world, we become the enemies of God, because the
friendship of this world is enmity with God. 1 John 4.21. John 17.3.
and every one that loves, is borne of God, and knows God; whereas he that
loves not God, knows him not, Joh. 4.21. howbeit this is eternal life, to
know him, Joh. 17.3. Sixthly, God has loved us first, when we deserved no love,
1 John 4.9. Romans 5.8.
but to be hated, whereas we often hate those that deserve to be loved: yea he
so loves us, that he sent his Son, his only begotten Son, whom he loved,
and in whom he is exceedingly well pleased, that we might live through him. Is
not this love of his toward his enemies strong enough, to work love again in
us toward our brethren? O what a little feeling have we in our hearts of the
love of the Father, if it cannot work thus much in us, to cause us for his
sake to love his children? The bright beams of the love of the Sun of
righteousness did never shine upon us to quicken us, if we do not also warm
his Sons with the comfortable heat thereof. Seventhly, 1 John 4.17.
we have boldness to lift up our heads in the Day of Judgment, because as he
is, so we are in this world; if we be regenerate, we are partakers of the
heavenly nature, ready to render love for love. Lastly, 1 John 4.20. and 5.1.
we are liars, and speak not the truth: for he that loves not his brother
whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? forasmuch as
every one which loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of
him, 1 John 5.1. All these are as so many chains, whereunto I might add
sundry other linkes, to couple us together, and to hold us close one to
another. If we break these bands in sunder, that nothing will hold us, like
the man distempered and distracted in the Gospel, How can we have any communion
with God, that have no fellowship with the brethren?

Fifthly, we all have need of patience, Luke 21.19. Heb. 10.36.
except we possess our souls with patience against the contempt, which all
for Christ's sake are subject unto in this present world? We are commonly
esteemed as the reffuse and off all of all others, but let us keep faith and a
good conscience, and then say with the holy man Job, whose patience and
constancy was many ways prooved; and sundry false imputations charged upon
him, Behold, my witness is in Heaven, John 16.19. 1 Cor. 4.3.
and my record is on high. And with the Apostle, With me it is a very small
thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not
mine own self. The Faithful are Gods hidden Ones, dear to him, and beloved
of him. And as they are the members of Christ, so he accounts his body after
a sort maimed and unperfect, without us, for He is the Head over all things to
the Church, Ephesians. 1.23.
which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23.
where the Apostle shows, that his body is his fullness. Is it not a blemish
and deformity in the natural body, wherein one member only (if it be but a
little finger) is wanting? so Christ Jesus should be unperfect, as a body
maimed and disfigured, if any of his members should be missing, which he will
not suffer to be taken from him. If at any time great men favor and respect
us, we pass not greatly, what inferior persons think of us. So should it be
with us concerning the matter in hand, we ought to digest the disgraces and
reproaches of the world more easily and with all patience, considering the
mighty God and Christ his Son and our Savior have us in such estimation.
Romans 8.31.
For if God be on our side, who shall be against us? We commonly affirm, A
friend in the Court is as good as a penny in the purse, and we find it so. If
then we have a friend in the Court of Heaven, which is the highest Court, and
from whence lies no appeal, we shall not need to fear, or be disquieted,
what man does, or can do unto us. And if we had the greatest friends that can
be upon the earth, what benefit can we promise to our selves by it, when he
that is higher then the highest, is our enemy?

Lastly, Matthew: 5.44. 2 Cor. 2.10. Acts. 7.59. Luke 17.3. Romans 12.19.
but we must love our enemies, Matthew. 5.44. and forgive them, Luke 17.3.2 Cor.
2.10. and pray for them, Acts 7.59. Hence it is that the Apostle teaches, Romans
12.19. Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for it is
written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. He is the Judge of
the whole world, and to him it belongs to punish: and shall not the Judge of
the whole world deal uprightly? Genesis 18.15.
He judges without all passion or perturbation, whereas we are partial and
passionate, and sometimes peevish in our own causes. It is the office of God
that properly belongs to him, Psalm. 94.1.
to revenge all our wrongs whatsoever, who will more sharply and sever^ly
right our causes, then any other man can do; whereas if we be avengers of our
own private injuries, we make our selves Judges of the earth, we take upon us
the perfect knowledge of all things, we make our selves searchers of the heart,
we wrest the sword of justice from the Magistrate, nay, we usurp the office
of God, and make our selves to be witnesses, parties, and punishers in our own
matters, which was never allowed in any Court where there was any color of
upright dealing, and we cannot expect the Divine revenge, which only keeps
due measure and proportion between too much, and too little.

Little flock.) The last observation taken from the limitation added to the
flock of Christ that it is little, and arising from the former interpretation,
is, that it is said to be little, in respect of the opinion that these poor
sheep have of themselves. Their hearts are not hauty, neither are their eyes
lofty, Psalm. 131.1, 2.
neither do they exercise themselves in great matters, or in things too high
for them, but they behave themselves as a child, that is weaned from his
mother, their soul is even as a weaned child. This teaches us, Jacob an holy
Patriarch says of himself, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all
the mercies, Genesis 32.10. and 18.27.
and of all the truth which thou have showed to thy servant. Thus does Abraham
the Father of the faithful confess in his prayer, I have taken upon me to
speak to my Lord, which am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. Ezra the learned
Scribe of God was ashamed and blushed to lift up his face to God, Ezra 9.6. Job
1.1. and 4.3, 4. and 42.6.
Ezra 9.6. Job a just and upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil,
who had none like to him in the earth, answered the Lord and said, I am vile,
what shall I answer? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth, once have I spoken,
yea twice, but I will proceed no further; yea, I abhor my self, and repent
in dust and ashes. Esaias 6.6.
The Prophet Esaias cries out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips, Chap. 6.6. The like we might say of Moses, Exodus 4.10, 13 Ier.
1.6. Dan. 9 8. I hn 1.27. Matthew. 11.11.
Exodus 4.10, 13. of Jeremy, chap. 1.6. and of Daniel, chap. 9.8. John Baptist
makes it known, that he was not worthy to unloose the shoes latchet of
Christ that came after him, albeit among them that were borne of women, there
has not risen a greater then he. The Prodigal Son, being come to himself,
Luke 13.21. and 18.13.
and to his Father, confesses, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in
thy sight, I am no more worthy to be called thy Son. The Publican, being come
up to the Temple to pray; stood a far off and would not lift up so much as
his eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, O Lord, be merciful to
me a sinner. So Paul testifies that he was as one borne out of due time, 1
Cor. 15.8, 9.
not worthy to be called an Apostle; not only the least of the Apostles,
Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Timothy 1.15.
1 Cor. 15.8. but the least of all the Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. and the greatest of
all sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

The reasons are many and weighty. 2 Cor. 3.5.
we are not able of our selves to think any thing that is good: and without
the help and assistance of Christ we can do nothing at all, Joh. 6. so that
to be proud of our selves, is to be proud of nothing.

Secondly, every day, and are not able to answer him one of a thousand: their
iniquities are increased over their heads, Ezra 9.6. Lam. 3.22.
and their transgressions are gone up to the Heavens, Ezra 9.6. so that it is
his mercy, that they are not utterly consumed. The more the Lord vouchsafes
his grace unto them, the more they behold their own ways, and are privy to
their own wants. They know they have many known and open sins. They know
they stand in need to pray to God to cleanse them from their secret faults. They
know they must beg of him, Psalm. 19.12, 13.
to keep his servants from presumptuous sins, that they may not have
dominion over them. They know they are daily to crave pardon for their errors,
ignorances, and negligences, for omitting good, for committing evil. They know
their own hearts smite them, 1 Ioh. 3.20.
and if their own hearts condemn them, God is greater then their hearts, and
knows all things. And have they not therefore cause in all these respects to
hang down their heads, and to humble themselves in the sight of God? As for
the ungodly, it is not so with them, they are blind and can see nothing; they
are deaf and will learn nothing; they are senseless and can feel nothing,
be it never so palpable.

Thirdly, meek and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11.29.
Matthew. 11.29. who being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be
equal with God, took upon him the shape of a servant, Phil. 2.6, 7.
and made himself of no reputation. Thus he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross. Yea, he disdained not to
wash the feet of his Disciples, Ioh. 13.5, 15.
and gave them an example what they should do, even as he had done to them.
Thus he that was both God and Man, the Lord of Heaven and earth, the eternal
Son of the Father, the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.3.
the express Image of his person, the Heir of all things, upholding them by
the Word of his power, the King and Priest of his Church, did stoop down and
abase himself for us, even to the death, and that also the cursed death of the
Cross, Luke 21. 27.
and was in the world as he that serves, Luke 22.27. Ought not we therefore to
set evermore his example before our eyes, as a glass to look upon, and in
lowliness of mind each one of us to esteem of others better then of our
selves, that the same mind might be in us which was in him?

Fourthly, Genesis 3.19. Job 1.21. 1 Timothy 6.7.
our first or our last: for dust we are, and to dust shall we return, Genesis 3.
We brought nothing with us in this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out. Is not the baseness of the matter out of which we were formed,
and into which we shall be resolved, argument weighty enough to pull down
every high conceit of our selves, and to preach humility unto us?

Lastly, Jacob, after he had wrastled with God, had his thigh out of joint,
Genesis 32.25, 31. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.
and he halted of it all the days of his life afterward, Genesis 32. So had the
holy and blessed Apostle Paul asplinter in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet him, lest he should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
revelations that were given unto him. And albeit he besought the Lord thrice
that it might depart from him, yet he obtained in not, but received this
gracious answer, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made
perfect in weakness. The best servants of God therefore have had something to
cast them down even to the ground, and if we have not eyes to see this which
every where offers it self before us, we are blind, and can see nothing at
all.

First of all this serves for reproof, Romans 10.3.
and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. Such men swelling very big with the
wind of their own works, are far from the humility and humbleness of
mind which we read to have been in all the Saints of God from the beginning.
The continual song and saying that has been evermore in the mouths of all
the godly, of the Patriarchs, of the Princes, of the Kings, of the Captains,
of the Priests, of the Prophets, of the Apostles, and of all true Converts and
penitent persons, when they speak of themselves, has been this, I am not
worthy, as we have noted before. On the other side, as they take away all
worthiness from themselves, Rev. 4.10. 11.
and east down their Crowns at the feet of him that sits upon the Throne;
so when they speak of God, they give all praise and honor, and ascribe all
worthiness to him, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and
power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and
were created. Secondly, Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.21.
all such as are boasters and proud persons, heady, high-minded, and there are
not a few of those, whose practices cannot stand with true humility. Some are
boasters of false liberality, like clouds without rain, or bubbles of water
that rise up and suddenly vanish away. Such were Ananias and Saphira his wife,
Acts 5.3, 8.
who kept back part of the price of the Land they sold, and yet boasted of
their bounty, as if they had brought the whole price, and had sold it for so
much only. Some are boasters of false obedience, as if they had dealt soundly
and sincerely with God, and yet offer unto him a lame service, as it were a
blind and maimed sacrifice which he abhors. Mal. 1.8. 1 Samuel 15.13, 20.
Such was Saul's oblation, which was indeed rebellion, yet he gloried that he
had done all that the Lord commanded, and had left nothing undone. This
boasting of his sincerity was a notable discovering of his hypocrisy. Some are
boasters of perfection, as if they had gone as far as God prescribed, like
such as think themselves at their journeis end as soon as they are set forth
out of doors. Matthew. 19.20.
Such was the young man in the Gospel, that professed he had kept the whole
Law from his youth, Romans 8.3.
which notwithstanding is not possible through the flesh; who said to our
Savior, All these things have I performed, what lack I yet? Such was the
Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.17. which boasted she was rich and had need of
nothing, Revel. 3.17.
and knew not that she was wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. Such also are they that boast of works of supererogation, swelling like
a bladder till they be ready to burst again, as if they were able to do more
then God requires at their hands, and had more strength then ever he gave
them. These make themselves over-iust, Eccles. 7.16.
and are indeed over-unjust. Some boast of their sin and wickedness, in
filthiness and profaneness, in whoredom, in drunkenness, and beastliness,
as if a sick man should glory in his sickness, in his wounds, and ulcers, in
his boiles, and blaines, and blisters, in his running and putrefying sores,
which no man that is sober and well in his wits would do. Sins are the
ulcers and sores of the soul, Psalm. 38.5.
at which we should rather blush then boast: and of which there is cause why we
should be ashamed rather then any way enamored. Some filly souls boast of
their ignorance, that they know nothing, neither God, nor themselves, neither
any thing pertaining to the salvation of their souls, as if a man should glory
that he lives in a dungeon or in the dark, and thank God he never had the
Sun shining in his face all the days of his life: or as if a subject should
boast, he never knew any of the Princes Laws, or a servant that he never
regarded to know the will and pleasure of his Master. Such are silly fools,
and love their own folly, and are to be pitied for their simplicity. Some
boast of their hypocrisy, that they can carry matters so closely and so
cunningly, as not to be espied; Luke 12.2.
never considering that there is nothing covered that shall not be discovered
and revealed. Some boast of their felicity and prosperity, some of their
riches, some of their honor and nobility, all which the Apostle esteemed as
dung in comparison of the righteousness of Christ, that he might win him:
Phil. 3.8.
nay, he would not glory in divine revelations, lest he should be exalted, but
rather in his infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.9.
that he might be humbled by them, and that the power of Christ might be
magnified in him.

Secondly, let us not think highly of our own gifts, Romans 12.3, 16
Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate, be not wise in
your own conceits. And again, Verse 3. Let every man think soberly of
himself, according as God has dealt to him the measure of faith, and let him
not think more highly of himself then he ought to think. So likewise, Prove.
3.7.
Prove. 3.7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear the Lord, and depart from
evil. So we are also charged, in giving honor, Romans 12.10.
to go one before another, Romans 12.10. for there is little hope of a conceited
fool, that thinks better of himself then any besides, and is so blind that
he cannot see his grossest corruptions that are as beams in the eyes; nay, is
so weak in judgment, that he thinks his blemishes to be ornaments, and his
vices to be virtues in himself. Therefore Solomon says, Prove. 26.12.
Prove. 26.12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of
a fool then of him. Let us examine our selves, whether we be indeed lowly or
not, Matthew. 5.3.
and that by these rules. First, if we be poor in Spirit, knowing and evermore
meditating upon our infirmities, insufficiences, weaknesses, imperfections,
defects and faults, laboring thereby to understand them better, and better,
and to heal them the sooner; this is one sign of humility. Secondly, if we
despise and disgrace none, though never so mean, and reject not the opinion
and judgment of any, though much more unlearned then our selves, and far
inferior to our selves. Genesis 21.12.
Abraham must sometimes be content to hearkon to the voice of Sarah, the higher
to the lower, the man to the woman, the husband to the wife. Moses the great
Prophet of the Lord and the Church, must learn of Jethro his Father in law.
Exo^. 18.24. 2 King. 5.1, 4, 12.
Naaman a Master and great Captain, and honorable, thought it no
disparagement to himself and his high place, to follow the advice first of his
poor Maidservant, and afterward of his Menservants, or else that foul
leprosy had cleaved unto him for ever. David, a mighty man of war, and
anointed to be King, disdained not the wise counsel of Abigail a woman, 1 Samuel
25.33.
and therefore kept himself from sheading of blood, and blessed God for it.
Apollos was an eloquent man, fervent in the Spirit, and mighty in the
Scriptures, who watered where the Apostle planted; Acts 18.24. 1 Cor. 3.6.
yet Aquila and Priscilla took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way
of God more perfectly. It was an evident sign that Job was humble in his own
eyes, Job 31.13, 15.
in that he did not despise the cause of his Manservant, or of his Maid, when
they contended with him, but considered with himself, that he which made him
in the womb, fashioned them also, and that one formed them all. Thirdly, if we
submit our selves to be governed by the wisdom of God revealed in his Word.
This submitting and subjecting of our selves, makes simple men become wise,
young men to be wiser then their Elders, and such as have been taught, Psalm.
119.98, 99. and 19.7. Prove. 1.4.
wiser then their Teachers, and such as have enemies, to go beyond all their
deep policies, and to prevent all their cunning devices. On the other side, if
we reject the Word, and will not be obedient unto it, making it a lamp unto
our feet, and a light unto our paths, Psalm. 119.105. Ier. 8.9. 2 Timothy 3.15.
there is no true wisdom at all in us, Jer. 8.9. The Word is able to make us
wise to salvation, 1 Timothy 3.15. which is the greatest wisdom that can be. He
that is not wise for his soul, is a fool: let him be never so wise and wary
for the body, and let him have never so great reputation for a wise man in the
world, yet is his wisdom disprooved. Fourthly, if we deny our selves, and our
own natural and fleshly wisdom. It is a very hard matter to deny our
selves, and our carnal wisdom, but it must of necessity be done, if ever
we desire to come to the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore the Apostle says, Let
no man deceive himself: 1 Cor. 8.13. 2 Cor. 10.32.
If any man among you seem to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be
wise. For our high thoughts must be cast down, that exalt themselves against
the knowledge of God, and be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.

Lastly, Peter, 1 Pet. 5.5, 6.
Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time, and cloathe yourselves with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5, 6. And we have sundry
motives to stir us up unto it. First, no good thing dwells in our flesh,
Romans 7.18.
but evil dwells in us abundantly, and plentifully. All the thoughts of man's
heart are only evil, Genesis 6.5.
and that continually. The water can arise no higher then nature will give it
leave: so there is an impotency and disability in our nature to ascend above it
self to that which is good, as unpossible as for the stream to climb up to
the top of an high mountain, or for a stone by its own strength to mount into
the air. For that which is of the flesh, is only flesh. Our nature is stained
and defiled with all manner of sin, and a pronenesse to all sorts of sins
from our birth, Job 14.4. and 15.14. Psalm. 51.5.
nay, from our conception, which has over-spred us as a filthy leprosy. The
mind and understanding, the will and affections, the memory and conscience,
the whole soul and body are infected, Romans 8.7.
so that the natural man understands not the things of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, and are spiritually discerned. Secondly, God resists
the proud, and professes himfelfe to be an enemy to them, Iam. 4.6. Prove.
3.34. 1 Pet. 5.5.
but he gives grace unto the humble, Iam. 4.6. Thirdly, our best gifts are
wonderfully tainted and defiled. We know nothing, if we be ignorant hereof.
What is our faith, our repentance, our sanctification, our love, our
temperance, our patience, our hope, our knowledge, but as it were the
foundation or beginning of a great building, or the seed of grace sown in our
hearts, rather then grace it self, being compared with perfection. We know
nothing as we ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.
howsoever we may think we know all things. Our faith is little, and soon
shaken with many doubtings, and with much unbeleefe. Lastly, Mark 9.24.
such only as are humble, shall be exalted and lifted up in due time. Luke
1.51.
As the proud are scattered in the imagination of their hearts, so the humble
shall be advanced. It is a common saying of Christ, oftentimes uttered by him,
and repeated by the Evangelists, Matthew. 23.12. Luke 24.11. and 18.14.
He that lifts up himself, shall be cast down, and he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted. As pride goes before destruction, and an high
mind before the fall, Prove. 16. so on the other side, humility goes before
exaltation, and leads the way before it. All are desirous to pass into the
house of glory, but they are unwilling to enter in at the gate of humility. By
this gate Christ himself entered, and this way he has consecrated to all his
children.

For it is your Fathers.) These words contain the reason, which is the promise
of a great and wonderful blessing, greater then all the world besides. For
what is this world, without respect and reference to the World to come? or what
is all the glory of this life, without the glory of the next Life? or what is
an earthly Kingdom, without the Kingdom of Heaven? Now touching the force and
strength of this reason, see afterward in the last branch. This promise, which
is a promise of promises, or the perfection of all promises, as a spring or
fountain, has many streams or channels issuing out of it, as has been
observed before in the beginning. The first is the Author of the promise, not
Man, not Angels, not Princes, not any creature; for this is greater then all
the Angels of Heaven, and all the Kings and mighty men of the earth are able to
promise and perform; it is God that has promised, who also will accomplish
whatsoever he has spoken. And to the intent this promise might take the deeper
root in our hearts, Christ Jesus does not call him the mighty Lord, the
righteous Judge, the God of revenge, or such like, but a merciful Father. For
as before we showed, that God shows himself a Shepherd, to teach that his
Sheep shall not want: so here the Lord Jesus calls him a Father, 2 Cor.
12.14.
to show that as a Father provideth for his Chlldren, so God loves his, and
will provide for all of them. He were a bad Shepherd that would feed himself,
but starve and famish his Sheep: so he were an evil father that would be
careful for himself, but careless altogether for his children. The meaning
of the word Father.
Now touching the meaning, this word (Father) so far as it is ascribed to
God, is taken sometimes personally, and sometimes essentially. Personally, when
it is restrained to one of the Persons, as to the first Person in the holy and
blessed Trinity, Matthew. 28.19. Ephesians. 2.3. 2 Cor. 13.13.
to wit, God the Father begetting the Son, and sending forth the holy Ghost,
whenever mention is made of any of the other Persons also. Thus likewise it
is taken, when it is limited to the second Person in Trinity, to wit, God the
Son, begotten of the Father before all worlds, ^say 9.6.
as Esaias 9.6. Unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is given, his Name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father.
And in this sense, the holy Ghost the third Person proceeding from the Father
and the Son, may also be called Father, because he together with the Father
and the Son gives being to all things. Sometimes the Word is taken
essentially without consideration of any personal relation, and then it is
referred simply to God, and is extended to all the three Persons, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
as Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye so reward the Lord, Mal. 2.10. Iam. 1.27.
O ye foolish people? is not he thy Father that has bought thee? and Mal.
2.10. Have ye not all one Father? and thus it is taken in this place for the
whole Godhead, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, who have a
Sovereign Father-hood over the Church, loving it, defending it, delighting in
it; caring for it, bestowing all blessings upon it, and withholding nothing
that is good from it. King. 3.26. 2 Samuel 18.23. 1 King. 3.26. Esaias 66.13. Zach.
12.10. 2 Samuel 19.37. Genesis 17.18. and 49.1. 1 King. 14.2. Esaias 49.15. Psalm.
103.13, 17. and 68.5. Esaias 63.16. and 69.8. 2 These. 2.6.
2 Samuel 18, 23. they rejoice at their good, Prove. 101. they moutne for their
trouble and evil that befalls them, Zach. 12.10. they comfort them in sorrow
and anguish, Esaias 66.13. they procure them what good and preferment they can, 2 Samuel 19.37. Genesis 17.18. they provide for the time present and to come, Genesis
49.1. they tender them in sickness and in health, 1 King. 14.2. they prevent
dangers that do hang over their heads, and may befall them, Genesis 27.43. and
28.2. they regard them in prosperity and adversity, in wealth and in poverty,
so that they cannot leave them, nor forget them, nor forsake them, Esaias 49.15.
All these, being only in part, and unperfectly in men, are fully, infinitely
and perfectly in God, as his nature and essence, and therefore he commends
his love to us above all this, Esaias 49. Matthew. 7. of which places before. The
Prophets and Apostles are full of such testimonies, as Psalm. 103. As a Father
pittieth his Children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him: and as the
Heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear
him. And 68.5. A Father of the Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widows is God
in his holy habitation. So Esaias 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, our
Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. And 64.8. Thou, O Lord, art our Father,
we are the clay, and thou our Potter, and we all are the work of thine hand.
Thus the Apostle, 2 These. 2.6. The Lord Jesus, and God even the Father which
has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, comfort your hearts.

This title is indeed proper to God alone; Exodus 20.12.
and all Superiors, Exodus 20.12. Yet to us, as there is but one God, and one
Lord, so there is but one Father (as we heard before out of the Prophet) to
whom this name is properly and peculiarly belonging. Matthew. 23.9.
This Christ himself teaches, Matthew. 23.9. Call no man Father upon the earth,
for one is your Father which is in Heaven; neither be ye called Masters, for
one is your Master, even Christ But is it unlawful to call any Father? the
Apostle calls himself the Father of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.15.
1 Cor. 9. Though ye have ten thousand Instructours, yet have ye not many
Fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. abolish
from among Christians the name of Father, or Master, or Teacher, as if it were
unlawful for Children to call those their Fathers, of whom they received their
being; or for Servants to call any their Masters, to whom they owe their
service, forasmuch as the Scripture wills Children to honor their Fathers,
and Servants to be obedient to their bodily Masters: but his purpose is to
forbid these names, in such sort as the Pharisees were called by them, who loved
or desired to be called Rabbis, Fathers, and Masters, and challenged the names
as proper and peculiar to themselves. It is not therefore the bare title, but
their vain glory that is condemned. Again, so to be called Rabbi, Father, or
Master, that the people of the Lord should wholly and absolutely depend upon
their mouths, 1 Cor. 7.23.
to become servants of men, and rest slavishly in their opinions and
traditions, as the only true Teachers and Fathers of the Church (as the
Jesuits would be accounted in these days) may not be admitted in any case; or
that their doctrines were not subject to trial and examination by the
Scripture, is wholly to be rejected, forasmuch as the spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets. 1 Cor. 14.32.
Thus to be called Father or Master, agrees to no mortal man, but God is the
only true Father, and Christ Jesus the only true Master, as the only
Lawgiver, that is able to save and to destroy, Jam. 4. whose Precepts we must
receive, and are bound to obey, though all the world should teach otherwise.
God then must be held to be supreme; others are subordinate unto him.

Secondly, God has set his whole delight on his, Deuteronomy. 10.15, 21.
and does great things for them that he has not done for the whole world
beside. He has given his own Son for them, and to them, which is the
fountain of all his love, Joh. 3.16. For he so loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life. And 1 John 4.9, 10. in this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son
into the world, 1 Ioh. 4.9, 10.
that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved him, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.
From hence flow all spiritual and eternal blessings, as reconciliation, and
atonement, sanctification, and likewise our justification consisting in the
forgiveness of sins, and the imputation of his righteousness unto us: yea
hence do flow temporal blessings to us, as they are blessings, so that he
cares for us, as the Eagle for her Birds, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12. and tendreth us as
the apple of his own eye, Zach. 2.5.

Thirdly, Abshalom, who had his name of his Fathers peace, but he sought the
destruction of his Father. It is not so with God, he does not deceive, neither
can be deceived in calling his Children by their names. They are called,
sometimes the Lords portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. Exodus 19.5.
and the lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. Sometimes his chief treasure above
all people, though all the earth be his, Exodus 19 5. sometimes his Sons and
Daughters, 1 Ioh. 3.1.
begotten of him to a lively hope of an inheritance unspeakable and glorious, 1 John 3.1. sometimes the Spouse of Christ, Hos. 2.19, 23. Ioh. 15.24.
Hos. 2. sometimes his Jewels, Mal. 3. and sometimes also his friends laboring
to do whatsoever he commands them, Joh. 15.14. All these titles and
testimonies teach us, how dearly he loves, and accounts of his people.

The uses of this point serve, our Father, Matthew. 6.^.
to stir up our faith to come with assurance, and without doubting to be
heard and helped. Will a Father deny his Child any thing that is good for him?
God is our Father, and we his Children: he our Shepherd, and we his Flock:
he the Creator, and we his creatures. He sees what we have need of, and he
knows better then our selves what is good for us, so that we may boldly come
in faith, and not waver, as the Romanists would have us to do. Now to the end
we may approach and appear before him aright, and come unto him as to a
Father, we must come partly with cheerfulness and boldness, and partly with
awefulnesse and reverence. And these two must be compounded and mingled
together, boldness with reverence, and reverence with boldness, that we may
pray and make supplication to him with a reverent boldness, and with a bold
kind of reverence; lest boldness severed from reverence, breed baseness and
contempt, and reverence severed from boldness turn into a slavish and
superstitious fear. To work in us boldness and willingness, the Scripture
lays before us the promises of God, whereupon we must build as upon a sure
foundation. To strike in us reverence, it propounds sundry threatenings and
admonitions, which we ought to call to mind so often as we go to prayer, to
prepare us thereunto. First, we must acquaint our selves with the gracious
promises of God which he has made to us in his holy Word, that our dull and
dead spirits may thereby be quickened, and our unbeleeving hearts may be fully
persuaded, that he will deliver our soul from death, Psalm. 116.8.
our eyes from tears, and our feet from falling. For as the amiable Word of a
Father implies a readiness and willingness in God to show mercy, so it
should stir up in us a forwardness to come unto him, and to ask whatsoever
we want. The Scripture is full of such heavenly promises, Psalm. 50.15. Matthew.
7.7.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee, Psalm. 50.15. Matthew.
7.7. If we humble our selves in his presence, and turn from our sins and
wicked ways, then He will hear in Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. and 15.2. Esaias 65.24.
and be merciful unto our sins, 2 Chronicles. 7. If we seek him, He will be found
of us, 2 Chronicles. 15. Before we call, he will answer, and while we speak, he
will hear, Esaias 65. If we which are evil can give good gifts to our children,
Luke 11.13.
how much more will our heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that desire
him, Romans 10.22.
Luke 11? He that is Lord of all, is rich unto all that call upon him, Romans 10.
Draw near to God, and He will draw near to you, Iam. 4.8.
Iam. 4. All these are so many encouragements to draw us, and to drive us to
God, who by these and a thousand such other promises inviteth us into his holy
presence: Again, on the other side we must consider, that the Scripture
withal gives us sundry advertisements and threatenings to admonish us to come
to him with fear and reverence. The name of a Father is a title of
familiarity: but familiarity many times breeds too much boldness, and
boldness breeds contempt, and contempt a base estimation of God: and
therefore it must be seasoned with other considerations, lest we come to him
in vain, and to our own hurt. Hence it is, that as Christ our Savior teach
thus to call God our Father when we fall down before him, so withal he wills
us to remember that he is in Heaven, that is, of infinite glory, power, and
majesty. Let us therefore have before us these and such like meditations, If I
regard wickedness in my heart, Psalm. 66.18. and 26.6. Prove. 1.28. and 15.8.
and 21.27.
the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18. and 26.6. and often in the Proverbs,
They shall call upon me, but I will not answer: the prayer of the wicked is
abominable. And Ioh. 9.31. We know that God hears not sinners; Ioh. 9.31.
but if any man be a Worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears. Thus
James speaks, Chap. 4. Iam. 4.3.
Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon
your lusts. So Christ himself teaches, This people draws near to me with
their mouths, Matthew. 15.8, 9.
and honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me: in vain do
they worship me. And the Prophet long before, When ye spread forth your hands,
Esaias 1.11, 12, 15.
I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not
hear. These and such like places coming every where to hand, are so many
threatenings and watchwords, and must be our continual study and meditation,
whenever we go to prayer, to awake us, and rowze us up to come unto God as
to a Father, with the more reverence and godly fear, and to assure us, that if
we take not good heed, we may tread in his Courts, and appear in his presence,
and yet receive no gracious answer from him, because we do no other, nor no
better, then take his name in vain.

Secondly, Our duty to God learned out of this Title.
some belonging to God, some to our selves, and some to our brethren. Touching
God, it leads us as it were by the hand to honor, reverence, and obey him,
as Children do their earthly Parents, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. This the Prophet Malachi
teaches, Mal. 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16, 17.
Chap. 1. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master; If then I be
a Father, where is mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear, says
the Lord of Hosts? And if we take his name in our mouths, and call him
Father, let us not fashion our selves according to the former lusts, but pass
the time of our sojourning here in fear, and as he that calls us is holy, so
let us be holy in all manner of conversation, because it is written, Be ye
holy, for I am holy. If then we believe God to be our Father in Christ Jesus,
we must as good and obedient Children submit our selves to his holy Will and
pleasure. He that does the Will of the Father that is in Heaven, he is the
Child of God, and every one that calls him Father: Ioh. 4.44.
he that does the will of the Devil, is the child of the Devil, Ioh. 8. For
know ye not, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16.
whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? It is
a grievous and heavy charge to have it said to us, as Christ does to the Jews,
Ye are of your father the Devil. But do we think that this charge lies
heavy upon them alone, or that they only may justly be upbraided with this
reproach? Nay doubtless, all such as follow their steps, must be content to
bear and borrow the same name. If then this saying fall fully upon us, How to
know whether we be Gods Children?
which is the groundworke of the doing thereof. First, we regard not to know
it, how or when shall we practice and perform it? He that has not as yet
laid the foundation, when will he set up the rest of the building? Hence it is
that Christ says, Ioh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye, Ioh.
13.1^.
if ye do them. The Son and Heir will search and know the Will and
Testament of his earthly Father, that he may not be ignorant what is left unto
him. So ought we to do, we must be always looking into the Will of our
Heavenly Father, that we may know what is befallen us, and what is acceptable
in his sight. This is one evident sign of our adoption. Secondly, The second
sign. Psalm. 119.6.
if we labor to please him in all things, and have respect to all his
Commandments. If we regard his will in some things, but displease and despise
him, and dispense with our selves in the rest, he has no respect to us,
neither to our obedience. For this is not the obedience of Sons, but rather
to serve two Fathers, Matthew. 6.24.
while we love the one, we hate the other, and while we cleave to the one, we
neglect the other, and therefore God will not be a Father to such. Thirdly, The
third sign.
we must fear to offend him, because he is a Father, and loves us, and
because we love his Commandments. If we fear him only, because he can and
will and does punish such as commit sin, we are rather slaves then sons.
For this is a servile fear, not a child-like fear. Wicked men oftentimes
fear to offend, but it is only or chiefly for fear of punishment, Romans 8.15.
which proceeds from the spirit of bondage that ingendreth fear, not from
the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. The godly
fear to offend, because they love God and his Laws, and they know he loves
them again: they know he is ready to forgive, and not to power out all his
wrath, and therefore they fear him. Fourthly, if we unfainedly take God for
our Father, The fourth sign. Psalm. 119.136.
we must be greatly grieved when by sin we displease him, or see others
displease him, and transgress his Commandments. No other cross or calamity
should go so near us, as to dishonor and disobey him. No loss of friends so
great, as to lose his favor. No want so great, as to want his love and
protection, and the light of his countenance. The greatest grief that
possessed the Prodigal Son was this, that he had offended his loving Father
by sinning against him; Luke 15.20.
this struck him more to the heart, then the wasting of his wealth, and that
he began to be pinched with poverty. This was the beginning of his repentance,
and of his coming to himself. And as it was with him, so it must be with us
also. This must be our grief, and hereby we must show our repentance. The
fifth sign.
Fifthly, we may not, nay, we will not, nor cannot be silent, when we hear the
holy Name of God dishonored. His love has so ravished our hearts, Cant. 5.8.
that we are even sick of love; it is such a fire kindled in our breasts, that
much water cannot quench it: for albeit we would hide it, it cannot be
smothered; and though we resolve to hold our peace, yet it will break out.
This we see in the Prophet, when the Word of the Lord became a reproach unto
him, and a derision daily, he said within himself, Ier. 20.9.
I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name: howbeit his
Word was in his heart as a burning flame in his bones, and he was weary with
forbearing, so that he could not stay, Ier. 20.9. It is not enough for us to
mourn in secret for the abominations committed openly, but it is our duty to
reprove those that dishonor him, and such as sin openly, should be reprooved
openly, as the Apostle teaches both by precept, 1 Timothy 5.20. Gal. 2.14.
1 Timothy 5.20. and by example, Gal. 2.14. Can a good Child, that loves his
Father, hear him in his presence reviled, traduced, and evil spoken of, and
yet hold his peace, as if he were a deaf man, and heard nothing? does he not
thereby after a sort give consent to such reproaches, and make himself
partaker of those evils, as it were a party, and join himself to his Fathers
enemy? Or will a good Servant hear his Master disgraced before him, and yet
say nothing at all? How then shall we hear the Lord blasphemed, who is both
our Father and Master, and his Name taken in vain, and yet keep silence, and
not answer a word? How shall we dare once to call him Father, and not blush at
the naming of him (if there be any shame in us) when we have no care to
maintain his honor? but suffer it to lie in the dust, and trodden under foot
as a polluted thing? How shall God open his ears at our prayers to power on us
his graces, when our mouths are quite shut up and stopped at his disgraces? or
how shall we look to have him confess us before his Father, Matthew. 10.32.
and the elect Angels in Heaven, when we are ashamed to confess him before the
sons of men upon earth? Alas, how jealous are we of our own names? and upon
what nice and tender points of saving credit and reputation do we stand, to
maintain them? And ought not the Name of God to be much more dear and
precious unto us? Either let us cease once to take the name of a Father in our
mouths, or else let us show a more Sonne-like affection toward him in our
hearts. Either let us forbear to profess our selves his Children, or else let
us bear our selves as Children, and carry in us a readiness every way to
honor him. The sixth sign.
Sixthly, we are bound to love God again, and to answer love for love. And so
much the rather, because he commends his love toward us, that when we were
his enemies, he sent his Son into the world to die for us. O how great was
his love toward us! O how little is our love toward him! were not he a very
unnatural child, that tasting abundantly of his Fathers kindness,
recompenceth it with unkindnesse, stubbornenesse, unthankfulness, and
disobedience again? Thus do we, foolish people, deal with the Lord, and
reward him hatred for his love, and enmity for his friendship. How to know
whether we love God?
But how shall we know, whether we love him, or not? Is every man's claim, and
entituling himself unto it, a certain and sufficient rule to know this? No
doubtless, this is a mark too general, and may soon deceive us, if we lean
upon it, as a broken staff, or a reed of Egypt. If we love him indeed and in
truth, we will love him, even when he chasteneth and afflicts us. It is an
easy matter for us to say, we love God greatly, when he blesses and
prospers us, and when he mercifully supplieth all things unto us that we
desire. Such love the hypocrites may pretend, and make greater show thereof,
then the true Children of God. This may all such do as live in peace and
prosperity, and yet notwithstanding deceive themselves and others also. This
corruption does Satan discover to be in us naturally, Job 1.9, 10.
Job 1.9, 10. Does Job fear God for naught? have thou not made an hedge about
him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? thou have
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the Land: but
put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to
thy face. But we must testify our love toward him, that we can love him when
he chasteneth us, and bear the cross patiently, whatsoever he shall lay upon
us, and look for deliverance from him alone. And so much the rather, because
he chasteneth in love toward us, and if we endure chastisement, Heb. 12.7.
God offers himself to us as unto children, Heb. 12.7. especially
considering he does it evermore for our good. And if his chastisements proceed
from love, why should they not work the same in them that are chastened? we
have had the fathers of our bodies which corrected us oftentimes for their
pleasure, and yet we gave them reverence: shall we not then much rather be in
subjection to the Father of spirits, and live, who chasteneth us for our
profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness? Lastly, The seventh sign.
we must come out from the society and company of evil men, and have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. If we delight as much in
the company of the ungodly, as of the godly, of the children of the Devil, as
of Gods, we are become one body with them, we cannot be assured that we are
Gods Children: but he that is their Father, is become our Father; and he that
rules in them, rules in us also. This note not only gives light to our
selves, but holds out the candle to others, to know whose we are, and to
whom we belong. Psalm. 16.3. and 15.4.
If our greatest delight be in the Saints, we are also ourselves in the number
of the Saints: and if we honor them that fear the Lord, it is an evident
token our selves fear him, and that a vile person is contemned of us. But if
we be never more merry then with them, whose conversation would make us sorry
and sigh, if the zeal of Gods glory were before our eyes; how can we assure
our hearts that God is our Father, seeing his enemies are our greatest friends,
and best welcome unto us? This does the Apostle teach at large, 2 Cor. 6. who
upon the promise that God will be a Father unto us, and we shall be his Sons
and Daughters, concludes, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
Be not therefore unequally yoaked with Infidels? what fellowship is there
between righteousness and unrighteousness, between Christ and Belial?
wherefore come out from among them, and separate from them, and touch no
unclean thing, and I will receive you. But it may be said, we have been all
baptized, we meet in the House of prayer, deny him in our works? Tit. 1.16.
to be washed with water, and not to be cleansed from our wickedness? to come
to the Lords Supper, and yet to cleave to our sins? to look for salvation
from Christ, and never labor for true sanctification of the Spirit? For if he
be made to us justification, he must also be made to us sanctification: and if
he be our righteousness, it cannot be, but he works also righteousness in
us. The Jews were a separate people from the Nations, yet if there were not a
further separation among them, even Jew from Jew, the holy from the profane,
the clean from the unclean, and one of Abraham's seed from another, they could
not be the people of God. Romans 9.6, 7.
They were not all the Israel of God, that were of Israel, according to the
flesh, because even among the Jews themselves were many found that did
justify the Gentiles, Ezekiel. 16.51, 52.
and lived more profanely and abominably then they. So must it in like manner
be with us, the Word, if once it be sincerely embraced and received, will
fan away the chafe from the wheat, and sever Christian from Christian, yea,
neighbor from neighbor, acquaintance from acquaintance, Genesis 21.10. Gal. 4.30.
and friend from friend, so that the Bondwoman and her son shall be thrust
out of the house of Abraham, and find no more place in it.

Thus much touching our duty respecting God: Our duty tovvard our selves
learned out of this Title.
the next concerning our selves. For hence also we must learn to beware of
excessive cares for earthly things, and to have our conversation without
covetousness, which is the maine scope of Christ our Savior in all these
words, that we should not fear want, because God is our Father. And doubtless
if we had hearts to believe, and could have this comfortable assurance, that he
is indeed our Father and we his children, we need no more, we could not but
rest in his care and providence over us, and provision for us. We cannot be
ignorant, that in the family, the father provideth for all. If then we be of
his family, we shall be assured to have him our Father, and to spread the wings
of his protection over us. Will the father suffer his children to starve, when
he has store in his own hand, and can give the staff of bread? Matthew. 6.25.
When Christ our Savior shows that our heavenly Father feeds the Ravens,
and clotheth the Lillies of the field, which is the doctrine here delivered, he
draws this exhortation from thence, Be not careful for your life, what ye
shall eat, or drink, or put on, Math. 6. O, the folly therefore of such as
have their hearts oppressed and ouer-charged with the cares of this life, and
so forget the Kingdom here promised by our heavenly Father! The danger of
covetous persons may be considered in these particular points. First, it is a
sin alive, when other seem mortified, as appears in the example of Judas,
and by lamentable experience of many Professors wholly addicted to the world.
For when other sins have left them, this sticks fast unto them, as a
disease bred in the bones. Secondly, it is a sin seldom repented of, because
it is so close and secret, that it is hardly discerned: and therefore Christ
himself says, Matthew. 19.23.
A rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Many there are that
follow after it, but few confess it. For where shall you have a rich man,
though covetous in the highest degree, that will acknowledge himself to be
covetous? The rich man that had many possessions, came to Christ, and seemed,
(no doubt) to himself and to others very religious; and a diligent obseruer of
the Commandments, yet when he detected him of his covetousness, he went away
sorrowful, and repented of nothing, but happily that he had gone so far. We
have particular examples of many grievous sinners that have turned to God, and
not been ashamed to lay open their sin to their own shame; Genesis 19.33. with
2 Pet. 2.8 2 Samuel 12.13. 2 Cor. 2.7. Acts 3.15. Gen 9.21. 2 Chronicles. 33.6, 12.
Numb. 12.1. Matthew. 26.75. 1 Timothy 1.13. Luke 23.40. Matthew. 21.29. Philem. 18.
some adulterers, and incestuous, Genesis 19. 2 Samuel 12. 2 Cor. 2. some
murderers, 2 Samuel 12.9. Act. 3.13.19. some drunkards, Gen 9.21. Some
Idolaters, sorcerers, enchanters, witches, and wizards, 2 Chronicles. 33.6, 12. Some
envious, and murmurers, Numb. 12.1. Some cursers, swearers, and denyers of
Christ, Math. 26.75. Some persecuters, blasphemers, and oppressors, 1 Timothy
1.13. Some stubborn and disobedient to Parents, Matthew. 21.29. Some thieves and
injurious persons, that rob other men of their goods, Luke 23.40. Philem. 14.
but among all these, very few that are covetous, enter into the Kingdom of
God, who bless themselves when God abhors them. Some examples indeed we may
find of Gods mercy upon them, that none should despair, but they are very
few, that none should presume. For when, or where almost shall you have a
covetous person repent, and confess with his own mouth, I have been
covetous? And how can they repent of their sin, who do acknowledge
themselves to be sinners? we may therefore say of such, as Christ speaks of
the Highpriests and the Elders, Matthew. 21.31.
Verily I say unto you, that the Harlots go before you into the Kingdom of
heaven, Math. 21.31. They hear the Scriptures, again and again, threatening
and thundering against this sin, to beware and take heed of covetousness, and
the Ministers laying it open, but they have neither ears to hear, nor hearts
to believe, and therefore they regard them as the Pharisees did Christ himself,
who being covetous, heard all these things, Luke 16.14.
and they derided him. Thirdly, these men, so much as lies in them, do
cancel the whole Law and abrogate it, and therefore it worthily may be called
the root of all evil. Let us briefly run over the Commandments.
Covetousness the breach of the whole Law.
They break the first Commandment, because they make their Mammon to be their
Master, they love their money above God, and put their trust in their treasure,
and so make to themselves a strange God, and commit Idolatry unto it,
worshipping it as an Image, Mark 10.24. Ephesians. 5.5. Psalm. 62.10.
Mark 10.24. Ephesians. 5.5. Touching the second, it keeps the heart so
inthralled to the World, that they have no leisure to intend the worship of
God. What a deformity were it in the body, to see one eye lifted up to heaven,
and the other cast down to the earth? It choketh the Word as a rank Thorn,
and stops, yea, stuffeth the mouth so full with earth, that it cannot be
opened to pray to God, Psalm. 14.4. Ezekiel. 33.31. Psalm. 119.36. The third is
broken, because it draws men to cursing and swearing, and forswearing, in
buying and bargaining, and that sometimes to get a penny. Hence proceed false
waights and false measures, making the rules of Justice, to be the means of
injustice. Such oftentimes take the name of God in vain. The fourth is
trangressed, because it thrusts men headlong to the breach of the Sabbath:
they think it comes too soon, they judge that it begins too early; they
suppose that it lasts too long; they imagine that it is urged too strictly,
being ready to join with those in the Prophet, Neh. 13.20. Amos 8.5.
When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may set forth wheat, etc? The fifth
Commandment maintains the dignity of our person, which the covetous man
defaceth. If we should see Kings and Princes, or the children of Kings and
Princes, that are heirs to a Kingdom, busy themselves in base Trades, or
handy-crafts and occupations, Turk. History, in the life of Aemet.
(as the Turkish Emperors do,) what a reproach would we think it to their
high calling? God has made his children Kings, and prepared for them a
Kingdom; shall we therefore be so base and bad-minded, as to follow after this
world, and forget the things of the World to come? The sixth Commandment is
pulled up by the roots, because this sin is often a bloody sin, and takes
away life from the owners thereof, as we see in Ahab and in Judas. When a man
is once covetous, it cannot be but he shall give himself to hatred, malice,
cruelty, violence, rage, and revenge. It causes the breach of the seventh
Commandment: for when whoredom has taken away the heart of many, to
maintain their unbridled lusts, they oftentimes oppress rich and poor, small
and great without difference, so that sometimes whoredom is the cause of
covetousness, and sometimes covetousness of whoredom. The eigth Commandment
is principally broken by this sin above the rest. Here the covetous are, as
it were, in their proper element, and make shipwreck upon it, as upon a rock.
They devise all mischief, they regard no Contracts nor Covenants, their word
is yea, and nay, as stands most with their own profit. They rush against the
ninth Commandment, because they are faithful to no man, they are void of all
true dealing, they stick not to lie and bear false witness, as appears in
Gehazi, 2 King. 5.25.
and in those that were hired for money to dissemble and deny the resurrection,
and to make report that the Disciples came by night, Matthew. 28.13, 15.
and stole away the body of Jesus out of the Sepulcher while they slept. The
tenth Commandment strikes at the root of all these evils, and forbids the
covetousness of the heart before consent, which is thoroughly settled therein.
All these things considered, what a blot is it to our holy profession, that we
should profess our selves Christians, and yet live as the Gentiles, Infidels,
and Pagans? as Christ himself speaks, Matthew 6.32. After all these things
do the Gentiles seek, whereas our heavenly Father knows that we have need
of all these things. If we should see a young man rake and scrape all he can
together, shifting for himself, and no other upon the earth providing for him,
or looking after him, or mindful of him, we would presently conclude,
Doubtless his father is dead. Even so when we see men in this world bestow
all their thoughts, studies, endeauours, and practices, reaching and
ouer-reaching day and night for the things of this world, it argues plainly,
that they take God no longer for their Father, but imagine in their unbeleeving
hearts, that he has cast away the care of them, and will no longer provide for
them, otherwise they would not thus shift and shave for themselves.

Hitherto of our duty respecting our selves: Our duty toward our brethren
learned out of this Title.
now we have somewhat to learn from hence in respect of our brethren. For if
we have all of us one Father, are we not to demean and behave our selves
uprightly and lovingly toward those that are his Children, and our own
brethren? We must be like our heavenly Father, if we bear his Image: and not
as bastard-children, that carry but the Image of his Image. And first, we must
imitate him, and walk in his steps that has gone before us, 1 Ioh. 4.11.
Ioh. 13.34. and 15.12.
loving them heartily that are his Children, as well as our selves, Jo. 4.11.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. And again,
This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you. This
duty must appear, especially in two points: first, in loving them that hate
us, and in doing good to them that persecute us, Math. 5. That thereby we may
show our selves to be the Children of our heavenly Father. Matthew. 5.45. Luke
6.32.
For if we love them only that love us, what reward have we, or what singular
thing do we? for sinners also love those that love them. And if we do good to
them only which do good to us, what thank have we? for sinners also do even
the same. And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more then others?
do not even the Publicanes so? We must therefore labor to go beyond them,
and to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, who makes his Sun to
shine upon the good and bad, and the rain to fall upon the godly, and ungodly.
Secondly, we must do good and show mercy to the poor and impotent, Luke 6.76.
that we may also be merciful to others, as our heavenly Father is merciful
unto us, who is a Father of the Fatherless, of the Stranger, and of the Widow.

Lastly, David debate the matter with Saul's servants, 1 Samuel 18.23.
Seems it to you a light thing to be a Kings Son in law, seeing that I am a
poor man, and lightly esteemed? howbeit, it is a thousand times greater
honor, to be the Sons and Daughters, and consequently Heirs of the King of
Kings, the eternal God. This Christ our Savior shows, Joh. 1.12. Ioh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them he gave prerogative to be the Sons of God.
So the Apostle says, and speaks it with admiration, 1 Ioh. 3.1.
Behold what love the Father has showed to us, that we should be called the
Children of God! This preeminence ought so much the more to be magnified, if we
consider what we are by nature, to wit, the children of wrath, the heirs of
damnation, the sons of Satan, the servants of sin, so that we may say, not
only with Abraham, Genesis 18.27. Luke 15.21.
I am but dust and ashes: but with the Prodigal Son, I am not worthy to be
called thy Son. For what are we, from the crown of the head, to the sole of
the foot, but a very lump of sin and corruption? It is by grace and
adoption, that we are made the Brethren of Christ, and fellow-heires with him,
and not much inferior to the very Angels in Heaven, Psalm. 8. Secondly, in that
God professes himself a Father of all the faithful, observe that with him
there is no accepting of persons. Acts 11.36. Job 34.19. Gal. 2.6.
The poor man has as great right and interest in Gods Kingdom, and in this
Title to call him Father, as the rich man whose corn and cattle is increased,
whose wine and oil is multiplied. The weak brother may comfort himself
herein, knowing that God is a Father to him, as well as he was to Abraham, to
Isaac, to Jacob, to David, to Peter, or to Paul. As all the Faithful have
obtained like precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1.
so have all of them a like or equal right in this Father-hood, the low as
well as high, the poor as well as rich, the simple as well as wise, the bond
as well as free are allowed and warranted to speak to him as to a Father, as we
are also taught in the Lords prayer: which is a perfect platform for all to
use that come before him. For there is neither Jew nor Gentile, Gal. 3.28. Col.
3.11.
male nor female, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, but
Christ is all, and in all, and they have interest in him alike, who shed his
blood as well for the one as for the other, and paid the same price for them
all. And thus it shall be at the last Day, when no outward thing shall commend
us to God, neither birth, nor blood, neither learning, nor riches, neither
great revenues, nor golden crowns, nor large Kingdoms; none of these shall
help, no not the outward calling of a Christian, if there be no more in us.
Let us therefore comfort our selves in this, that the love of God is as great
toward us, as to those that are greater in the world. True it is, all men have
not, neither can have free access into the presence of Kings and Princes to
stand before them, and to hear their voice: but all men, even of low degree,
have liberty to come into the presence of Almighty God to hear his Word, which
is his voice, nay, they are called and invited unto it. All men have not
liberty to sit down at the Table of great Personages: howbeit God admits
all true believers, and penitent persons, though never so poor, to sit at his
Table, and to partake of his Supper: yea, they are the guests that he inviteth
and entertaineth, and welcommeth, he will suppe with them, and they shall suppe
with him. Thirdly, from hence we have assurance, that God will accept of our
service and obedience, albeit it be maimed and unperfect, and many ways
defective. The father that commands his child to serve him, albeit he fail
oftentimes in the manner of doing, yet when he beholds his care and endeavor
to please him, he praises his doing, and passes by his misdoing, as if he saw
it not: so it is with God, he requires at our hands to obey him; and albeit we
fail and offend many ways in our obedience, yet when he sees a ready and
willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12.
and an unfeigned desire in us to do our duty, he accepts us according to
that we have, and not according to that we have not. Psalm. 203.13.
This the Prophet teaches, He pittieth them that fear him, no less then a
Father does his Children. Does the Father accept of nothing but that which is
on every side perfect, and every way absolute? Yes, he commends the heart,
when the foot halteth: so God accepts of our sincerity, even when it is
mingled with much infirmity. This the Prophet Malachi witnesses, Chap. 3.17.
They shall be mine, Mal. 3.17.
says the Lord of Hosts, in the Day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son that serves him. This serves as a great
encouragement to us, to cause us to serve him, and to put forth all our
strength and utmost endeavor to do his will. Lastly, he will not cast away
any of the faithful finally, and for ever: neither shall any fall away from
his favor. True it is, they may many ways fall, but they shall rise again,
Mic. 7.8. he may chastise them with the rods of men, but his mercy he will
never take away from them, neither purposes he to cast them away utterly out
of his sight. He may suffer them to be winnowed, Esaias 54.8. Luke 22.31, 32.
as men winnow wheat, but he has prayed for them, that their faith shall not
fully nor finally fail, as Christ our Savior speaks unto Peter, Luke 22.31,
32,

Your Father.) The second point in the promise is the application. Christ Jesus
contenteth not himself to say, It is the Fathers pleasure, but your Fathers,
as when we pray, we are taught to say, Our Father. Neither does the reason run
in this manner: It is my Fathers pleasure, as he might have spoken, as indeed
sometimes he speaks, and as the Scripture calls him, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ioh. 20.17.
but to set the better edge upon it, and to make it pierce the deeper, he
says, It is your Fathers good pleasure. Ephesians. 1.3.
It is not enough to believe, that God is the Father of Christ, or the Father
of the Church, but we must further believe that he is our Father, and every one
for his part must say, He is my Father. It is a matter of knowledge, only to
confess him a Father: but it is a matter of faith to confess him to be our
Father. Thou shall call me, Ier. 3.19.
My Father, and shall not turn away from me. Christ also sends Mary to his
Brethren to say unto them, Ioh. 20.17, 28.
I ascend unto my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God, Ioh.
20. This was the confession and application of Thomas, Luke 1.47. Gal. 2.20.
My Lord and my God. This was the faith of the blessed Virgin, My spirit
rejoices in God my Savior. Even so the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. The Son of God,
who lives in me, loved me, and gave himself for me. It must be thus with
every soul in particular, not only to say, Christ is the beloved Son of the
Father, but as it was with the Church to say as it is, Cant. 2.16.
Cant. 2.16. My well-beloved is mine, and I am his, as Christ himself says, I
know mine, and am known of mine. See the like, Ruth 1.16. Jer. 31.33. Ezra
25.9.

The reasons are evident. Mark 1.15. 1 John 5.13. Now it is not sufficient to
make us true believers, to know the promises, except we also love them, desire
them, delight in them, and make application of them, otherwise we believe no
better then the Devils: and our faith is no other then the faith of the Devils,
for even they believe God, Iam. 2.19.
yea one God, and Christ, and all the promises to be true. They know all the
Scriptures, Matthew. 4.6.
and as they are perfect, so are these perfect in them; they can allege them
more readily and easily a thousand times, than ten thousand in the world. They
know all the promises recorded in the Scriptures, and believe that they shall
come to pass. But let us see what faith they have. There are four sorts of
faith, the historical, the miraculous, the temporary, and the justifying
faith. The historical is, to have the knowledge of Gods Word, and to give
assent that the histories and doctrines therein contained are true. The
miraculous is, 1 Cor. 13.2.
to be able to work miracles. The temporary, to believe in Christ in a
confused manner for a time, like the man that having a glimmering light, saw
men walking like trees; to bring forth some fruits, Mark. 8.24.
and the fruits may seem fair and beautiful in their own and other men's
eyes, like the Apples of Sodom, yet are neither sound, nor lasting; to submit
themselves willingly to the Word, Luke 8.13.
and to take some delight in the hearing thereof. The justifying faith goes
beyond all the former, and it stands in laying hold upon Christ, and making
him to be their own. Among all these, the Devils have only the historical
faith, What manner of faith the Devils have.
to believe all in the Scripture to be most true, wherein notwithstanding they
go beyond many men. They have not the miraculous faith: for albeit they effect
many wonders, yet they can work no miracles, nor change the nature of things.
They want the temporary faith, because as the tree is wholly evil, so they can
bring forth no good fruits, they have no taste of the good Word of God, neither
show any joy they take in it, neither yield they any outward obedience. Much
more therefore do they want the justifying faith, to stretch out their hand to
receive Christ Jesus, and to take him to themselves: for notwithstanding their
belief, they tremble, as the Apostle teaches: so that their faith fails in
this particular, which is more then they can do, to make particular
application of Christ and his promises, to say, Christ is mine, and I am his;
his promises are mine; and belong to me; I have remission of my sins by his
death; he is my Father; and he will give to me the Kingdom. The Angels, that
were the first Preachers of the Gospel, were sent to the Shepherds, and they
taught them this lesson, Behold, Luke 2.11.
I bring you glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all people, that to
you is borne a Savior, Luke 2. They do not only tell them, they brought good
tidings, good tidings to others, but good tidings to them: and not only that
Christ was borne, but that he was borne to them; Esaias 9.6.
as the Prophet had done long before, Unto us a Child is borne, unto us a
Son is given. And except the Shepherds had believed, and applied it to
themselves, they might have been instruments of salvation unto others, but
they could never have believed, or have had benefit by it themselves, like
those that builded the Arc to save others, but were drowned in the waters
themselves.

Secondly, Joshua, Josh. 1.5. Heb. 13.6. 1 Chronicles. 28.20. Deuteronomy. 31.6.
I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee; which also is given to others: yet
the Apostle applies it as spoken to the Hebrews, so that the same which was
spoken to him, was in him spoken to all. The Gospel is as it were a pardon
published to sinners, and faith lays hold on that pardon particularly: so
that the believer does as truly apply it to himself, as if his own name were
written therein, and it were said to him, Matthew. 9.1.
Thy sins are forgiven thee, as it was said to the man sick of the palsy,
Matthew. 9.1.

Thirdly, there must be particular application, Seals of the Righteousness
that is by faith, Romans 4. Romans 4.11.
Now as God has established them in the Church, so he has ordained, that they
should be delivered particularly to every one, that every man should be
baptized, and every man receive the Supper of the Lord in his own person;
which shows that the proper use of a Sacrament is to assure a man's conscience
of the promises in particular. When we come once to believe, and to know that
Christ offers remission of sins by his death, then by receiving of the
Sacraments particularly, we come to apply Christ and his merits to our selves,
so that the delivering and receiving of the Sacraments is thus much in effect:
if thou believe the promises of life and salvation, then take this, that thou
may be assured that they belong unto thee, as certainly as if thy name were
specified therein. Now then all these things considered, the use of faith, the
use of the Word, and the use of the Sacraments; it must necessarily follow,
that it is not only a general notion, but a particular application of the
promises that do belong to salvation.

First, Difference between the faith of Devils and true believers.
To this purpose, I pray you, consider briefly what is the faith of the
Devils, and what is the faith of true believers touching the Articles of the
Creed. For the Devils believe, and man believes. But as Christ tells his
Disciples, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven: so may I say, Except
our faith exceed the faith of the Devils, and of all the Romanists and
Reprobates, we cannot be saved. For there is no faith taught in the Church of
Rome, but a man may have it, and yet be damned. Now I will show what the Devils
believe, and how far they proceed. They believe there is one God, that God is
a Father, that Christ Jesus is a Savior and Redeemer, and the holy Ghost a
Sanctifier: they believe there is now, has been before, and ever shall be a
Church, a true Church; they believe the Communion of Saints, and forgiveness
of sins; they believe there shall be a resurrection of men's bodies, and
everlasting life. All these they steadfastly believe without any wavering or
doubting. Judas. For this is but the historical faith, to believe the
Scriptures to be true. The Devil himself does this, and yet has no benefit
by it, James commends it, Iam. 2.19.
Thou beleevest one God, thou do well in it. This indeed must be embraced,
but there is more then this, not to be omitted. Christ our Savior says, If
ye love them that love you, Luke 6.32.
what thank have ye? for sinners also love those that love them. What then?
does he forbid us to love such again as love us? or does he reject this as
evil? No: but he means, this is not sufficient, if we proceed no further: as
Lots wife is punished, not because she went out of Sodom, not because she pased
it for a time with her husband, not because she went so far, but because she
stood still, and looked back, Genesis 19.26.
and went no further. So then, where the Devils end, we must begin, or rather
proceed. True it is, we must have this common faith, not because the Devils
have it, but because God has commanded it, as Peter confessed Christ to be the
Son of God, not because the Devils confessed it, but because the Father had
revealed it unto him. This common faith is a good preparative to saving faith,
and lays after a sort, the foundation thereof, and we must have it, not
because of it self it is sufficient: or we may not rest there, as if we were
come to our iournies end, but must proceed forward in our way. For we must
believe, not only that there is a God, but likewise that he is our God: not
only that he is a Father, but that he is our Father: not only that Christ is
a Savior, but that he is our Savior: not only that there is a Church, but
that we are parts and members of it; that we are of the Communion of the
Saints, and that our sins shall be forgiven: that our bodies shall be raised,
and that we shall have eternal life given unto us. This truth, the grounds
before delivered, are sufficient to manifest, if any thing can be sufficient,
and to show that there must be of necessity an application. the Gospel
teaches this, Whosoever believes and repents, Mark. 16.16.
has Christ Jesus for his Savior: therefore there is this particular, Peter,
Paul, Cornelius, and the rest did believe and repent: therefore certainly they
are saved by this their application. The Apostle Paul says to the Iayler, Act.
16.31.
Act. 16. If thou beleevest in the Lord Jesus, thou shall be saved, and all
thine house. But he might presently have rejoined (by the doctrine of these
doting Doctors,) to the Apostles, Sirs, how do you know this? is my name
written in so many letters and syllables in the Scripture? But doubtless Paul
and Silas would have shaped him this answer, This is as true and certain by
the general rules, as if thy name were written therein. As for the particular
faith, it is written in our hearts, not in the Scriptures. But let us deal
with them according to their own practice. The Romish Priests take authority
to themselves to forgive sins, to bind and to loose; Ask any particular
Priest for his warrant, Ioh. 20.23. Matthew. 18.18.
he will allege a general Commission, Whose sins ye remit, they are
remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained, John 20.23. And he
supposed this to be sufficient, albeit his own name be not read and registered
therein. So then, if a man should demand by what authority they absolve? or who
gave them this authority? they think they have answered fully, that they are
the successors of the Apostles, and that therefore whatsoever they did, they
also have power and authority to do the same: and yet neither their names, nor
of such as are absolved by them, neither of the pardoners, nor of the pardoned
are written in holy Scripture. What then? May not we apply to our selves and to
our comfort and salvation, that which they do to others for gain and for
money? Lastly, this objection overthrows all piety and Religion. For if we be
not bound to be assured of our salvation, because it is not said in the
Scripture by name that we shall be saved; then it will follow that we are not
bound to be holy, nor to fear God, nor to be religious, because it is said in
Scripture by name, that we ought to be so. O, but it will be said, Jude 6.
who are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of
the great Day, have notwithstanding as much faith as the Romanists, for they
can say, I believe there is a God, one God, remission of sins sealed up by
Christ to salvation, but neither they, nor the Romanists ever came to make any
paticular application of these or any other promise to themselves. But what was
it the better for the Prodigal son, to know there was bread enough in his
fathers house, whiles in the mean season he had no part of it, Luke 15.17. 2
King. 7.4.
but was in danger to perish for hunger? or for the four Lepers to know there
was plenty enough in the Host of the Syrians, whiles themselves sat at the
gate of the City ready to die? but when once they came to taste thereof, they
soon found strength thereby. So it shall avail us nothing at all to know
there is much good in the Church for the Children of the Church, while there is
none at all in our own hearts.

Secondly, well. But all this while there is no talk of special faith, nor of
particular application. Their case must needs be lamentable, and they in a
damnable condition. Such are like to some sick men, who out of an evil
humor, and distemperature of the brain, persuade themselves that they may not
eat or drink, and that they are unworthy to touch and taste their meat, and
by this means are the causes of their own death and destruction: yet they
think they may see it, and look upon it, they may hear of it, and talk of
it, and they may reason about it, but by no means taste it, and touch it, and
eat of it. Thus it fares with common Christians, and this is the faith that
is commonly to be found every where: a sick faith, God wot; they think they
may hear of the promises by others, and talk of them to others, but by no
means they may apply them, which is as much as to feed upon them. These are in
a dangerous and damnable estate, like to a man that has an excellent remedy
and receipt for his wound, but he never applies it to the sore; or ^o a man
that has meat, but never takes it; such a one must needs famish himself, and
perish. For as our Savior says, He that eats me, Ioh. 6.57, 58.
even he shall live by me: he that eats not of this bread, that came down
from Heaven, shall not live for ever. If any of the Israelites being mortally
stung with the fiery Serpents should have said, I know, Numb. 21.6, 9.
God has appointed a sovereign remedy to heal me, but I am not worthy of it,
and therefore I dare not be so bold and presume to look upon the brazen
Serpent; would we not say, he perished justly? so may we be bold to say in this
case. 1 Timothy 1.15.
All men among us know that God has sent his Son into the world to save
sinners: howbeit if we go no further, we have no more benefit by it, then a
man that barely beholds food, but never feeds of it: can such food nourish
him? or such meat strengthen him? If we do not apply Christ and his death,
and all the promises of mercy and salvation to our selves, we are in the high
and broad way to destruction, his judgments follow us at the heels, and shall
overtake us. Jer. 17.10. I answer, We shall know it by these few notes. How we
may know whether we have true faith or not?
If we have the true faith, first we shall find the Devil an open enemy
unto us in the matter of this special faith. He will fight with us hand to
hand, Michael about the body of Moses, Jude 9. We are therefore seriously to
examine our selves, whether we find any doubts or distrust, and whether we
have not many questions arising in our hearts, which are ready to call our
faith into question, suggesting unto us, that we have no faith at all, thereby
shaking the very foundation of the house. If we find these wrastlings and
struglings in us, as Rebecca did of the twins that were in her womb, it is
an argument we have a true faith conceived in us. This rule is drawn out of
Christ's Words to his Disciples, Luke 22.31.
Luke 22. Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat. If
then we find and feel these assaults, these tentations, these buffettings, it
is a plain proof that we have received faith, which makes the Devil so
earnest and diligent to interrupt us and intercept us. whereunto we are most
inclined, and wherewith we are most infected, as most consonant and agreeable
to our corrupt natures. This is one infallible token that we are true
believers: and this rule is taken out of the words of Peter, Acts 15.9. Gal.
5.6.
He put no difference between Jews and Gentiles, purifying their hearts by
faith, Acts 15. which works by love, Gal. 5. Thirdly, Hos. 2.19, 20.
I will betroth them to me for ever in righteousness, in faithfulness, in
judgment, in loving kindness, and in mercy. Thus they are married to him in
holiness, and they become to be the members of Christ: for Christ cannot be
the head of a polluted body, or of defiled members. As from a corrupt head
proceed corrupt things to the members: so from a pure and holy head, which is
Christ, must necessarily proceed holiness to all those that are his members.
The Vine cannot but communicate of his juice or sap to the branches. There
was never any that did truly apply Christ, but Christ truly applied himself
to him again: neither was there ever any that embraced him, but he likewise by
and by took hold of him, His left hand is under his head, Cant. 2.6. and 8.3.
and his right hand does embrace him. The believer applies Christ, and Christ
holds the believer, so that as the believer says, I am Christ's, and Christ
is mine: so on the other side Christ says, I am the believers, and the
believer is mine. This application is mutual and mystical, there is a double
work in it, one is of the believer, the other of Christ. A man lays hold
upon a staff that he carries in his hand to stay himself up from falling,
but the staff cannot lay hold upon him again. Or a man claspeth and embraces
the tree with both his arms, but the tree cannot embrace him again: but it is
not so between Christ and the true believer: we hold him fast, but he holds
us faster, and gives unto us of his holiness, even grace for grace; even as
the child holds the Father fast that leads him, howbeit the father holds
him faster, and stays him up from falling away from him, otherwise he were
every foot in danger. True it is, we cannot say, that all our blackness of
sin is quite gone, and removed, but that we have still many spots and
wrinkles, we have not yet received perfect holiness from him. The Moon
receives all her light from the Sun, yet is not her body without some spots:
so it is with us, though we be black, Cant 1.5.
yet he accepts us as comely. Lastly, we have the true faith, Job 13.15.
as it was with Job, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: though he hide
his face for a time from us, yet the bright beams of faith will shine through
the thickest fogs and mists that arise in us. Thus we may by these notes prove
our faith, and try the truth thereof. But if these be not in us, but the
contrary, we cannot assure our selves, that we are yet come to a true faith.
For first of all, if we live in quiet and at rest, at peace and ease all our
days, without any fears, doubtings, wrastlings, bruisings, buffettings, and
assaults of Satan, we have cause to fear we have a false faith. This rule is
grounded upon the Words of Christ, Luke 11.21.
Luke 11. When a strong man armed keeps the Palace, his goods are in peace.
If Satan never assault us to pull down the buttresse and fortress of our
faith, we are at peace and league with him, and he with us, and we have just
cause to suspect our selves. True it is, there may be many doubts and
tentations, and yet no faith: but there can be no faith, where are no doubtings
or tentations at all. If we have faith, Wheresoever there is true faith, there
will be doubts and tentations.
there will arise doubts, yea, albeit we have a great and a strong faith: for
it is not so strong, but That strong man armed will try the strength thereof:
and so much the rather, because it is ever mingled with some infidelity. Such
then as can cry out, What? a doubt touching my salvation? Out upon it! O it is
a great sin once to make a doubt! I thank God I never doubted any whit of my
salvation since I can remember, neither yet of Christ to be mine: I doubt not
to pronounce of all such without any doubting at all, they never knew what
faith means, it is an evident demonstration of great and gross infidelity.
Again, if sin be living in us, that there be no mortification at all, 2 Cor.
7.1.
no cleansing of our selves from the filthiness of the flesh and spirit, we
can have no true faith. It is open impiety to imagine, that the death of Christ
truly applied to any soul, should not be of force to kill sin in it; and
therefore it is great folly to say, We can rightly apply Christ and the
promises of the Gospel, Col. 3.3, 4, 5.
and yet can show never a sin mortified in us. No man is come to that height
of sin, that he dares either speak or think, that there wants power in
the death of Christ to kill sin in us, and therefore we must needs hold him
for an unbeleever, that talks of particular application, and yet has sin
as a tyrant reigning in him. Besides, if Christ have not united us to himself
in holiness, we are yet faithless men. For he uniteth himself to none, but
he puts holiness in some measure into them. This rule is expressed by the
Apostle, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh, 2 Cor. 4.17.
with the affections and lusts, and are become new creatures. Lastly, if we
rely upon God, and upon his love and favor no longer then we have a lively and
sensible feeling of the same, while we live at ease and in prosperity, Job 29.6.
while we wash our steps in butter, and the Rock powers out rivers of oil,
shall we call this a true faith? Tit. 1.1.
The faith of the Elect, to make show of many good things in us so long only,
as God bestows good things upon us, and no longer? but if he once change our
estate, to be ready to repine against him, and to rent him in pieces, like mad
Dogs that fly in their Masters face? This rule arises from Satan's false
measuring of the practice of Job, Job 2.5.
Chap. 2.5. Put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he
will curse thee to thy face. This is contrary to the application of Gods
servants, who when he does afflict them, and his hand is most heavy upon them,
even then they stick fastest unto him, as the Traveller that claspeth his
cloak closest unto him in blusterous winds, and stormy weather. The hypocrites
will do this in time of prosperity only, whereas in trouble and persecution
they fall away, and are offended, Matthew. 13.21.

Lastly, A vveake faith applies as truly, as the strong faith.
to apply in particular the promises of God to himself. These may be
comforted, yea, these only, for they shall be sure to find God gracious unto
them in the end. If they be stung, they shall be sure to be healed, because
they are able to look up to the Brazen Serpent, that God had commanded to be
showed. If they be hungry, they shall be satisfied and saved, because they can
in part apply Gods promises to themselves. It is a rule that the Civilians
have, that mine is better then ours: so we say in this case of faith, for a man
to say by particular application, Christ is mine, is better then to say in
general, Christ is ours, or others: and God is my Father, then to say he is
our Father, or their Father. Nevertheless, we must not on the other side be
discouraged, to think or to fear we do not believe, when indeed we do
believe. True it is, unbeleevers doubt, and true believers doubt, and yet there
is great difference between the doubting of the one, and of the other. The
hypocrites or temporary believers are like a man that is in a dream, Esaias 29.8.
that thinks he eats, and behold, when he awaketh, he is hungry: that
thinks he drinks, and behold, when he awaketh, he is thirsty; that he
enjoys many good things, and when he awaketh, he is disappointed, and finds
no such matter. Or like one, who, being in a deep sleep supposes he holds
somewhat in his hand, and that he claspeth and gripeth it so fast, that none
shall be able to wring it, or wrest it from him by any means: howbeit when he
awaketh, his hand is empty, and he perceives plainly, he has nothing at all
in it. So do all temporizers, they have many a pleasant dream, they think
verily they have true faith, when indeed they have nothing less: they are
without the fears, and terrors, and tremblings, that Gods Children do often,
even in their best meditations find in themselves, whom Satan will not suffer
to be quiet. If any ask, How comes this to pass, Job, of David, and of
diverse others, that we might learn to walk by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7.
and not by sight or feeling. Sometimes, the heart of man, too full of
corruption, will cast forth doubts, as the Furnace does sparkles, concerning
his faith, seeking as it were to throw mire and dirt in the face of his faith:
and sometimes Satan is ready to interrupt us, and to hinder the course of our
believing, because he is evermore an enemy unto us. For the life of a Christian
is like the days of the year; one while the days are very fair, another
while they are full of clouds, of storms, and of showers. So a man that does
believe, shall sometimes find all fair, as when the Sun shines in his
strength, and have a long time of breathing and gathering new strength, lest he
should be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness. For as God will not suffer
the rod of the wicked to rest upon the back of the righteous, Psalm. 125.3.
lest he should put forth his hands to iniqiuty: so he will not suffer the
tentations of Satan to dwell evermore with him, and to continue upon him, lest
he should be discouraged and dis-heartned. Sometimes again, whiles storms and
tempests of doubting are raised, and the waves and floods of infidelity
threaten to drown, or at least to shake the four corners or pillars of the
house, that it may fall down: and we are like a troubled Sea, Job 7.19.
we have not leisure so much as to swallow our spittle; this falls out, lest
we should grow secure, and that he might draw us, or drive us thereby nearer to
himself. Then the Sun hides his face in a cloud: then we are full of
wavering. Notwithstanding, this may be no matter of discouragement, but rather
of much comfort and encouragement, forasmuch as this is a token of true faith;
and God does it for these ends, to make us more certain of our faith
afterward, to cause us to lay better hold on the promises of God, and to find
more joy in them at the latter end.

Good pleasure.) Here is the third branch of the promise, noting the ground
thereof; not the free will of man, but the good pleasure of God. From hence are
all good things conveied unto us. This is called in holy Scripture, His grace,
his mercy, his love, his kindness, his purpose, his will, the purpose of his
will, the good pleasure of his will, and such like, all of them pointing out
the supreme and highest cause of all the good meant toward us, and bestowed
upon us. Moses shows, Deuteronomy. 7.8. The cause why the Lord brought his people
out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and redeemed them out of the house of bondmen,
and from the hand of Pharaoh, was because he loved them. Deuteronomy. 7.8. Revel. 1.5.
Luke 2.14.
This is the saying of the Angels after the birth of Christ, Luke 2. Glory to
God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men. The Apostle James
teaches this, Iam. 1.18.
Of his own will begat he us with the Word of Truth. And Paul to like
purpose, He has opened to us the mystery of his Will, and has made us
accepted in his Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Phil. 2.13.
according to his rich grace. And elsewhere, It is God that works in you both
to will and to do of his good pleasure. This will further appear to be the
first mover that sets forward the other second causes. For our whole
salvation proceeds from the grace of God, as election, Christ himself,
vocation, faith, justification, regeneration, love, good works, conversion of
sinners, the final perseverance of the Saints, and eternal glorification.
Even as the body and branches of the tree, issue from the root: so is the good
pleasure of God the root, out of which all these blessings grow, which in due
time we partake. Let us see this better by induction of particulars. No man can
be saved and obtain eternal life, except he be predestined and chosen unto
it. For the Kingdom is not given but to such, for whom it is prepared, Matthew.
25.34. and 20.23. Ephesians. 1.4.
Matthew. 25.34. and 20.23. but this is done according to the good pleasure of
his will, Ephesians. 1.4. No man could be saved, except Christ Jesus had come, and
had satisfied the wrath of his Father for the sins of the world: Acts 4.12.
for there is no other name under Heaven, whereby we can be saved. But this
benefit proceeds from the grace of God, Ioh. 3.16.
and his everlasting love toward us, Ioh. 3.16. For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son for all that believe in him. There is
none saved that is come to years of discretion, except he be effectually
called to Christ and his Gospel; but whence comes this but from his grace?
for he has called us with an holy calling, according to his own purpose, 2 Timothy 1.9. Gal. 1.15.
which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. No man
is saved except he have faith, and believe in Christ, for the Just shall live
by his faith, Hab. 2.4. Heb. 11.6.
and without it, It is unpossible to please God: and whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. But from whence have we faith? it is by grace, Ephesians. 2.8.
Ephesians. 2. By grace ye are saved through faith, it is the gift of God. No man
can be saved, except also he be justified, Psalm. 34.15.
for the eyes of the Lord are over the just, but the face of the Lord is upon
the evil, to root out the remembrance of them from the earth, Psalm. 34. Now
whence is this, but from his free grace, Romans 3.24? We are justified freely by
his grace. Romans 3.24.
No man can be saved, except he be regenerated and sanctified by the holy
Spirit: for except a man be borne again, of water and the holy Ghost, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3.3.
Joh. 3.3. But whence is this also but from grace, that we should be holy, and
without blame before him, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Tit. 2.11, 12. 1 Cor. 16.14, 22.
Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Tit. 2.11, 12? No man can be saved without love toward God and
our neighbor. 1 Cor. 16.14. For he that loves not the brethren, abides in
death, 1 John 3.14. 1 Ioh. 3.14. and 4.7, 19.
But this love proceeds from grace, for love is God, 1 Ioh. 4.7, 19. and we
love him, because he loved us first. No man can be saved without bringing
forth good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
and walking in them, for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them: But this
comes from his grace, who has promised to give us his Spirit, Ezekiel. 36.
Ezekiel. 36.27.
I will cause them to walk in my ways. No man can be saved without remission
of sins, for in many things we all offend daily, Jam. 3.2. Iam. 3.2. Ephesians.
2.7. Esaias 43.25.
but this is from grace, Ephesians. 2.7. Esaias 43.25. No man can be saved, except
he persevere and continue in faith, in good works, and in all Christian
duties: for he that continues unto the end, shall be saved, Matthew. 24.13.
Matthew. 24.13.
but when the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned,
but in his sin that he has sinned, he shall die, Ezekiel. 18.24. Ezekiel. 18.24.
Now whence is this, that we stand fast? Is it from our selves? No, it is from
his grace, who will give them an heart to fear him for ever, Ier. 32.39. Phil.
1.6.
that they shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.39, 40. Phil. 1.6, Lastly, no man
can be saved without eternal life, for what is our salvation, but our
glorification? now this is also of grace, for here Christ says, It is the good
pleasure of our heavenly Father to give us the Kingdom; and the Apostle
elsewhere, Eternal life is the gift of God, Romans Romans 6.23.
6.23.

The reasons; first, Ephesians. 1.11, 12. Ephesians. 1.11, 12. Romans 11.36.
All things are from him, and through him, and for him, To him be rendered all
glory for ever, Romans 11.36. But if our salvation were any way of our selves,
that we did part stakes with him in the grace, there were reason we should
also share with him in the glory. Hence it is, that the Apostle says, Romans
4.2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not
before God.

Secondly, Romans 11.6.
Romans 11.6. If it be of grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace
were no more grace: but if it be of works, then it is no more grace, otherwise
work is no more work. Thus the Apostle reasons from the contrary.

Thirdly, Job 9.12. Romans 9.20. Esaias 10.15. and 45.9.
What do thou? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have
thou made me thus? Shall the clay say to him that fashioned it, What make
thou? Shall the Son say to the Father, What begettest thou? or to the Woman,
What have thou brought forth? Shall the Axe boast it self against him that
heweth therewith? Ier. 18.6.
Or shall the Saw magnify it self against him that shakes it? As if the Rod
should shake it self against them that lift it up? or as if the Staff should
lift up it self, as if it were no wood? Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker. Let the Potsheard strive with the Potsheards of the earth. Wherefore
albeit he showed no mercy on Cain, Esau, Saul, Ahab, Judas, and sundry others,
yet is he not herein unjust, for he was indebted unto them nothing at all.
Nay, more then all this, had he denied mercy to all mankind, and appointed all
the sons of Adam (of whom they come, as out of a corrupted mass) to endless
torments, as he did the Angels that fell, yet had he done them no wrong, but
executed upon them just judgment, and their deserved punishment, so that no
man can justly utter a word of complaint against him. Romans 11.51.
Hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans 11. Who has first given to him, and
it shall be recompensed unto him again?

This reprooveth two sorts. First, Cant. 1.4.
then we will, and work freely; and if we be drawn, we run after him.
What then, may some say? Are we stocks and stones without will, without life,
without motion? I answer, Not so: and sanctified manner. For not only we have
stony hearts, but also we rebel against God, and lift up our selves against
him, which stocks and stones never do against their Maker: Ioh. 15.5. Ephesians.
2.1.
so that Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing. And the Apostle, We
are borne dead in sins and trespasses. Whosoever therefore shall tell us, and
persuade us, that we have power of our selves to do that which is good, and
that we stand in need of nothing, but to be gently helped with the hand, to
walk in his ways, and need not to be wholly assisted and prevented by grace,
they are lying spirits, and false prophets, believe them not, bid them not God
speed, neither receive them to house. What a stir has there been
heretofore, and is yet in the Church of Rome, and among other Sectaries (and
who is ignorant of it?) about the matter of free will? Were he not a fond man,
who being fast bound in chains and irons, would talk of nothing but of his
present freedom and liberty? Yet this is the case with us; we are bondmen, and
yet we hold our selves to be free men: we have just cause therefore utterly to
abolish this name of Freewill, and learn to reason of our bond-will another
while. For we are as unfit to begin any good in our own selves, as the green
wood is to kindle in it self and of it self any fire or heat: which being
kindled, it is rather apt to be put out again. These never knew the greatness
of the fall of man, and the deadly wound that nature has received: for it is
God that works in us the will and the deed. And if both the deed and will it
self be Gods gifts, I would gladly know, what good gift we have left unto us
in nature? or what we can rightly challenge to our selves? God is Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the ending, and therefore all
power and ability is taken from us quite and clean of doing any thing that is
good. True it is, the first man Adam, before his transgression, had free will
to choose the good, and to refuse the evil, but by his fall he lost both it
and himself, both his liberty and his innocence. Man's freedom is a very
bondage.
For now our freedom is only to be free to sin: too free (alas) we are to
it, if that may be called a freedom, which indeed is the most miserable and
slavish bondage, while we can do nothing else but sin, lying as it were
fast bound in chains and fetters hand and foot. O, but a man that is fettered,
has at least a will and desire to be loosed. It is true of bodily captives and
prisoners, but it is not so with the natural man that is unregenerate. For as
he is fettered, so of himself he is willing and desirous to be so, he does
evil, and he will do it: he loves his chains as if they were of gold or
silver, Ephesians. 5.14. 2 Timothy 2.26.
and has no will to be raised from the dead sleep of sin. He thinks
himself at liberty, and as free as the best, when he is faster holden then the
worst Gallyslave. He is the servant of corruption, and yet he is offended with
him that moves him to shake off those heavy bolts and fetters, and to come out
of that bad and bond condition. The Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 2.14.
that the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Secondly, it reprooveth such as teach, that faith and works
foreseen, are the causes of our election to life and salvation. This were for
us to choose God, Faith foreseen is not the cause of our salvation
and not for God to choose us, whereas he witnesses the contrary. This is to
reject all infants from Gods Election, who are taken away by untimely death, as
corn that is reaped down in the green blade. This makes election to be
uncertain, and to depend upon the will and pleasure of men. This teaches that
grace is not the total cause of faith. This is as much as to begin our
spiritual life at our selves, and to give the praise to our selves, at least
in part, and not to God for the blessings that we receive from him. This is to
be afraid, lest we should be too much beholding to God for our salvation, and
too little to our own selves. 1 Cor. 1.29. The doctrine of the new Sectaries.
This is to rejoice in an arm of flesh, and not in the mercy of God, 1 Cor.
1.29. The new Sectaries teach that Election rests and depends upon the
foreknowledge of faith, and that it is made for faith foreseen, which the
sounder sort of Papists begin to be ashamed of, as appears in Bellarmine. The
Apostle teaches plainly, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
that all spiritual blessings whatsoever are given us according to Election,
before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. and therefore Election must
of necessity be before those blessings. Again, we are elected, that we should
be holy, and without blame: he says to holiness, not for any holiness, and
consequently to faith, not for faith. So Paul obtained mercy, 1 Cor. 7.25. Acts
22.14.
That he should be faithful, 1 Cor. 7.25. not because God considered him as
already faithful. Christ Jesus chose his Disciples not already bearing fruit,
but that they should bring forth fruit, Ioh. 15.16. Acts 13.48.
Ioh. 15.16. This also Luke shows, that such as were ordained to eternal
life believed, Act. 13. Election therefore is before faith, and it is the cause
why men do believe: whereas our new Sect-masters and Strife-makers set the
Apostle and the rest of the Church to School, and teach him to speak, as they
do young children, that they believed, and afterward were ordained to eternal
life. Romans 9.16.
The words of Paul, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy, could not be true, if God had mercy on men for faith
foreseen. For what could he foresee but his own gifts, which himself
determined to bestow upon us?

This teaches us also to pull down all high conceits of our own worth, as if
our salvation depended upon our own selves, and that we were able to guide
our ways, and order our steps to life: and on the other side, admonishes
all Gods Children to think humbly of themselves, and of all that they can do,
or have done touching the cause and foundation of their salvation, and withal
to magnify highly the riches of the mercy of God, and the abundance of the
love of Jesus Christ our Savior, shed abroad in our hearts, acknowledging the
beginning, proceeding, continuing, and finishing of our salvation to spring
from him only. True it is, our destruction is not of God, Hos. 13.9. Iam.
1.13, 14, 15.
but of our own selves, but our salvation is not of our selves, but of God.
Wherefore then has God chosen us and refused others? made us vessels to
honor, 2 Timothy 2.20. Romans 2.5.
and left others to be vessels to dishonor? why has he taken away the
hardness of our stony hearts, and given over others to walk in their
hardness, and hearts that cannot repent, as he did Pharaoh? Wherefore has he
sanctified us with his Spirit, and passed by many thousand others, that they
might work out their own destruction and damnation? Doubtless he has not
done all these, nor any one of all these things for any good he saw in us, nor
for any goodness he foresaw would be in us, nor for any inclination to
goodness he could perceive in us, nor for any works of preparation to make
us fit for grace: for what could he see in us, though he be of pure eyes, but
matter of his wrath to feed upon, as the fire does upon the fuel? It was not
greatness of wealth, nobleness of birth, highness of estate, worthiness of
condition, multitude of friends, that he respected, who respects no man's
person: so that when we consider what we are of our selves, and how graciously
God has dealt toward us, we should cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33.

Lastly, Matthew. 15.18.
as evil thoughts come from within, and do defile us, as water coming from
an unclean fountain. All our good is of his good pleasure, and therefore it
is good reason, that he should be honored and glorified in it, and for it.
Hence it is, that the Apostle says, What is it that thou have not received?
We are so far from coming to our iournyes end without his direction, that
we cannot set one foot forward in the right way. We are so far from being
able to practice any thing that is good, that we have no power to prepare our
selves to it, Psalm. 10.17.
forasmuch as it is he that prepares the heart, Psalm. 10.17. And the Apostle
says, We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, 2 Cor. 3.5.
but all our sufficiency is of God. This use does Christ our Savior point
unto, Mat. 11. I thank thee, O Father, Matthew. 11.25, 26.
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them to babes; even so, Father, for it seemed good
in thy sight. That which Christ our Savior does, ought we all to practice and
perform. It belongs to all the Elect and godly to show great love to him
that has loved us first, and continual thankfulness toward him, because we
hold our selves and all that we have of his gracious favor. We enjoy not any
good through our own deservings, but all besides our merits, nay directly
against our merits. For by the guilt of sin, we deserve to be in the same
condition with the reprobate; and it is the great goodness and mercy of God
who has separated us, and allotted unto us a better estate, and that it goes
better with us. How often do we requite his love with unkindnesse? for we
give him nothing, but he gives us all: neither do we prevent his liberality,
but he preventeth our ability (if any were) to work in us such duties as may
please him.

To give.) The fourth branch of the reason. These words contain the manner of
bestowing the promise, and the means how it is convaied unto us. As the
fountain of it is Gods good pleasure, so the channel to convay it, is his free
gift. Some kind of gifts are given, but they are first well deserved by them
that receive them. Again, some things are given, Luke 14.11.
but it is with hope and expectation to have as great or greater bestowed upon
them again, as they that give to Kings and Princes. Some things are said to be
given, when a sufficient recompense is tendered and offered withal, as Genesis
23.9. Give me the cave for as much money as it is worth: Genesis 23.9.
and 1. King 12.2. Give me thy Vineyard, and I will give thee for it a better
Vineyard then it. This giving by way of commutative justice, is no other then
bargain and sale or exchange. But it is not thus with the gifts of God, who is
a free giver and bestower, he does not alter them, neither barter them for
other, he does not chop and change, buy and sell his blessings, as men do
Bullockes in a market, that he should be as much beholding to us, as we to him:
He offers with a willing heart, Ephesians. 1.7.
yet was this also of mere grace. We have Redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of our sins, according to the riches of his grace. So then,
albeit Salvation were purchased, and as I may say, dearly bought in respect of
Christ, yet neither the whole work, nor any part or parcel thereof was
purchased in regard of our selves, who are made partakers thereof through Gods
special grace. We confer nothing toward the attainement of Salvation, to
procure to our selves this unspeakable benefit. We cannot gratify Christ
Jesus again in any matter or measure, Esaias 63.3.
who trod the wine press of the wrath of the Father alone for us, and has
paid the utmost farthing that could be required of us, and therefore it comes
as a mere gratuity unto us without any purchase or payment, without any money
or satisfaction. Romans 3.24. and 6.23.
This the Apostle teaches, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ, and Chap. 6.23. The gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. And Peter speaks to the same
purpose, 2 Pet. 1.3.
According to his divine power he has given us all things that pertain unto
life and godliness, 2. Pet. 1.3. Thus the Prophet long before proclaimed the
free gift of God, without either money or money-worth, or any price; all that
are a-thirst may come freely to the waters of life, Revel. 22.17. Esaias 55.1, 2.
John 7.37.

The reasons are, Jam. 1. They spring not out of the earth, Iam. 1.17. Ioh.
3.27.
as John 3. A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from above;
neither yet come unto Christ, except the Father draw him, John 6.

Secondly, our daily bread given unto us. Matthew. 6.11. Deuteronomy. 9.5.
The Israelites could not inherit the Land of Canaan by any inherent
righteousness in themselves, and the uprightnes of their hearts, neither yet
conquer it by their own sword, Psalm. 44.3. Psalm. 44.3.
They gate not the Land in possession by their own sword, neither did their
own arm save them, but thy right hand, and the light of thy countenance,
because thou had a favor unto them; much less then are we able to possess
the heavenly Canaan by any godliness in our own persons.

This doctrine overthrows all Justification by our own works and merits,
whether done before grace, Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh
be justified in his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. And Tit.
3. Romans 3.20.
The kindness and love of God appeared, Tit. 3.4, 5.
not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us: and again, 2. Tim. 1.9. He has saved us and called us by an
holy calling, 2 Timothy 1.9.
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which
is given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. What can works before a
man's conversion avail, for as much as we are borne dead in sins and
trespasses, as we have showed before, being without faith, without hope,
without any good, so that we should be justified by our sins, and our
righteousness should be by unrighteousness, if we should be justified by
these or any such works? Neither can works of righteousness done in faith,
and after our conversion present us as righteous in the sight of God, because
they are all unperfect, even the best and the holiest of them, that we cannot
challenge righteousness by them, Psalm. 143.2. and 130. 3. and. 32.1, 2.
but must with the Prophet cry out, Lord, enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. And again to like
purpose, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? but
there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. This is our
justification to obtain remission of our sins, Psalm. 32. The Servants of God
do not in the pride of their hearts advance themselves against God through
their own righteousness, but they ask forgiveness for their
unrighteousness. The Apostle John says, 1 Job. 1.10.
If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his Word is not in
us. All our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, Esaias 64.6.
spotted with the flesh. Luke 4.8. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
as we see the like case in Christ our Savior, Luke 4.8. compares with Deuteronomy.
6.13. who adds that word without any correction, or corruption, or without
any violence to the Text. Again, the Scripture teaches, that we are justified
without works, not by the works of the Law. If then works be excluded, what
can be included? or what is there established but faith? what can have place in
our justification beside the same? For to say that a man is justified by faith
only, and to say that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
Law, are equivalent and in effect all one thing. Even as he that says, The
husband ought to be master of the house, and not the wife, says in effect that
the husband only ought to be master, especially when the Question arises,
whether the man or the woman ought to be master: for albeit he express not the
word (only) yet all men know it is necessarily to be supplied: So he that
says, a man is justified by faith without works, implies withal that a man
is justified by faith only, when the Question stands, whether a man be
justified by faith, or by good works, or by the one and the other joined
together, albeit he do not expressly add the word only. But it is further
objected, Paul excludes, are the works of the Ceremonial Law, and that
sometimes he excludes the works of Nature only, and not of Grace. I answer,
Romans 4.2, 6.
brings in the example of Abraham and David, even when they were in Gods
favor. Observe farther for the clearing of this point, that he, in all his
treatises of justification which are many and large, never exhorts us to be
justified, no more then he does to be elected. Search the Epistle to the
Romans, to the Galatians, and other his Epistles; or the Epistles of Peter and
John, and James, ye shall never find an exhortation to be justified; but in
these and other Scriptures, we have a thousand exhortations to be holy and
sanctified. True it is, we are warned to make our election and calling sure, as
also we may be, to make our justification sure. But what may be the reason
hereof? doubtless, because justification is not a virtue in man, but a grace
of God, whereby he absolveth sinners in beholding his Son, as in Civil
Courts, Justification is an Act of the Judge, not a virtue in him that is to be
judged. Romans 5.9.
Therefore he says, We are justified by the blood of Christ; but if by
justifying he had meant sanctifying or regenerating of us, he would rather
have said, we are justified by the Spirit of Christ: besides they are
expressly distinguished elsewhere, 1 Cor. 1.30. Again, the same Apostle
concluding, that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law,
Romans 3.20.
must be understood to understand the Moral Law, to wit, the same Law, by
which he teaches that those which have sinned shall be judged. And afterward,
that the Gentiles which have not the Law, Romans 2.12, 14. and 4.2.
do by Nature the things contained in the Law. And again, chapter 4. when he
insisteth upon the example of Abraham, that he was not justified by works, it
had been in vain to go about to prove, that he was not justified by the
works of the Ceremonial Law. For what had this been, but to fight with his
own shadow, seeing the Ceremonial Law was not then ordained, neither was
established, until four hundred years afterward? The like I might show out
of the Epistle to the Galatians; For when he teaches, Gal. 2.16.
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, he excludes the works
not only of the Ceremonial Law, but of the Moral Law especially, as
appears in the next Chapter, where he shows, that Christ Jesus has
delivered us from the curse of the Law, even of that Law which says, Gal.
3.26. and 5.14.
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them; where only the Moral Law is spoken of. And in
the 5. Chapter he tells them, that all the Law is fulfilled in one word,
which is this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. O, but it may be
said, This is no better then to abolish and destroy good works utterly, when
they are excluded from justification: and to make our selves enemies to good
works, that we may live as we list, because we teach that we cannot stand
righteous by them in the sight of God. God forbid. Nay, Bellarmine himself as
a witness no way partial to us, speak for us, lib. 4. de Justif. cap. 7.
Bellarm. lib. 4. De Iustific. cap. 7
Adversarij in eo convenient, etc. ut opera bona fieri debeant, quoniam alioqui
fides non esset viva, nec vera, nisi fructus bonos faceret, quomodo ignis non
est ignis nisi calefaciat: that is, It is agreed by our Adversaries, that
goodworkes, in regard of the necessity of their presence, are necessary to
salvation, and ought to be done, because otherwise faith could not be lively
and true, unless it does bring forth good fruits, as fire cannot be fire,
except it give heat. So then, we cannot be judged to condemn good works, even
our Adversaries themselves being judges: yea we confess a necessity of them,
as themselves confess. Besides, the same Bellarmine, after all his magnifying
of the dignity of good works to the highest strain, as the wringing of the
nose brings forth blood, Prove. 30.33.
so he teaches they are able to endure the Justice and Judgment of God: yet
I say after all this, he witnesses and confesses thus much in his own
words, Bellarm. De Iustific. lib. 2. cap. 3
Justificamur a Deo gratis, id est, ex mera ejus liberalitate, quantum ad
nostra merita, nullo enim nostro opere meremur justificari, that is, We are
justified of God freely, that is, of his mere liberality, as touching our own
merits, for we deserve by no work of our own to be justified. Now what, I
pray you, ye Romanists, do we teach more then he teaches in those words?
And yet farther touching works he shows, as I have showed elsewhere,
Bellarm. De Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 7 propos. 3.
that for the uncertainty of our righteousness, and the danger of vain glory,
it is a most safe thing to put our whole trust in the mercy and bountifulness
of God only. And immediately after, Nemoabsque revelatione certo scire potest
habere vera merita, aut in eis ad finem usque perseveraturum, that is, No man
can without a revelation know certainly, that he has any true merits, or
whether he shall continue in them unto the end. I wonder therefore how they can
warrant the works of suprerogation in any of the Saints, and how they dare
take upon them to dispense the overplus of their merits, when they avouch,
that no man knows himself whether he have any true merits? do they know
the merits of other better then of themselves? or can they dispense that
whereof the Saints themselves are ignorant? and what do they then mean to
boast so much, and babble so often of their merits, when this great master at
Rome, and a Cardinal of that purple Whore affirms, that no man, and
therefore not himself, certainly knows, whether he has any merits at all,
or not: and that it is therefore the safest course for all men to rely upon the
mercy of God only? Thus they say and unsay, they affirm and deny, they bind
and loose, they blow hot and cold at their own pleasure.

Secondly, acknowledge from hence, Ioh. 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is
borne of the Spirit. This truth the Apostle teaches, pointing out the steps
whereby we attain to salvation, as it were to the top of a mountain, he
takes the beginning of all at God, who sends out Pastors for the work of
the ministry, Romans 10.15. Ephesians. 4.12.
and the edification of the body of Christ. And that the work might every way
appear to be free, he causes it to rain upon one City, Amos 4.7.
and causes it not to rain upon another: one piece was rained upon, and the
piece whereupon it rained not, withered away. And as it is his gift that we
have the Word, so it is a gift no less then the former, to clear the eyes of
our understanding, that the Word vanish not away, as the corn that is blasted:
otherwise we may hear it, and yet have no profit by it. The Jews were as
sheep without a Shepherd, scattered abroad: what was the cause that they were
gathered together? Matthew. 9.36. Acts 16.9, 10, 6, 7.
Christ Jesus had compassion upon them, Matthew. 9. The Apostle had a vision, A
man of Macedonia stood by him, and prayed him to come among them: whereby he
gathered that the Lord had called them to preach the Gospel unto them. Again,
they were forbidden to preach the Word in Asia, and the Spirit suffered them
not to go into Bithynia. This puts us in mind of sundry other duties, as
branches thereof: Heb. 5.11.
First, we are by nature dull of hearing; we have ears, but we cannot hear,
until the Lord open them, Acts 16.14.
as he did Lydias, that she attended to the words that were spoken: we have
hearts, indeed, but we cannot understand, until God open them, as he did the
hearts of the two Disciples that were going to Emaus, who said, Did not our
hearts burn within us, Luke 24.32.
while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures?
And likewise of those that heard Peter, who were pricked in their hearts, Acts
2.37.
and said to the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? We have eyes
indeed, but we are stark blind, until he open them, who came into the
world, Ioh. 9.39.
that they which see not, might see, Ioh. 9. and he sent the Apostle to open
the eyes of the Gentiles, and to turn them from darkness to light, Acts
26.18. Secondly, we know not the mysteries of Gods Kingdom: for albeit they be
the wisdom of God, yet to us, that are by nature foolish, they are
foolishness, Mark 4.11.
therefore it must be given to us to know them, whereas to them that are
without, all things are done in parables. Thirdly, we must beg of God to take
away the scales from our eyes, and the stone out of our hearts, and to give us
hearts of flesh. Thus the Prophet prays oftentimes to God, Psalm 119.18, 27,
34.
to give him understanding. Fourthly, it is our duty to come into the house of
God, the School of all spiritual wisdom. This is the House of prayer and
preaching, the place where his honor dwells. This is Mount Sion, wherein he
pleases to reside, and has promised to dwell. God is present with such, and
in the midst of them that hear his Word. But how can we look to have his
graces bestowed upon us, if we resort not to his gate where they are
distributed? Fifthly, hearken and attend to the things taught and delivered with
all diligence, Heb. 2.1.
lest they slip from us, as wholesome liquor out of a rent or riven and broken
vessel, Heb. 2. Lastly, the greater that the means are which are offered, the
greater is his mercy toward us: and the greater his mercy is, the greater
obedience he requires at our hands. He deals not so with every people: but
if these be rejected of us, the greater is our sin: the greater our sin,
the greater is his wrath: and the greater his wrath, the greater shall be our
punishment, as Luke 12. Luke 12.48.
Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom men
have committed much, of him they will ask the more.

Thirdly, ten thousand talents, Matthew. 18. Matthew. 18.24.
and yet have not one penny or mite to make payment, and to discharge the debt,
considering that God offers his gifts frankly and freely unto us, and
stands not as a merciless creditor upon our own satisfaction. This puts
us in mind, first of all of our own disability, to give any ransom or
recompense unto him: for then his gifts should not be free. Secondly, God
offers and propounds his gifts to such as have nothing to give, and
pronounces the poor in spirit to be blessed, Matthew. 5.3. Esaias 55.1.
so that our buying of him is without any money: nay, the offering of him
money, and tendering any payment to him, is like Simons offering money to buy
the gifts of the holy Ghost, which is such a bar lying in our way, that we
may be sure never to attain unto them. True it is, the graces of God are many
in number, excellent in value, and great in measure: yet if they were open and
offered to none but to such as can well deserve them, and thoroughly recompense
them, what profit should we have thereby? Thirdly, his grace is set forth and
magnified by our want and weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 2 Cor. 12.9. Romans 6.20.
and where sin abounds, his grace much more abounds, Romans 6. Fourthly, we
must be humble in our own eyes, considering that we have nothing which we
have not received: 1 Cor. 4.7.
and therefore why should we boast, as if we had not received the same? He that
has nothing at home, must seek abroad, as Jacob that wanted corn, was glad to
send far for it to the King of Egypt. Solomon says, Prove. 18.23.
The poor uses entreaties, or makes supplications. If we could thoroughly be
brought to know, to feel, and to sigh for our own barrenness and emptiness,
it would constrain us to go out of our selves, and to have recourse to God for
the supplying of our wants. Lastly, we should freely yield him our obedience,
as he freely yields to us a plentiful measure of his grace. We have all of
us freely received; let us therefore likewise freely give to him the honor
that is due to his name. If we will not do this, we will do nothing.

Fourthly, Ioh. 6.68.
who gives liberally, and reproacheth no man. For as the Apostle says, To
whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal Life: so I may say, The
Wellhead is in Heaven, whither then shall we go, but to God that dwells in
the Heavens? This does the Apostle teach, If any man want wisdom, let him
ask of God, Jam. 1. True it is, God has a treasury of his graces, and he is
also by nature full of bounty, and his hands always open and extended to
bestow somewhat: but what shall this help or further us, if we do not duly
and daily make suit and supplication unto him? The graces of God are offered
and bestowed: but to whom are they offered, and upon whom are they bestowed?
doubtless upon them, and to them only that ask after them, Matthew. 7.7.
that seek for them, and knock at the Gate of God to receive them, as poor
men do for an alms at rich men's doors. If then we be destitute of them, where
is the fault of our emptiness, but in our selves, that never desire them? or
if we do, it is so coldly, as if we cared not whether we obtain them or not?
If we did in that manner crave any thing at the hands of mortal men, we
should teach them to deny us that which we crave. The treasures of God being
precious, are kept locked up, prayer is as the Key that opens the Closet,
that we may take up so much as we need. Again, they are in Heaven, and
therefore we ought to be more in Heaven then we are, and to carry our souls
thither with us, and not ever lie groaning, and grovelling upon the earth. Prayer
is a familiar communication and conference with God, and that with boldness,
yet with reverence, as it were to bind him to his own word, that is gone out
of his own mouth. The greatest enemy thereunto is the Devil, Zach. 3.1.
that stands as it were at our right hand to resist us, when we would call
upon God. Acts 16.16.
When Paul and the Disciples prepared to go to prayer, the Devil, that had
possessed a Damsel, stirred her up to call and cry after them, and so to
disturb and destroy that holy action. And no marvel. For he knows, as well
as if he were of our secret counsel, what we desire and demand, and what we
aim at, namely, to gather strength, and get supply against him; and therefore
Christ says to the seventy Disciples returning from preaching and praying,
Luke 10.18.
I beheld Satan as lightning fall down from Heaven, as the Amalekites at the
prayer of Moses were discomfited. Exodus 17.11.
So he teaches us to pray daily, Not to be led into tentation, but to be
delivered from evil: and thereupon he bestirreth himself, not only to
corrupt the doctrine, but to hinder the practice and performance thereof. And
if he can draw us to live in some open and known sin, he thereby stops
our mouths, and stifleth our prayers, and shakes our confidence to obtain
that which we desire, forasmuch as God hears not sinners, as we noted before.

Lastly, Ioh. 3.26. Acts 10.25. and 14.11.
as John's Disciples did to their Master, as Cornelius to Peter, and as they of
Lycaonia to Paul and Barnabas, and to forget God the Author and Fountain of
all good things. This made the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 3.7.
Neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that
gives the increase. God is all in all, and let him have the glory for all.
This the Prophet teaches, Psalm. 103.1. As then the former use directs us to
ask such things as we want, so this teaches us to return praise and glory
when they are obtained, Psalm. 50.23.
forasmuch as he that offers praise, glorifyeth him: he that offers him
not praise, glorifieth him not. The Prophets and Apostles seldom mention the
great works of God the Father, and of his Son Iefus Christ wrought for our
redemption, and salvation, but they break out into the praises of God, Esaias
12.1, 2. Gal. 1.5. Ephesians. 3.21. Revel. 1.5, 6. 1 Timothy 1.15, 16, 17. It is a
fearful sign of little or no grace received or regarded, that we are so cold
and seldom in thanksgiving: whereas he that has received much, will also be
much in offering to God the calves of his lips. If we can open our mouths to
pray for our own good, and then presently shut them again, so soon as we
have obtained our suit, (like the unthankefull Lepers) and should render
thanks to him for them, we are unworthy either to receive any new blessings,
or to retain the old, having justly forfeited them into his hands.

Unto you.) In these words we have a description of the object of the promise,
You; that is, the little Flock mentioned in the words before. In the former
words we heard of the Donor or Giver of the promise, to wit, the Father: now of
the donee, or persons to whom the Kingdom promised is given, and for whom it
is prepared, for the Sheep of Christ. Wherein observe, that our Savior says
not, The Father will give to all men the Kingdom without any limitation or
exception, without any difference or distinction. This were an happy matter and
joyful news, to hear that all shall inherit the Kingdom, that all shall be
made Kings, and wear Crowns of gold: but such are divellish Teachers and
spreaders of false news, who will have this Kingdom equally prepared for all,
and equally propounded to all. For Christ has made an enclosure, and separated
it as with an high wall from the world, as he did the Garden of Eden from the
rest of the earth, wherein the beasts abode, that it lies not open for the
unclean and profane. This reward shall be given to the Sheep of Christ, and
to them only, To you it shall be given. the Kingdom of heaven is not given to
all persons whatsoever, but only to his own, as Dan. 12. Many of them that
sleep in the dust shall awake, Dan. 12.2, 3.
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. All
indeed shall arise, but all shall not arise to everlasting life, but some
only. And Revel. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, Revel. 21.27. Matthew. 19.28, 29. Ioh. 10.28. and 17.22, 24.
neither whatsoever works abomination, etc. So Christ speaks John 20.28. My
Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, and Chap. 17. Christ praying
for all that shall believe in him, says, The glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one as we are one. And afterward, Father, I
will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory which thou have given me. And Matthew. ^5.46. They which do
not cloth. nor feed, nor visit poor distressed Christians, Matthew. 25.46.
shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.
See more, 1 John 3.2. Colos. 3.3. 2 Timothy 2.19. John 3.16. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

This will farther appear by reason. Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before
the foundation of the world. So then, such only as are Elected shall be
glorified: but all are not Elected, because a general election is no election.
For he that takes all, does not make any choice of any; and many are called,
but few are chosen. Hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans 8. Whom he
predestined, Romans 8.30.
them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. But all are not glorified, because all are
not justified: all are not justified, because all are not called: and all are
not called, because all are not predestined.

Secondly, such as are Goats, Depart from me, ye cursed, Matthew. 25.45.
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels, Matthew. 25.
Seeing therefore everlasting destruction is prepared for all the Reprobate, it
cannot be that the Kingdom of heaven should be given unto all men.

Thirdly, such only are saved as have faith, These. 3. He would have the
Thessalonians pray, that he might be delivered from unreasonable and wicked
men, 2 These. 3.2.
because all men have not faith. And if we cannot please God without it,
doubtless we cannot be saved without it.

Fourthly, only such are saved, the mystery of the Kingdom revealed unto
them. For the Lord will teach the meek his way, and the secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him: but this mystery is not known to any that are
without, Mark 4.11.
but all things are done to them in Parables, Mar. 4.11.

Conclude from hence the damnable heresy of such as hold, That all men shall
be saved, and the Commonwealth to ruin? We may not therefore so extend the
mercy of God at large, that we shrink up the sinews, and cut short the
cords of his Justice. Heaven is commonly presumed by these, to be as a common
Inn, in which all shall stay and rest that list, without difference or
exception: or as the earth which is a common mother, in the womb whereof all
must take up their lodging. This is a notable illusion of the Devil, who,
being damned himself, and deprived of the glory of God, seeks to deceive
men, and to draw them into that estate into which he himself is fallen. If he
can once bring his disciples and followers to this folly, nay impiety, nay the
top of all impiety, to persuade them that they may do what they will, and live
as profanely as they list, because (forsooth) all shall be faved: he has
gotten full possession of them, they are become his own, he has them fast
bound to him in chains and fetters, that they cannot break away from him. For
who will regard godliness of life, that is persuaded that all men must be
saved? as if the punishment of hell so often threatened in the holy Scriptures,
were old wives fables, to make men merry, or an idle scarecrow to make them
afraid; or else a poetical fiction to delight the reader. But while such men
dream of salvation in heaven, let them take heed they have not their portion
in hell. The Apostle Paul labored more abundantly then the rest, yet after all
his labors and sufferings, and care of all the Churches, he gained not all: he
submitted himself to the condition of all, both Jews, and Gentiles, yea, 1
Cor. 9.22.
he became all things to all men, that he might by all means save (not all,
but) some, 1 Cor. 9. And what some this is in comparison of the rest; the Acts
of the Apostles sufficiently declare, sometimes one, sometimes two, create any
man to be damned? If not, then they shall be saved. To say he did, makes him
unjust. I answer, Prove. 16.4.
even the wicked for the day of evil, as Solomon teaches: So it is said of
Pharaoh To. 9. For this same purpose I have raised thee up, Romans 9.17, 18,
that I might show my power in thee, and that my Name might be declared
thorowout all the earth: therefore He has mercy on whom He will have mercy,
and whom He will, He hardneth. Secondly, God does consider man as fallen, and
thereby having lost the happiness wherein he was created. This befell him for
his own grievous sin, Genesis 3. The more grievous, by how much the goodness
of God toward him was the greater, and the power whereby he was enabled to
stand the stronger. Besides, by the sin of our first Parents, we all were
defiled, no less then if Satan had tempted us in the Garden, and we in our
persons had harkened to his voice, had tasted of the forbidden fruit actually,
and had stretched out our hand to receive the same, as Romans 5.12. By one man,
sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12, 15, 17.
and death by sin, and so death went over all men, for as much as all men
have sinned. Thus also afterward, By the offense of one, the fault came on all
men to condemnation, and by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, as by
the obedience of One, many are made righteous. Romans 11.32. If upon all, then
none, no, Romans 11.32.
not one shall be condemned. I answer, Romans 10.12, 13. Gal. 3.22.
as appears by comparing of other Scriptures, as Romans 10, 12, 13. He is rich
to all that call upon him: and Gal. 3. where all is limited and restrained to
all believers, to all the Elect, and to them only.

Secondly, has foundations, Heb. 11.10.
whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11? It is a sore punishment to have
judgment to be burned, notwithstanding that the fire quickly consumes the
body to dust and ashes: how much more to be cast into the fire that never goes
out? Who knows not what a fearful judgment it was to be cast into the
Den of Lions, Dan. 6.16.
as Daniel was? how much more to be cast into the dark Dungeon and Den of the
Devils, which are Lions always roaring after their prey? A sore judgment to
be committed to perpetual imprisonment, and to lie there with bolts of iron as
many as he can bear, and to have none suffered to come to comfort him: how
much more to be cast into the prison of hell, 1 Pet. 3.19. Revel. 20.7.
in which there is no release, out of which there is no recovery? nay all these
punishments, if they could be put together, what are they but as painted fires,
painted dens, painted prisons, painted pains, in comparison of the
everlasting punishment in hell, and those unspeakable torments? It is a
grievous punishment to be thrust out of the visible Church in this life, Genesis
4.14. and 21.10.
as Cain was out of the house of Adam, as Hagar with her son Ishmael out of
the house of Abraham: but a thousand times more fearful to be thrust out of
the house of God in heaven, from the glorious presence of God and his Angels?
Alas, what benefit or comfort shall these have, to know that God has prepared
a Kingdom and an Inheritance, immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not,
Matthew. 8.11, 12. 1 Cor. 6.9.
and to see Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, and all the Prophets and people of God
in the Kingdom of heaven, and themselves shut out of doors, Math. 8.11. 1 Cor.
6.9? This cannot but be a terror, nay, a terror of all terrors, to consider
that God has appointed a certain day, Acts 17.31. Romans 2.5. Jude 15.
in which he will judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17. He will rebuke
the ungodly of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed. This
terror will be acknowledged the greater for these causes. First, they shall
hear the dreadful thunder of Christ's fearful voice summoning them to
Judgment. 1 Cor. 15.52.
For the Archangell shall blow the Trumpet so shrill, that the dead shall hear
the sound thereof, and hearing it, 1 These. 4.16.
shall arise and come to Judgment. Secondly, they shall be all compelled,
though sore against their wills, to appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, being gathered and assembled from the four winds of heaven. If
malefactors be hardly drawn before Magistrates to receive worthy punishment
for their offenses: how much more will the Reprobate strive and struggle, to
keep themselves (if it might be,) from the presence of him that sits upon
the Throne? and rather say to the mountains, Fall upon us; and to the hills,
Cover us? Thirdly, Luke 23.30.
they shall stand as poor caitiffes at the left hand of Christ, as a sign of
miserable disgrace, especially when they shall behold the Righteous on his
right hand, in token of their honor and advancement, whom they in their life
time have despised. For as the right hand has bin taken for a token of
acceptance and receiving into favor, 1 King 2.19. So on the other side, the
left hand has been accounted ominous, and a token of rejection. Psalm. 50.3. 2
These. 1.8. Exodus 19.18, 19, 16. and 20.18.
Fourthly, a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be tempestuous round
about him, Psalm. 50. So it was at the giving of the Law in mount Sinai, which
was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire, and the
smoke thereof ascended, as the smoke of a Furnace, and the whole mount quaked
greatly: there were thunders and lightnings, and the voice of the Trumpet
exceeding loud and sounding long, so that all the people trembled. But the fire
and the fear shall be much greater at the last day, when the Lord Jesus shall
appear in great glory, when the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, 2 Pet.
3.10.
the earth also, and all the works therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10.
Fifthly, they shall have shame and perpetual contempt powered upon them, so that
they shall be shamed for ever before many witnesses before men and Angels, even
before all the world, Dan. 12.2. Forasmuch as there is nothing secret, that
shall not be evident and come to light. This the Lord teaches by the Prophet,
These things have thou done, Psalm. 50.21.
and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy
self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
Lastly, they shall have the Sentence of death and damnation pronounced against
them; the misery whereof stands in three points. First, in feeling pains
intolerable, unspeakable, and unsupportable, not to be uttered by the tongue of
man. We see how terrible and tedious many diseases are, and what torments they
bring to the body in this life: but what are they to the torments of hell? For
as all the comforts and pleasutes of this life, are nothing in comparison of
the joys of heaven, 1 Cor. 2.9.
the eye has not seen them, the care has not heard them, the heart cannot
comprehend them: So I may say of the punishments of damned souls. Neither has
the eye of man seen them, neither the ear of man heard them, neither can the
heart fully conceive of them as they are indeed. Only the Scripture expresses
them by things most bitter and violent, that we might in some sort attain to
the knowledge of them: and therefore the Apostle says, Romans 2. Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil.
Secondly, in a separation from God, from Christ, from the Angels, from all the
righteous, from all comfort, and from eternal glory. A pain and punishment no
less then the former, to see the Saints, whom they thorowout their whole life
have mocked and misused, and judged to be fools and mad men, now honored and
advanced to the Kingdom of God, and themselves in greatest disgrace for ever.
The sight doubtless of the felicity of others, shall aggravate and increase
their own misery. Thirdly, in the fellowship that the Reprobate shall have
with the Devil and his angels. They that now will seem to shake and tremble
at the very naked naming of the Devil, and cannot abide to hear of him; they
that are ready to defy, and deny, and detest him in words, yea, to bless
themselves when any mention is made of him: alas, alas, now they must be
constrained to abide this, as a part of their cursed condition, to have the
continual fellowship of the Devil, and the rest of the damned crew, and of
none other but of them. David complains of it, as of a great misery, and a
woe much to be bewailed and lamented, that he did soiourne in Mesech, and dwell
in the Tents of Kedar: but woe, woe, woe, again and again, to those, that
must not sojourne for a season, but dwell for ever and ever; not in Mesech or
Kedar, but in the house of darkness, with the Devil the Prince of
darkness, where they shall be cast into utter darkness; Mitth. 8.12.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Lastly, acknowledge the wonderful mercy of God toward his Children, who has
loved them with a special and unspeakable love. True it is, the Reprobate have
many blessings in this life, because they live among the godly, and for their
sakes, because God would leave them without excuse, and stop their mouths
for ever, because he would teach his own servants not to place any happiness
in them, but to look for greater blessings in the other life: howbeit they
have not such among them all, Genesis 25.5, 6.
as do accompany salvation. For as Abraham gave sundry blessings to the sons
of the Concubines, but he made Isaak the son of the free woman to be his
heir: so God bestows common gifts, Matthew. 5.45.
and many temporal blessings upon the Reprobates, he makes his Sun to rise
on the evil and on the good, and sends rain upon the just and unjust:
howbeit he makes them not his heirs, for as much as spiritual and eternal
graces are communicated to none, but to the Elect, which shall be inheriters of
Salvation, and for them he has prepared the Kingdom. Why may we not
therefore cry out with the Prophet, Psalm. 144.3. and 8.5. and 3, 4.8, 9.
Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man,
that thou make account of him? who is like to vanity, and his days are as a
shadow that passes away, Psalm. 144. And elsewhere, O, taste and see, for the
Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusts in him! O fear the Lord, ye his
Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. If God must have praise
for the least of his blessings, how much more for this, that is the greatest of
all, wherein the Lord has enlarged his love toward us? and without which, our
faith had been in vain, yea, Christ Jesus had dyed, risen again, and
ascended in vain, and all the work of our Redemption were frustrate; so that
without consideration of the Kingdom of heaven, (of which we come now to
consider in the last place,) blessings were no blessings, and graces were no
graces at all.

The Kingdom.) This is the last, but not the least branch of the promise,
which contains the highest staire and top of our felicity and happiness. The
ungodly think faithful men unworthy to breathe, or whom the earth should
bear: but behold, God, even the Father, vouchsafes of his grace and good
pleasure to account them worthy of heaven. The ungodly deem them not to be
worthy to live in the world: but the Lord esteems not the world worthy of
them, Heb. 11.38.
and therefore he will translate them out of the world, that they may enjoy his
presence. Now as before we heard of the object of the promise, the Flock of
Christ: so now we come to consider of the subject or principal matter of the
promise, the Kingdom of heaven. And in this word we have the substance of the
reason used by Christ our Savior, to keep us from fear of falling away from
him, for fear of future wants: and therefore we have deferred to consider of
the strength thereof to this place. The reason may be thus framed, and put into
form, that we may see the force of it, If God will bestow upon us the
Kingdom, then fear not the lack of earthly things.
But God will bestow upon us the Kingdom, Therefore
Fear not the lack of earthly things.
Or more plainly after this manner: Whosoever have a Kingdom promised unto
them, need not fear the lack of lesser blessings;
But the faithful have a Kingdom promised unto them,
Therefore the faithful need not fear the lack of lesser blessings.


The power and strength of this reason is good and exceeding great. Christ our
Savior does never argue weakly, who ministers strength to all his that are
weak. In this reason, the giving of heavenly things to us, is made an argument
to prove the not withholding of earthly things from us. We may not fear or
faint in our faith and profession, as though God would quite forsake us, or
give us over. And wherefore? Because he has promised to us the Kingdom, so
that there is nothing so great that he will stick at, or doubt to bestow upon
us. separated from the love of God and his Son Jesus Christ? Romans 8.35. ^
Cor. 11.27.
or to be oppressed and overburdened with weariness and painfulnesse, with
hunger and thirst, with fastings, with cold, with watchings, with poverty, with
reproaches, with fear of death, and such like? behold the promise here set
before us: let us lay fast hold upon it. Let us with joy and comfort lift up
our eyes, or rather our hearts to Heaven, and remember that we have the
reversion of a Kingdom promised unto us by him that did never falsify his
Word, in regard whereof, we are more then Conquerers through him that loved us,
whereby we may easily see an issue out of the former tentations. Hence it is
that Abraham, Moses, and all the Prophets, in the midst of all their
afflictions wherewith they were afflicted, did comfort themselves hereby, they
had respect to the great reward they knew to be laid up for them in the
Heavens. The Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, while they
were made a gazing-stocke by reproaches and calamities. This is no easy thing
to bear, but hard for flesh and blood to do. For no doubt their goods and
good names were as precious unto them, as ours to our selves, or to any other.
What then was the cause that made them able to bear all these injuries and
indignities? Surely this; they knew in themselves, that they were Heirs
apparent to a Kingdom, and had in Heaven a better and an enduring substance,
Heb. 10.34. Heb. 10.34. and 11.9, 10, 24, 35.
then they knew, that what tears soever they shed, he would not only keep
them in his bottle of remembrance, but then he would wipe them away from their
eyes, that they should shead them no more, Revel. 7.17. and 21.4. Here is their
time of weeping, but then shall be the time of their rejoicing: here is their
time of sowing, but then shall be the time of their reaping; as Lazarus while
he was here was distressed, but after this life he was comforted. Luke 16.25.
Ioh. 16.20, 21, 22. 1 Ioh. 3.2.
Then there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away, Revel. 21.4.
the sorrow of the Saints shall be turned into joy, and their joy shall no man
take from them.

The reasons follow. First, man, having a promise of a greater benefit from an
honest man that he knows has ever been wont to be as good as his word, can
or will make any doubt of his performance of the lesser: so ought we to learn
to strengthen our faith against the fear of earthly wants, by consideration of
the heavenly promises that are found in the Word of God, none of which did ever
fall to the ground, Romans 8.32.
as the Apostle teaches, Romans 8. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things?

Secondly, worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed, Romans
8.18.
Romans 8. Let the meditation of this glory be once thoroughly laid up as a
treasure in our hearts, and we have thereby a sovereign preservative against
all dangers whatsoever which beset us round about: whereas such as are daunted
and distressed with every blast or bruit of danger, like men that are at their
wits end, it is plain they were never well grounded in the Article of
everlasting life.

Thirdly, Revel. 2.10. Psalm. 30.5. Esaias 54.7, 8.
Ye shall have tribulation ten days. And the Prophet, Psalm. 30. His anger
endures but a moment, in his favor is life: weeping may endure for a night,
but joy comes in the morning. But the Kingdom of Heaven is not for a night,
nor for one year, nor two years, nor five years, neither ten years, nor
twenty years, nor as a flower that flourishes for a season, and suddenly
fades away; but it is unchangeable, incorruptible, and everlasting, 2 Cor.
4.15, 18.
as the Apostle shows, 2 Cor. 4. Our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works in us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things which
are not seen, are eternal.

Lastly, 1 Cor. 17.54
for then this mortal shall put on immortality, and death the last enemy shall
be destroyed and swallowed up in victory. The Traveller that has a great way
to go, and to pass through many troubles, not without much labor and
sweating, oftentimes comfort himself with the remembrance of the end of all
his journey. We are Pilgrims and strangers in this world, and we pass our
days in traveling toward the Kingdom that is everlasting. We should make
this reckoning and account, that our life, from our birth day to our dying day,
is nothing else but as a pilgrimage through the wilderness to the Land of
Canaan, that is, our journey and passage toward Heaven. Here we must resolve
with our selves to meet with many enemies and crosses, as it were rubs and
stumbling blocks to hinder us, and turn us out of the way. Except therefore
we often call to mind our heavenly Canaan the end of all our labors, when
all our sorrows shall be finished, we shall never be able to go forward, but
we shall be discouraged in the midst of our race, and sit still as a wearied
man that is quite tired and out of heart.

First, conclude from hence, pass away as a scrowle, 2 Pet. 3.10.
and the elements shall melt with heat, but his Word shall never pass, but it
must be fulfilled and accomplished. It is not the manner of Christ, neither of
the Apostles of Christ to use deceitful reasons, like subtle Sophisters, to
blind or bleare the eyes of the simple, they build the souls of men upon the
strong rock that cannot be shaken. Let us therefore be well grounded in this
article of our faith, which should never have been applied to drive away
fear, except it had been in it self certain and infallible. For a certain
disease cannot be expelled by an uncertain remedy.

Secondly, our Fathers good pleasure to give unto us the Kingdom. And
doubtless nothing in this world will more provoke us to stand in awe of God,
and to get grace in our hearts then this, Heb. 12.28.
as Heb. 12. Wherefore, we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us
have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.
What will move us to submit our selves unto him, and to walk in obedience
before him, if the consideration of this promise of a Kingdom to banish fear
of want from us, cannot do it? If an earthly Prince should thus comfort any of
his people, Fear not poverty, I will promote thee to honor and glory, how
would it refresh his soul? how would it revive his spirits? and how would it
provoke him to do him the best service he could? Take an example hereof in
David toward Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan. When the King, after
inquisition for some left of the house of Saul, that he might show him
kindness for Jonathans sake, had called him unto him, and said, Fear not, 2 Samuel 9.7, 8.
for I will show thee kindness for thy Fathers sake, and will restore thee all
the Land of Saul thy Father, and thou shall eat bread at my Table continually:
He had no sooner heard these gracious words, and received this comfortable
promise, but by and by he bowed himself before him. Thus ought it to be with
every one of us, when we consider what promise of honor and advancement we
have received, we should in all humility cast down our selves, and walk in
reverence and godly fear, all the days of our lives before him. The driving
out one fear, should work in us another kind of fear. If we have not this
grace here, we deceive our selves, if we look for glory hereafter. The
Kingdom of grace goes before the Kingdom of glory. If we belong not here,
to the Kingdom of grace, we shall never enter into the Kingdom of glory
hereafter.

Lastly, learn from hence that we are saved by hope; against fear of wanting
worldly wealth by the consideration of a Kingdom to come, where there is no
want, we are taught in all waves and storms of this life, to put our trust in
God, and to cast anchor in heaven. Whereby, behold by the way, a great
difference between the godly and the ungodly. The godly man has the best
things to come, it is worst with him at the first and in the beginning, the
farther he goes, the better it is with him; and the best of all is after this
life. Eccles. 7.1.
This made the Wise man say, The day of death is better then the day of ones
birth. And the Apostle testifies, Romans 13.11.
Now is our salvation nearer then when we believed. It is not so with the
ungodly, his best is in the beginning. True it is, it was never good with him,
nor never will be: but he is best at the first, the longer he lives and the
farther he proceeds, it is worser and worser with him, for he heapeth up
sin upon sin, until it come to the full, and withal treasureth up wrath
against the Day of wrath, and the worst of all remains for him in the world
to come. So then, we must acknowledge that we hold our salvation by hope, and
therefore it is not present, Romans 8.24.
but to come; for hope that is seen, is not hope, for what a man sees, why
does he yet hope for it, as the Apostle shows? We have it not therefore in
possession, but in expectation: and therefore he adds afterward, If we hope
for that which we see, we do with patience wait for it. We must all do as
Abraham is commended to have done, Romans 4.18, 19.
believe above hope, being strong in faith, Romans 4. we have so many hindrances
of our salvation. It is with us as it was with David: he had a Kingdom
promised, and he was anointed unto it, yea, in the end had full possession of
it. But in the mean season he found many storms and tempests going over his
head, and ready to drown him, and sink his ship in the very Haven: so have we
a Kingdom promised of another nature, not earthly, but heavenly; and we have
an unction from the Holy one also, 1 Ioh. 2.20.
that persuades us of the certainty of the promise to be performed:
nevertheless, Hos. 2.6. Acts 14.22.
the way to it is hedged with thorns, and we must through manifold
tribulations enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and wait with patience the
Lords leisure, till we may enjoy it: in the mean season let us say with the
Prophet, Why art thou cast down, Psalm. 42.11.
O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, for I will yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. The sum of that
which we have showed, is this: Christians have not their perfect estate in
this present life. This is their property, and the voice whereby they are
known; they say, My conversation is in heaven, my hope is in the next life, I
look for better things. For albeit God often bless them with honor, with
riches, with friends, and all that heart can desire, yet do they not place
their happiness in these, they look still for better things then these. They
cannot find any contentment in the world to rest in, their greatest profits and
pleasures have their satiety, they always aim at higher things, even when
they are at the highest. The worldly man thinks he is well enough here, he
accounts a bird in hand better then a thousand in the bush; he says, Give me
things present, let them that list, take things to come; let us eat and drink
while we may, for to morrow we shall die I give me to day, let him that list,
take to morrow. A most profane speech of profane men, whereby they may be
known what they are, if there were nothing else. Worldly men deride the
faithful, and laugh them to scorn, for contemning earthly things: but on the
other side, the faithful which hope for things not seen, mourn for these
worldly-minded men, because they set light by heavenly things.

Give you the Kingdom.) Thus much of the strength of the reason: the ruth of
the words follows, as they are set down without reference to the point that
is argued. Iam. 5.7.
Nevertheless with the Husbandman we must labor, before we can be partakers
of the precious fruits of the earth: 2 Timothy 2.3, 6, 11, 12.
as good Soldiers we must fight the Lords battles, before we can get the
victory: we must here wear a Crown of thorns, before we can wear a Crown
of glory: we must dye with Christ, before we can live with him: and we must
suffer with him, before we can reign with him. For as it was with the Head, so
it must be with the members: Luke 24.26.
the servant must not be above his Master, he first suffered and so he entered
into his glory. It is an honor unto us to be made conformable unto his image.
He was made like unto his brethren, that he might make them like unto himself.
This truth of doctrine that is here delivered, is confirmed unto us by all the
testimonies and consents of holy Scripture alleged before. Luke 23.43.
Besides which, observe the words of Christ to the penitent thief, Luke 23.
Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. This is the
promise made to the Disciples and to all that cleave unto him, Romans 2.
Matthew. 10.42.32. So Romans 2. To them who by patient continuance in well doing,
seek for glory, Ioh. 10.27, 28.
and honor, and immortality, eternal life. And Christ teaches the same, John
10. My sheep hear my voice, and I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands. This is an
Article of our Christian faith, set down indeed in the last place, because it
is last of all to be accomplished, that eternal life shall be given to us, and
to every true member of the Church, and is therefore firmly to be holden and
believed of us without any doubting or wavering.

For first of all, Christ Jesus is ascended and gone up into heaven far above
all Principalities and Powers, and has taken possession of the Kingdom in
their names, as he says to his Disciples, Ioh. 14.^.
In my Fathers house are many mansions, if it were not so, I would have told
you; I go to prepare a place for you, Joh. 14.2.

Secondly, it is a just thing with God, to give deliverance to his Servants,
peace for their trouble, joy for their sorrow, and glory for their shame. But
we see not this in this present life: 2 These. 1.6, 7.
for here they are troubled, and the ungodly are exalted, as 2 Thessalonians. 1. It is
a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you:
and to you, who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. Thus Abraham answers the rich
glutton, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things,
and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented.

Thirdly, if our happiness were in this life, other men the most miserable, 1.
Cor. 15.19. 1 Cor. 15.19, 32.
For what were our happiness, but a very unhappiness? It were better we
joined with the world, and said with the Epicures, Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall dye. And the life of the rich man were rather to be chosen,
who was clothed in purple, and fared deliciously every day, then of the beggar
that lay at his gate full of sores, and desired to be fed with the crummes
only that fell from the rich man's table. Howbeit the future estate of them
both alters the case: for the rich man, after all his pomp and glory, was
cast into torments, Luke 16.19, 20, 22, 23.
and the poor man, after all his want and misery, was carried by the Angels
into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. True it is, the Infidels, Pagans, Epicures, and
such like that live without Christ, are wretched and miserable, that have no
hope of eternal life: howbeit of all others, Christians should be most
miserable: for whereas the other enjoy the profits and pleasures of this
present life, and suffer not hatred, banishment, persecution and martyrdom for
Religion, but flourish in the wealth, honor power, and estimation of the world;
these are hated of all men for Christ's sake, and live in continual disgrace
and affliction, waiting patiently for the hope of reward to come, laid up for
them. Now, if this hope should fail them and deceive them, were they not
doubly miserable, being destitute of the happiness of the present life, and of
that to come also?

Lastly, Kings and Priests, Revel. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5.
and therefore he cannot but hereafter give them a Kingdom: And he begins
their salvation, and enters them after a sort into the Kingdom, partly by
giving them a lively taste and joyful feeling of that heavenly glory,
wherewith they are ravished, and partly while he blesses them with such
spiritual blessings in heavenly things as accompany salvation, Ephesians. 1.14.
which are as a pawn, or earnest-penny to assure them of his true mind and
meaning toward them.

We may learn from hence to reason from the greater to the lesser; food or
raiment, neither any thing which is good for us. It is a rule among the
Civilians, Lib. 2. ff. De Jurisdiction.
To whom the principal is granted, to him the accessory that depends upon
it, seems to be granted also. If a Prince make any of his servants Governor
of his Kingdomr, he grants to him by virtue thereof, all rights, and
privileges, and means which are needful to that office, and for the managing
of the State. So the Lord has appointed his to be Heirs of eternal life, he
gives them therefore all things belonging to this present life, and things
necessary to bring them to his Kingdom. If then we have the more noble
assured unto us, how can we, without great infidelity and impiety, doubt of
the performance of the lesser and baser? For what are all the blessings of this
transitory life better then trifles, being valued and prized with immortality?
Let us therefore evermore have before our eyes this promise, It is your Fathers
good pleasure to give unto you the Kingdom: and certainly being mingled with
faith, it will give us assurance of his help in all time of need, how great
soever our assaults and afflictions shall be. Let us call to remembrance what
the Prophet speaks to Amaziah King of Judah, when he had hired a great Army
of Israel to help him against the Edomites, and given them an hundred talents
of silver, when he was charged to dismiss them, and was in danger to lose the
money which they had received for their pay: when the King said, What shall we
do for the hundred talents? the man of God answered, 2 Chronicles. 25.6, 7, 9.
The Lord is able to give thee much more then this. Was this spoken for that
King alone? No, it was written even for us also, upon whom the ends of the
world are come. For as when he was in doubt, and feared to lose his money, the
Prophet casts him upon Gods providence, and calls upon him to wait upon God
in an holy obedience to his Commandment to receive a greater blessing at his
hands: so if we shall rely upon him by faith in all our troubles without
murmuring and grudging, this heavenly consolation is written for us, and to us,
as well as to the King; The Lord is able to give us much more then this. If we
suffer any losses, or spoiling of our goods, he can restore whatsoever has
been taken away, and make us recompense to the full, as we see in the example
of Job. For as he submitted himself to His good pleasure in all his crosses,
Job 1.21. and 42 ^0.
and said, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name
of the Lord, and sinned not against him with his lips: so having tried his
faith, his patience, and obedience, the Lord gave him twice as much as he had
before. And this is his promise which he will perform, Mark 10.29, 30. Yea,
what can be more forcible to work in us patience in troubles, and contentment
in poverty, submitting our selves humbly to God in all losses and wants
whatsoever, then to consider that God has laid up for us treasure in Heaven,
and will bestow upon us a Kingdom? If then at any time we be carried into
strange thoughts and cares for the things of this life, it is certain we were
never well grounded in the doctrine of everlasting life. For how can we look
for heavenly things from him, when we doubt of earthly? How can we look for
the life to come, when we fear to lack for this life? or how shall we depend
upon him for our souls, when we dare not trust him with our bodies?
Whatsoever therefore we may seem to others, or to our selves to do, it is
certain, we deceive both our selves and others also, to think that we rely
upon him wholly for the greater and better things, when we rest not upon him for
the slightest and smallest matters.

Secondly, us in our journey toward this Kingdom. All men are willing to be
at their ways end, but all men are not willing to know the way, or if they
know it, it is death to them to walk in it. But if any say as Thomas did to
Christ, How can we know the way? I answer, Ioh. 14.5.
We are brought in to the Kingdom by the means of the Word, as the Traveller
is to the place of his lodging by his Guide. Christ Jesus is the Way, the Word
of God is our Guide, and it is the Rule by which we must walk. The Carpenter
is no body without his square, his work can never be right, if it be not laid
unto it: so it is with the faithful, he can do, he will do nothing without
his rule, which is so excellent, that it is called the rod of Gods mouth, and
the breath of his lips, Esaias 11.4. 2 These. 2.8. The Gospel of the Kingdom,
Esaias 11.4. 2 These. 2.8. Matthew. 9.35. Mark 1.14. Heb. 1.8. Psalm. 45.6.
Matthew. 9.35. and the Scepter of righteousness, Heb. 1.8. Christ is the King
of his Church, to rule it, and give Laws unto it: howbeit he is not our King,
except we suffer him to reign in us outwardly by his Scepter, and inwardly by
his Spirit. All men will seem desirous to come to Heaven, but they will choose
their own way, and their own guide, they will not submit themselves to the
wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.25.
as if the foolishness of men were wiser then God, or the weakness of men
were stronger then God. They would gladly attain eternal life, and with him
in the Gospel, they account him happy that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of
Heaven: Luke 14.15.
but they regard not the Gospel of the Kingdom. These dream of a Kingdom
without the Word: but this is an imaginary Kingdom of their own. If we
travel without the Word, it will bring us to Hell, the kingdom of darkness;
but never to the Kingdom of Heaven; and of God who dwells in the light,
which no man can approach unto. No man by nature knows the way to Heaven;
neither can possibly find it without his guide; there are so many odd lanes,
and blind turnings, and by-pathes, and cross ways, that we are sure to
miss: the Devil stands at one corner and tells us, This is the way: the
World calls to us at another, I will lead thee: and sin sits at
anoother, ready to persuade us to follow it. We know the way that leads to
Hell well enough, nature is a sufficient guide to instruct us, and direct us,
if we have no other, we cannot miss it, the way is so broad, and the gate so
wide that leads to destruction, and the company so great going before us,
that thrusts and throngeth to enter into it. Wherefore it stands us upon to
do nothing without our guide. Howbeit, this is an hard matter, men will not
stoop down when God holds out his Scepter ready to lead them, neither will
they draw near, when God stretches out his arm to receive them, The causes
why we follovv not the guidance of the Word.
but hang back many ways. And will we understand and learn the causes that
stop up our way, and hinder us from following the guidance of the Word?
Ignorance, negligence, and contempt have so possessed the greatest part, that
they are a small remnant that make conscience to seek knowledge, to use
diligence, and to perform obedience. These lead us by the hand to the
Kingdom, the former are the greatest enemies to our souls. Ignorance of the
Word, the first hinderance to the Kingdom. Heb. 5.12.
Of these three that block up the way, and stop our passage, I will speak in
order. And touching the first, I will say with the Apostle, Heb. 5.12. When for
the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again,
which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as
have need of milk, and not of strong meat. After all our hearing and learning,
after so many years teaching and preaching, Heb. 6.1.
the greatest part know not the principles of the doctrine of Christian
Religion. The rain and dew of Heaven has fallen upon the ground, and yet it
remains dry and barren. The Hammer of the Word has beaten upon our hearts,
yet they are hardened as the Anvill. Many gracious showers have dropped down
upon the grass of the field, and yet (alas) it is ready to wither away. The
Sun has shined clearly in our eyes, and yet (alas) we remain in palpable
darkness. O, what a deep and secret judgment is this, that the rain should
make us dry, and the Sun make us blind: that the light should cause
darkness, and the sound of the Gospel should make us deaf! But thus it is,
and thus it must be, when we regard not to know the will of our God.
Certainly such blind sottish people, that remain willingly, nay, wilfully
blind in the midst of the means of knowledge, like those that having meat
before them, arise empty from the Table, cannot assure themselves to be true
members of the Christian Church. The Prophet foretells, touching the Church
of Christ, that the earth should be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Esaias
11.9. and 2.3. Joel 2.28.
as the waters that cover the Sea: but these have their hearts as full of
ignorance, as the Sea is of water. True it is, a man may be ignorant of many
truths, and yet be saved. 1 Cor. 13.9.12.
And it is true likewise that here we know in part, and we see as through a
glass darkely, and so we shall, until we come to know, even as also we are
known. Howbeit we must understand that there is difference between truth and
truth. There are some such truths as are like the heart in the body, without
which there is no life, or like the foundation of an house, except it be well
laid, no building can be reared and erected: Or like the Pillars on which
Samson leaned, if they be shaken, the house falls, and is overthrown, and
the fall thereof is great, and draws with it the ruin of others. So it is in
Religion. There are sundry such principles and grounds of the faith, that
whosoever is ignorant of them all, or of any one of them, it is impossible he
should be saved. These are to Christians as the A. B. C. is to Children, except
the Child know his letters, he can never be able to read, yea, albeit he be
ignorant but of one of them: so except they which be rude, be well and thoroughly
grounded in the Rudiments and first Principles, 1 Pet. 2.2.
as it were the first milk that they suck from their Mothers breasts, that
they may grow thereby, they are not yet in the way to the Kingdom, they have
not set one step forward to Heaven. Notwithstanding, if a through view and exact
examination were taken of the most places, I fear, the greatest number, even
of such as are of years of discretion, would be found faulty and guilty, that
they know not so much as every Christian must know that shall be saved, and see
Christ Jesus his Savior to his comfort. And therefore I may conclude that the
greatest number of them yet stand in the state of damnation. I will not say,
they shall be condemned, neither dare I, because God has given to us no such
warrant, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
and secret things belong unto him, but rather I hope better things of them,
though I thus speak: howbeit, this I affirm, and dare be bold to pronounce,
that such do as yet stand through their ignorance in the state of
condemnation. What though many of you be of great age? what though ye have
been baptized, and been admitted to the Lords Supper? what though ye have
been long hearers of the Word? I beseech you by the mercies and patience of
God toward you, deceive not your selves: do not flatter your own souls:
persuade not better things of your selves then there is just cause: be not as
Children that know not the right hand from the left: be not always blind in
your understanding: but rather examine your selves, and call your selves to an
account what ye have heard and learned, lest ye be like those that are
always learning, 2 Timothy 3.7.
but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. The Lord complains by
the Prophet, Hos. 4.1, 6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. And again a little before,
There is no knowledge of God in the Land, and therefore the Inhabitants thereof
shall be cut off.

Thus much of ignorance the mother of error: Neglect of the Word, the second
hinderance to the Kingdom.
the second hinderance that stops up the way to the Kingdom, is the neglect
of the Word, a farther degree of sin then the former. This is the sin of
our time, the common sin of every place, yea, almost of every person. The
light is come among us, but we love darkness more then the light, and are
lukewarm, Revel. 3.16.
as retchlesse men that care not which end goes forward. God will spew out
such out of his mouth, as evil humors out of the stomach. Solomon teaches
us in the Proverbes, that he which is sloathfull in his work, Prove. 18.9.
is brother to him that is a great waster: so is it with such as are sloathfull
in the Lords work, and in their own duty, they are companions and brethren
with such as are open and obstinate contemners of the Word, and make haste a
pace after them, they follow them close at the heels, and in short time will
overtake them. There is such carelessness and security everywhere, in the
matters of God among us, as if every man were left to do what he list, as if
the soul were the least matter of a thousand, as if Religion were last of all
to be regarded, or as if there were no day of account to come hereafter. Among
those that come to the place of Gods worship, many indeed are kept in awe and
in order: but how? and wherefore? Is it by any conscience of their duty, or by
love to the Word? Nay, nay, but for sinister ends: some by force of the Law,
because they fear to be presented: some by awe of their Superiors, because
they would not be thought stubborn: some come for custom and fashion sake,
because it is Sunday: some for company of others, because they would do as
their honest neighbors do, and love not to be singular: some for that they
would not be accounted Papists, because the State favors them not: some lest
they should be esteemed Atheists, and so be pointed at with the finger: some
to please their Parents, because they should leave them a better portion: some
to content their Masters, lest they should be thrusted out of their doors, or
because they hope to gain by them: some to pass away the time, because they
have nothing else to do: some to meet with their friends and acquaintance,
because they are loath to spare another day: some to meet with their debtors,
because they would demand their money: but the fewest number to meet the Lord
in his own Ordinances, because they love the habitation of his house, and the
place where his honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8.
who has promised to be in the midst of them that are gathered together in
his Name. Matthew. 18.20.
Happy are we, if we be in the number of these few. If such retchlesse men were
left to themselves without any bridle of Law, or fear of Superior and
authority (of whom we spoke before,) and suffered to do what they pleased
without any check or controlment, we should have our thin Assemblies a great
deal thinner, and our streets, and fields, and houses, and Alehouses,
fuller-stuffed and thronged, then our Churches. And this may appear hereby,
that notwithstanding we have Laws, and Magistrates, and Officers, and good
examples of the chiefest and principal among us, yet they are few, a very few,
in comparison of the rest that are constant and conscionable in their hearing,
some, if their presence and absence were balanced together, the waightier
scole would be given to their absence, and would weigh down their presence, as
being found too light. Others, albeit they dwell near enough, are starting
away at every turn, and when they make show of going to the Church, turn
aside another way. Others are more careful to fill the body, then to feed the
soul, who take every, even the least, occasion to feast with their friends,
forgetting the feast that God has prepared in his house, and not regarding it,
though they even starve their own souls. Others are gadding, yea, madding in
a manner after every vanity, and do delight much more in the pleasure of the
body, then in the profit that comes to the Spirit. Others are weary of the
Word, as the Israelites that loathed Manna. Numb. 11.6.
Others have hired ground, and they must needs go see it: others have bought
five yoke of Oxen, Luke 14.18, 19. Matthew. 22.5.
and they must go to prove them: others must visit their Farms, or attend
their Merchandise, and yet every one must be holden excused, though all set
light by the Word, and run after their own ways, like the guests in the
Gospel that were bidden to the wedding, and to the great Supper. God sends
out his Servants to invite them, Come, for all things are ready, I have
prepared my Dinner, my Oxen and my fatlings are killed; but they neglect the
Lords sending to them, and his calling of them. But what follows? The Lord
pronounces, Luke 14.24.
I say unto you, that none of those men, which were bidden, shall taste of my
Supper. These are they that are araigned, as guilty of the neglect of heavenly
things, who will sometimes seem to bear some affection to the house of God,
but partly their profits, and partly their pleasures carry them another way: of
all which the Prophet speaks, Ier. 48.10.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently or deceitfully. All
these stand under this heavy curse of the Lord, and therefore I counsel them
to look to it betimes, to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to meet
him by unfeigned repentance while he is here.

Lastly, Contempt of the Word, another hinderance to the Kingdom.
touching the contempt of the Word, who sees not how common it is, which
notwithstanding is the top of impiety, and that many have filled the measure of
their sins till it be full, that the cry of them is come up to heaven? If any
ask the cause, I answer, Our great negligence and general coldness have
brought this evil upon us, and God does hereby, in his deep, and yet just
Judgment, revenge our carelessness in his Service, by giving us over into all
profaneness. The Word of the Lord, by which we shall all be judged at the
last Day, is so far from holding men in awe, and from having their lives and
hearts in subjection, that they reject it from them as a needless thing, and
regard it no longer. The Minister may teach what he will, and threaten as long
as he list, but these Gallants, like Gallio in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts
18.17.
care for none of those things. The time has been, when the Word has been
reverenced, even by such as were not converted by it, nor transformed into the
obedience of it, yet it has held them in some awe: but now in these our days,
looseness, and licenciousnesse have generally prevailed in every place, and
sin is grown to such an head and height, as if the Word were but a
Scarecrow, and all Religion but a fable. We are come to this pass, to mock
at zeal and Religion, and to contemn the Professors of it. And who are they?
Verily not only such as are wise in their own eyes, but also such as cannot
themselves give the meaning of one Precept of the Law, or of one Petition of
the Lords Prayer, such as cannot render any account of their faith, neither an
answer to any that asks them a reason of the hope that is in them, through
want and contempt of knowledge; yet have they knowledge enough to deride such as
labor earnestly after knowledge. Every base and deboshed fellow, full of
profaneness and impurity, has learned to upbraid such with purity, that any
way love Religion: so that we may see with our eyes, and hear with our ears,
such as are truly religious, no less scoffed and scorned, even at home among
their own brethren, neighbors, acquaintance, and friends, then if they lived
among the very Savages. It is well known to those that are but little
conversant in History, how the Christians are taunted and reviled, that live
among the Turks and Sarazins, for the Christian Religion, and what an heavy
burden they bear. But is it much better think you, with many poor Christian
souls, though they live among their own people? if they be any whit zealous
in the Truth, and will not run riot with the multitude, if they will not
swear commonly, and be drunk for company, if they will once fall to reprove
sin in others, what is this reckoned but flat or rank Puritanisme? and such
are no less hated and persecuted, no less taunted and traduced, then if they
lived among the Infidels and Barbarians, the Paganes and open professed
enemies. Nay, I would this were all. For Religion it self, (to set aside men's
persons) becomes in very many places, a very byword, and a matter of
reproach. True it is, the Jews sinned with an high hand against God, they
loved not the Oracles of God, neither walked they worthy of his calling and
choosing of them before other Nations; and therefore worthily deserved to be
forsaken of God, who had first forsaken him: howbeit they never proceeded to
this top of sin, to make a mock of their Religion it self, they never
scorned the Word of the ever-living God. But we have learned to stick at
nothing, we are come thus far, to tread under our feet, like Dogs and
Swine, the precious Jewel of the Gospel, as if it were a curse, rather then a
blessing unto a Kingdom. O, how happy were it for these men, that God would
give them eyes to see these their sins, and hearts to bewail them betimes,
which now are hidden from them, before the time of Judgment come, which
doubtless cannot be far off from every one of them!

Thirdly, Heb. 11.27.
that he may see him that is invisible, as the Scripture speaks of Moses,
Heb. 11. For albeit a man flow in wealth so much as heart can wish, albeit he
abound in honor, and glory, and estimation, that the world esteem him the
only happy man, yet shall he find in the midst of all, sundry
discontentments, perplexities, crosses, and vexations, and himself far from
true happiness: so that he must not only behold the things present and before
his feet, but must look further then this life. He that will not fear death
the king of terror, Job 18.14.
as Job calls it, must look beyond death, and see the Land of Canaan before
he come into it, as Moses did from the mount. Death is dreadful and fearful
to the flesh, when we see no more in it, but the dissolution of the soul and
body; but if we have the eyes of faith to look further, and consider both from
what evils it freeth us, and to what good it brings us, we have great comfort
and consolation in it, so that we may triumph over it. So he that will have
true and sound joy in this world, must look beyond it, to the joys of the
World to come: He that would have comfort in trouble, must cast his eyes beyond
trouble, and look up to this Kingdom, which Christ Jesus promises in this
place, like the Mariner, who being tossed in the Sea, comfort himself with
the remembrance of the desired Haven where he would be. Now this point, to wit,
of esteeming our happiness to consist in heaven, has many particular
branches. First, we must long earnestly for it. If the Saints account them
blessed that dwell in the house of Prayer, and of his worship, how much more to
dwell in the house of his glorious presence? He that loves the Kingdom of
Heaven will long for it: he that loves it not, longs nor for it. The Crown
of righteousness is laid up for such as love the appearance of Christ. For
whiles we are at home in the body, 2 Timothy 4.8. 2 Cor. 5.2.
we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. He that is from home, longs greatly
to be at his house. This body is but a poor cottage, that must shortly be
dissolved and laid down: our chief mansion and habitation is above in the
heavens. Secondly, we must pray for this Kingdom of glory. It is the meaning
in part of the second Petition, Thy Kingdom come. For we pray therein not
only for the Kingdom of grace, but for the Kingdom of glory also. This is
the prayer and request of all the Saints, Come Lord Jesus. Revel. 22.20. 1 Cor.
15.25. Heb. 1.13. Acts 2.35.
The Kingdom is as yet come only in part, we see not all things put under his
feet: sin and Satan are not yet subdued, many oppositions are made against
it; have we not just cause therefore, to crave both the enlarging of the
territories, and stretching the Curtains thereof, and likewise the finishing
of these days of sin? Thirdly, let us endure with joy all sorts of
afflictions, whereunto we are called, and which it shall please God to lay upon
us, and to try us withal, considering that they are no way comparable to the
glory that shall be revealed to the sons of God. We are all, that will be the
Disciples of Christ, forewarned of troubles and afflictions that abide us, and
that we shall be hated for his Names sake; howbeit, the next life will make
amends for all, we shall have a super-abundant recompense for all our
sufferings; It is our Fathers pleasure to bestow upon us the Kingdom. He that
loses his life for his sake, shall find it. Fourthly, let us rejoice and
comfort our selves daily in the expectation of our full and final deliverance
and Redemption at the last day. Many defects and many sins do yet hang about
us, many wants and works of darkness compass us on every side, all these
together with the remnants of sorrows shall quickly be done away in the great
Day of the Lord, when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of
God: 2 These. 1.11.
then indeed he shall be made marveilous in all them that believe. And as the
ends of the world are come upon us, and the Day of our perfect reconciliation
draws near, so ought we to rejoice the more, and to lift up our heads the
higher, that as we have said in our trouble, Psalm. 22.15.
Thou have brought us into the dust of death; so we may say again, with joy of
Spirit, Thou, Lord, have drawn us out of many waters, His right hand has done
great things for us, for which we rejoice.

Lastly, in that Day. Such as look and hope hereafter to be made like unto
Christ, must wash their hands, 1 Ioh. 3.3.
and cleanse their hearts, and purify themselves even as he is pure. But it may
be said, We may repent at leisure, and at the last Day, and that is far off.
Nay, the Scripture puts such foolish conceits from us, and tells us that
the Lord is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7.
the coming of the Lord draws near. Besides, then is not the time of mercy,
but of justice to the impenitent. For as death leaves us, so shall the
Judgment Day find us, Romans 2.5. Romans 2.5.
We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. But wherefore? to
bring us to repentance? and to see whether we will turn from our sins to
him? No, that is not the end: but to receive the things which we have done in
our body, whether good or evil. The old world no doubt, when they saw the
rain that fell, were desirous to enter into the Arc, but the flood was come,
and it was too late. Exodus 14.23, 25.
The Egyptians pursuing Israel into the midst of the Sea, were desirous to
turn back, and to fly from the face of Israel, but the Lord took off their
Chariot wheels that they drove them heavily, and it was too late. The foolish
Virgins cried, Lord, Lord, open unto us, Matthew. 25.11, 12.
but the door was shut, and they received this uncomfortable answer, Verily, I
say unto you, I know you not: which verifieth the saying of Christ elsewhere,
Many, Luke 13.24.
I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Such as can
wish for Heaven, should also study to learn the way to Heaven. It was the wish
of Balaam the false prophet, though himself were unrighteous, that he might
dye the death of the righteous. Numb. 23, 10.
For albeit he regarded not to lead the life of the righteous, yet he could
be content to die their death: though he were at war with God, yet he was
desirous to enter into their peace: and though he would not be like them in the
beginning of his days, yet he was willing his latter end should be like
theirs. But as he was ignorant of the way, so he was as careless to enter
into it. This puts us in mind of sundry meditations. First, it is our duty
to consult with the Word, and to try all our actions by it, whether they please
God, as the gold is tried by the touchstone, whether it be current or
counterfeit, and as the work is tried by the rule, whether it be right or
crooked. Hence it is that Christ teaches, Ioh. 3.21.
He that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God: but he that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. For naturally men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil. 1 Cor. 11.31.
Secondly, we ought to judge our selves here, that so we may escape the
Judgment of God hereafter. If we will not judge our selves, we shall be
condemned with the wicked world, for the Lord himself will enter into
Judgment with us. We must to this purpose summon, accuse, examine, convince,
and condemn our selves, that he may acquit us, discharge us, and absolve us.
We must try and examine our selves by the Touchstone of the Law, and look
into it as upon a glass, whereby we may see the least spot and wrinkle.
Thirdly, we must watch and pray always, Luke 21.36.
that we may be found so doing, when the Lord comes, Luke 11. and be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and that
we may stand before the Son of man. But if the evil servant say in his
heart, My master deferreth and delayeth his coming, Luke 12.45, 46.
and shall begin to beat his fellow servants, and to eat and drink, and to
be drunken: the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not
for him, and in an hour when he is not ware, and will cut him in sunder, and
will appoint him his portion with the unbeleevers. Fourthly, we must practice
the works of mercy toward the members of Christ, and bountifulness to the
godly in all their distresses. Happy will that Day be, and joyful to them that
have fed, and clothed, and visited Christ in his members, that have come to
such as have been sick and in prison; which works of mercy the Lord Jesus
will account, accept, and reward as done to himself. But woe shall it be to
such as shall have this charged upon them by Christ himself the Judge of
quick and dead, Matthew. 25.4^
I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me
not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Neither will it serve their
turn to excuse their want of charity, to say, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee? For then it shall be answered them, Verily I say unto
you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to
me. Lastly, let us hold fast the faith, and the heavenly graces given unto us,
and not give over, neither suffer them to be wrested from us by any illusion of
Satan, for then we lose all our labor, and all the pains that we have taken.
Let us stand out to the end, Revel. 3.11.
and be faithful unto the death, and then we shall receive the Crown of
eternal life. This is the exhortation to the Church in Philadelphia, Hold fast
that which thou have, that no man take away thy Crown from thee. And the
Apostle John, Look to yourselves, 2 John 8. 1 Cor. 15.58.
that ye lose not the things that ye have done, that so ye may receive a full
reward. The Lord God Almighty, who has promised to reward our service, even to
a cup of cold water, grant, that we may be steadfast, and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

