Frauncis new Iigge, between Frauncis a Gentleman, and Richard a Farmer. To
the tune of Walsingham.


Besse. AS I went to Walsingham, to the shrine with speed,
Met I with a jolly Palmer, in a Pilgrims weed.
Now God you save you jolly Palmer.


Fran. Welcome Lady gay,

Often have I sued to thee for love.


B. Often have I said you nay.


F. My love is fixed.


B. And so is mine, but not on you:
For to my husband whilst I live, I will ever be true.

F. I Will give thee gold and rich array.


B. Which I shall buy too dear.


F. Naught shall thou want: then say not nay.


B. Naught would you make me I fear.

What though you be a Gentleman, and have lands great store?
I will be chaste do what you can, though I live never so poor.

F. Thy beauty rare has wounded me, and pierst heart.


B. Your foolish love does trouble me, pray you Sir depart.


F. Then tell me sweet will thou consent unto my desire:


B. And if I should, then tell me sir, what is it you require?


F. For to enjoy thee as my love.


B. Sir you have a wife:

Therefore let your suit have an end.


F. First will I lose my life.

All that I have thou shall command.


B. Then my l^^e you have.


F. Your weaning I well understand.


B. I yield to what you crave.


F. But tell me sweet when shall I enjoy my hearts delight.


B. I prithee sweet heart be not coy, even soon at night.



My husband is rid ten miles from home, money to receive:
In the evening see you come.

F. Til then I take my leave.

(Exit:
B. Thus have I rid my hands full well of my amorous love,
And my sweet husband will I tell, how he does me move.

Enter Richard Besses husband. To the tune of the Jewish dance. Rich. Hey down
a down, hey down, a down a down,
There is never a lusty Farmer, in all our town:
That has more cause, to lead a merry life,
Then I that am married to an honest faithful wife.

B. I thank you gentle husband, you praise me to my face.


R. I cry thee mercy, Bessee, I knew thee not in place.


B. Believe me gentle husband, if you knew as much as I,
The words that you have spoken, you quickly would deny:
For since you went from home, A suitor I have had,
Who is so far in love with me, that he is almost mad.
Heel give me gold and silver store, and money for to spend,
And I have promised him therefore, to be his loving friend.

R. Believe me, gentle wife, but this makes me to frown,
There is no gentleman nor knight, nor Lord of high renown:
That shall enjoy thy love, gyrle, though he were never so good:
Before he wrong my Besses so, I Will spend on him my blood.
And therefore tell me who it is that does desire thy love.

B. Our neighbor master Francis, that often did me move.

To whom I gave consent, hi^ mind for to fulfill,
And promised him this night, that he should have his will:
Nay do not frown, good Dickie, but hear me speak my mind:
For thou shall see I Will warrant thee, I Will use him in his kind.
For unto thee I will be true, so long as I do live,
I Will never change thee for a new, nor once my mind so give.
Go you to mistrisse Frauncis, and this to her declare:
And will her with all speed, to my house to repair:
Where she and i will devise some pretty knauish wile:
For I have laid the plot, her husband to beguile.
Make have I pray and tarry not, for long he will not stay.

R. Fear not, i will tell her such a tale, shall make her come away.


B. Now Besse bethink thee, what thou have to do*
Thy lover will come presently, and hardly will he woo:
I will teach my Gentleman, a trick that he may know,
I am too crafty and too wise, to be ore reached so:
But here he comes now: not a word, but fall to work again.
she sowes
F. How now sweetheart, at work so hard*


B. I sir, I must take pains.


F. But say, my lovely sweeting, thy promise will thou keep?
Shall I enjoy thy love, this night with me to sleep?

B. My husband rid from home, here safely may you stay.


F. And I have made my wife believe, I rid another way.


B. Go in good sir, what ere betide, this night and lodge with me.


F. The happiest night that ever I had, thy friend still will I be.


Enter Mistress Frauncis with Richard. To the tune of Bugle Boe. Imprinted at
London for I. W.

The Second part of Attowels new Iigge. To the tune of as I went to Walsingham.
W I Thank you neighbor Richard, for bringing me this news:


R. Nay, thank my wife that loves me so, and will not you abuse.


W. But see whereas she stands, and waits our return*


R. You must go cool your husbands heat, that so in love does burn.


B. Now Dickie welcome home, and Mistress welcome hither:
Grieve not although you find your husband and I together.
For you shall have your right, nor will I wrong you so:
Then change apparel with me straight, and unto him do go.

W. For this your kind goodwill, a thousand thanks I give:
And make account I will requite this kindness, if I live.

B. I hope it shall not need, Dick will not serve me so:
I know he loves me not so ill, a ranging for to go.

R. No faith, my lovely Besse, first will I lose my life:
Before I Will break my wedlock bonds, or seek to wrong my wife.
Now thinks good Master Frauncis, he has thee in his bed:
And makes account he is grafting of horns upon my head.
But softly stand aside, now shall we know his mind,
And how he would have used thee, if thou had been so kind.

Enter Master Francis with his own wife, having a mask before her face,
supposing her to be Besse. To the tune of go from my window.
F. Farewell my joy and hearts delight, til next we meet again:
Thy kindness to requite, for lodging me al night, heeres ten pound for thy
pain:
And more to show my love to thee, wear this ring for my sake.

W. Without your gold or fee you shall have more of me.


F. No doubt of that I make.


W. Then let your love continue still.


F. It shall til life does end.


W. Your wife I greatly fear.


F. for her thou needst not care* so I remain thy friend.


W. But you will suspect me without cause* that I am false to you:
And then you will cast me off, and make me but a scoff, since that I prove
untrue.

F. Then never trust man for my sake, if I prove so unkind:
So often have you sworn, sir, since that you were borne, and soon have
changde your mind.
Nor wife nor life, nor goods nor lands, shall make me leave my love,
Nor any worldly treasure make me forgo my pleasure, nor once my mind remove.

W. But soft a while, who is yonder? do you see my husband? out alas.


F. And yonder is my wife, now shall we have alife how comes this to pass?


R. Com hither gentle Besse I charge thee do confess what makes Master Francis
here.


B. Good husband pardon me, I Will tell the troth to thee.


R. Then speak and do not fear.


F. Nay, neighbor Richard hark to me, I Will tell the troth to you.


W. Nay tell it unto me, good sir, that I may see, what you have here to do.
But you can make no scuse to color this abuse, this wrong is too too great.

R. Good sir I take great scorn you should profer me the horn


W. Now must I cool this heat.


F. Nay neighbor Richard be content, thou have no wrong at all:
Thy wife has done thee right, and pleasurde me this night.

F. This frets me to the gall.
Good wife forgive me this offense, I do repent mine ill.

W. I thank you with mine heart, for playing this kind part, though sore against
your will.

Nay gentle husband frown not so, for you have made amends:
I think it is good gain, to have ten pound for my pain: then let us both be
friends.

F. Ashamed I am and know not what to say, good wife forgive this crime:

Alas I do repent.


W. Tut I could be content, to be served so many a time.


F. Good neighbor Richard be content, i will woo thy wife no more:

I have enough of this.


W. Then all forgiven is, I thank thee Dick therefore.

And to thy wife i will give this gold, I hope you will not say no:

Since I have had the pleasure, let her enjoy the treasure.


F. Good wife let it be so.


B. I thank you gentle Mistress.


R. Faith and so do I. sir, learn your own wife to know:

And shoot not in the dark, for fear you mis the mark.


B. He has paid for this I trow.

All women learn of me.


F. All men by me take heed how you a woman trust.


W. Nay women trust no men.


F. And if they do: how then?


W. There Is few of them prove just.

Farewell neighbor Richard, farewell honest Besse I hope we are all friends.


W. And if you stay at home, and use not thus to rome* here all our quarrel
ends.


FINIS.
George Attowell.

At London Printed for I. W.


