An Inquisition taken at Woodstock in the County of the (...) day of August in
the (...) year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Before Charles Walker
Gent. Deputy unto (...) Esquire. Clerk of the Market of his Majesty most
Honorable household, Within the Verge, and through out the Whole Realm of
England, as well within Liberties as without; By the Oath of (...) honest and
lawful men, Of the price of Grain, Victuals, Horse-meat, Lodgings, and other
things rated and taxed, in manner and form following. viz.
FIrst, a quarter of the best wheat clean and sweet in the Market (...) Item,
a quarter of second Whea in the Market (...) Item, a quarter third Wheat in the
Market (...) Item, a quarter best Barley in the Market (...) And a quarter
second Barley in the Market (...) Item, a quarter best Malt in the Market
(...) Item, a quarter second Malt in the Market (...) Item a quarter best
Beans or Pease in the Market (...) And a quarter second Beans ^r Pease in the
Market (...) Item, a bushel of Beans or Pase mingled with Oats for provender
in June (...) Item, a quarter best Oats in the Market (...) And a Bushel of
the same wihin every Inn or other house (...) Item, a Kilderkin of good Ale, e
double Beer, with carriage (...) And a Kilderkin of good Ale or Beer, with
carriage (...) Item, a full quart of the best Ale or Beer by measure seaed
(...) And a full quart of single Ale or Beeere by measure sealed (...) Item, a
pound of Butter sweet and new the best in the Mrket (...) And pound of second
Butter sweet and new in Shop or Market (...) Item, a pound best Cheese in the
Shop or Market (...) And a pound second Cheese in Shop or Market (...) Item, a
stone of the best Beef at the Butchers, weighing eight pound Avoirdepois (...)
And a Stone of second Beef at the Butchers (...) Item, a quarter best Veale at
the Butchers (...) And a quarter second Veale at the Butchers (...) Item, a
quarter best Wether Mutton at the Butchers (...) And a quarter second Wether
Mutton at the Butchers (...) Item a quarter best Lamb at the Butchers (...)
And a quarter second Lamber at the Butchers (...) Item a fat Pigge the best in
the Market (...) And a lean or second Pigge in the Market (...) Item a couple
of Capons the best in the Market (...) And a lean or second couple of Capons
in the Market (...) Item, a fat Goose the best in the Market (...) Item, a
couple of Chickens the best in the Market (...) Item, a couple of second
Chickens in the Market (...) Item, a couple of Rabbets the best in the Market
(...) And a couple of second Rabbets in the Market (...) Item, a dozen of
Pigeons the best in the Market (...) Item, that every man being in Company,
six or more together, having at Dinner or Supper, good Bread and Drink, Beef
and Mutton, boiled or roasted or else Veale boiled, and Pigge, Beef or Veale
roasted: or otherwise upon Fish-dayes to have good Bread and Drink, salt Fish,
or salt Salmon, Ling, Eggs, and Butter, and so in default of one meat, to
have another, every man to pay for his meal (...) Item, a pound of Tallow
Candles made of Wicke (...) And a pound of Cotton or Watching Candles (...)
Item, a Fether-bed, with necessary apparel for one man, one night, and so
depart (...) Item, a Fether-bed, with necessary apparel by the week for one
man alone (...) And the like Fether-bed and furniture for two together, by the
week (...) Item, a Mattresse or Flocke-bed by the week, for one or two
together (...) Item, a Chamber with two beds and good furniture one night and
so depart (...) And the like Chamber and furniture by the week (...) Item, if
any man abide in any such Chamber, over and above one day and one night, then
to pay after the rate of the whole week, being as aforesaid. (...) Item, three
Horse-loaves at the Bakers, every Loaf weighing ^ Troy. (...) And two of the
same Loaves within every June or other house (...) Item, a load of Straw for
litter with carriage (...) Item, an hundred weight of good and sweet Haie (...)
Item every bottle of Haie weighing ^ Avoirdepois (...) Item, Haie and Litter
day and night for one Horse within every June (...) And the like Haie and
Litter day and night for one Horse within every other house (...) Item, good
Grass for one Horse day and night, and so depart (...) And the like good
Grass for one Horse by the whole week (...) Item, a load of Talwood, keeping
the Assize with carriage (...) Item, a thousand Billets, keeping the Assize
with carriage (...) Item, a hundred of Fagots, keeping the Assize with carriage
(...) Item, one of the same Fagots within every house (...) Item, a load of
good brush Bavines, with carriage (...) Item, a load of long or great
Logge-Wood, with carriage (...) Item, an hundred of good Oak Boords, with
carriage (...) Item, an hundred of good Elm boords, with carriage (...) Item,
a thousand of Brickes, with carriage (...) Item, a quarter of Charcoles, with
carriage (...) Item, a vacant or empty room, either stable or chamber by the
week (...) Item, a quart of the best Claret or White Wine at the Vintners
(...) And a quart of the best Canary Sack at the Vintners by measure sealed
(...) Item a quart of the best Sherry sack at the Vintners by measure sealed
(...)
The (...) price (...) Woodstock

God save the king

