HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for the better direction of those who desire to repair to the
Court for the Cure of their Disease called, The Kings Evil.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, in his most Gracious and Pious disposition,
being as ready and willing as any King or Queen of this Realm ever was in any
thing to relieve the distresses and necessities of His good Subjects, and the
good success upon those who have need of His Sacred touch for the Cure of the
Kings Evil, being as happy, by the blessing of Almighty God, as any of His
Royal predecessors have been, Yet in His Princely wisdom foreseeing that
in this great work of Charity to singular persons, those fit times are
necessarily to be observed, which may not prejudice the general health of His
people, His Majesty did by His Proclamation in March last, declare His Royal
will and pleasure to be, That whereas the usual times of presenting such
persons to His Majesty for this purpose, were Easter and Whitsuntide, That
from thencefoorth the times should be Easter and Michaelmas, as times more
convenient, both for the Temperature of the Season, and in respect of any
Contagion which might happen in the near access to His Majesty's sacred
Person.

And His Majesty did thereby accordingly will and command, That from the time
of publishing the said Proclamation, none should presume to repair to His
Majesty's royal Court, to be healed of that Disease, before the Feast of S.
Michael the Archangel then next coming, and now last past.

His most excellent Majesty (now considering that the danger of the infection
of the plague is very much dispersed in diverse Counties of this Kingdom) does
hereby Will and Command, and does also declare His Royal will and pleasure to
be, That from the time of publishing this Proclamation, none presume to
repair to His Majesty's Royal Court, to be healed of that disease called the
Kings-Euill, before the fifteenth day of December next ensuing, and in case the
said Infection should continue or increase, which God of his mercy divert, his
Majesty will in the mean time signify and declare His Royal Will and
Pleasure by Proclamation for some further time, for that purpose.

And His Majesty does further Will and Command, as in his former Proclamation
aforesaid he Commanded, that all such as shall come and repair to the Court
for this purpose, shall bring with them Certificates under the hands of the
Parson, Vicar, or Minister, and Churchwardens of those several Parishes where
they dwell, and from whence they come, testifying according to the truth, that
they have not at any time before been touched by the King, to the intent to be
healed of that disease.

And His Majesty does straightly Charge all Justices of Peace, Constables and
other Officers, That they do not suffer any to pass, but such as have such
Certificates, upon pain of His Majesty's displeasure.

And to the end that all His loving Subjects may the better take knowledge of
this His Majesty's pleasure and Command; His Will is, that this Proclamation
be published and affixed in some open place in every Market Town of this
Realm. All which His Majesty does Command strictly to be observed by all and
every person, and persons whom it shall, or may concern, upon such pains, and
penalties as may be inflicted upon them, for the neglect thereof.

Given at Our Court at Hampton, The thirteenth day of October, in the seventh
year of Our Reign. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY: and by the Assigns of John Bill. M. D C. XXXI.


