THE MOST DELECtable and pleasant History of Clitiphon and Leucippe:

Written first in Greek, by Achilles Statius, an Alexandrian: and now newly
translated into English, By VV. B. Whereunto is also annexed the argument of
every Book, in the beginning of the same, for the better understanding of the
History.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for William Mattes, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreete, at the sign of the hand and Plough. 1597.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, EARL OF Southampton, and Baron of
Titchfield, W. B. wishes continuance of health, with prosperous estate and
felicity.
AT what time (Right Honorable) the renowned Prince Philip of Macedon, was
about to lay siege unto the famous City of Corinth, the Corinthians appalled
with the fear of this sudden news, every man fell to prepare himself ready
to the defense of the City: here one scoured up old armor, another carried
mortar and stones, to fill up the breaches of the wall: others went to make a
trench, others to the casting up of a bulwark: to conclude, every man applied
himself about some things, as need and time did require. Which diligence of
the people, Diogenes marking well, having nothing whereon he might bestow his
labor, girding his clothes to him, began to roll his Tub, wherein he dwelt, up
and down the Market place: and being asked of one of his acquaintance why he
did so: And I also (said he) do roll my Tub, that amongst so many workmen I
alone might not be id^^. In like manner (right noble Lord) since the same hat^
happened to me now, as it was in Diogines age, that amongst so many multitudes of
writers, which eueryday do publish and set forth new works, I alone might
not be idle, I have thought good with Diogenes to roll my small Tub also: and
because that, non omnibus contingit adire Corinthum, Of every course wood
Mercury is not made, neither is every man's Muse alike, to fly aloft: I have
bestowed my labor on the translation of this pleasant History, first written in
Greek by Achilles Statius, which now I have presumed to dedicate to your honor,
being a delightful poem, although in prose: which does consist in the fiction,
not in the meeter; although seeming full of prolixitie, yet with delight
avoiding satietie, being a mean to beguile the time, and other exercises being
past, to serve for recreation: wherefore I commit this to your honorable
protection: beseeching your honor favorably to accept of this my small
travel in translating of this Author, whom if I have worthily translated as he
requires, I am assured your honor will well like of: knowing that if the
gracious beams of your favor shine therein, no carping Momus can shadow it.
Resting thus in hope of your Honors courtesy, I cease: wishing you a happy
life, with increase of all honor and felicity.

Your Honors in all duty: W. B.

To the Courteous Reader.
THe Proverb is, where good wine is to be sold, there needs no luy-bush:
where the Author by himself is most exquisit, there needs no inscriptions of
commendations, or apology to be set before his door: but because he is a
stranger unknown, and lately arrived into this Country, I will show him the
like entertainment, as other country men have done, to show who and what he is:
A Grecian he was born, as by his eloquence may plainly appear; and from near
about Constantinople, as some have supposed, he went to be preferred in
Alexandria, where he wrote this History, as work most rare and delectable: of
the reading of which, I may verily say (as Fulgentius says in his
Mythiologickes) the moral does yield unfeigned profit: whose copious
eloquence, pleasant and delightful style, I leave to the gentle Readers to
commend: to whom I may say (as Crucius says upon Heliodorus) there is none
who is learned, and desirous of good instructions, which once having begun to
read him, can lay him aside, until he have perused him over. Thus committing
him to your favorable censure, I end.

Your friend, W. B.

The first Book of Achilles Statius, of the love of Clitiphon and Leucippe.
The Contents.
In it is declared the History of Europa, the Country and parents of
Clitiphon, the coming of Panthia and Leucippe from Byzantium to Tyrus: the
manner how Clitiphon fell in love with Leucippe: the discourse of Clinias
concerning women: the unfortunate death of Charicles.

IN the shore of the Assyrian sea, is situated Sydon, chief City of
Phaenicia, and the original of ye famous race of the Thebans, this City has
two heavens, containing within them a great compass, but the passage to them
is very narow, drawing in the water of the sea by little and little, on the
right side of the Port where the Creek by force of the water is made hollow:
there lies open another passage, by the which the water does flow back again,
whereby a haven is joined to a haven: so that in this ships may harbor in
winter, and in the other in summer they may safely ly^ at road. Thither when
out of the maine sea by force of a mighty tempest I was brought, for the safe
arrival (as the custom was) I sacrificed to the Goddess of the Phaenicians,
which the Sydonyans do ^^ll Astarte; but the most of the Latins do call her
Venus. Then walked I round about many parts of the city, viewing the (...)
situation, the famous edifices, and sumptuous buildings, admiring also the
magnificences of their temples, wherein when I had sufficiently gazed on their
offerings to their gods hung at their tabernacles, I by chance espied a fair
large picture, wherein was drawn the sea and land, and the whole history of
Europe: the sea was called ye Phaenician sea, but ye land was called ye
Sydonian: on the land was a grove full of young damsels: in the sea was a bull
swimming, carrying on his back a most beautiful virgin, directing his course
toward Creet: the grove was garnished with variety of many flowers, and
planted with many fair trees* and pleasant shrubs, whose boughs and leaves did
so naturally (as it were) embrace and tie one another, as that they did serve
for use of a house. Moreover, the painter had with such cunning workmanship
drawn a thin shadow under the leaves, that in some places the beams of the sun
pearcing through, did somewhat shine: this grove was compassed round with reeds,
and set throughout with sweet and odoriferous plants, as myrrh, roses, spike,
daf^adill, wherevnder were made pleasant seats to rest upon: but in the bottom
of this grove there was a most bright fountain, which winding it self through
the midst of it did water these flowers and plants: neither were they wanting
who had the ^uersight of it: for one was weeding and picking the beds, another
pruning the trees, an other standing over the river with a spade in his hand,
did open the course of the water: but on that part of the grove which bordered
on the sea, the painter had so artificially drawn the maids, as that they did
show both mirth and sorrow by their countenances, having garlands on their
heads, their hair about their shoulders, their feet without shoes, their legs
bare, their clothes tuckt up to the knee, their faces pale, their cheeks
wrinckled and wan, their eyes beholding the sea, their lips, as it were for
fear about to speak somewhat, a little gaping, their hands were stretched
forth toward the bull, and they went so far into the sea, that the water came
up to the upper part of their legs: their carriage and gesture of their body
did appear to be such, as that they seemed they would go to the bull, yet
feared to commit themselves to the violence of the water. The sea had two
colors, that part which was next to the land was somewhat red, but the deeper
and further off, of his natural color: there out of the midst of the water did
appear certain rocks, as it were cast up out of the earth, which seemed to be
all white with the foam of the swelling and raging waves beating on the side.
In the middle of the sea was painted a bull, which was carried by the waves,
casting up the water before him like unto a mountain. The virgin sitting upon
his back, not after the manner of horsemen, but both her l^gs being fitly laid
down on his right side, with her left hand held his horn, as wagoners
accustom to hold their reins, whose direction the bull did follow: her breast
to her privy parts was attired with a veil of lawne, the rest of her body was
covered with a purple mantle, all the other parts were to be seen, save there
where her garments covered, for she had a deep nauill, a plain smooth belly,
narrow flank, round buttocks: her tender breasts seemed to swel, through the
middle of which went down a fair narrow way most pleasant and delightful to
the beholders: with one hand did she hold his horn, with the other his tail,
but yet so that the attire of her head covered with a scarf cast over her
shoulders, was held on fast against the force of the wind, which did so beat on
her bosom, that every where it seemed to swell. She thus sitting on the bull,
was carried like a ship, her scarf serving in stead of a sail. Round about
the bull Dolphins floted about* and sported at their loves in such sort, as
that you would think, you saw their very motions drawn. There was a little
boy, which led the bull, displaying his wings abroad, holding in his hand a
Torch, and turning to Jupiter did smile, as though he mocked him, that he for
his cause was thus transformed into a Bull. I thus beholding this picture,
praised every part thereof: but looking more earnestly upon Cupid, which led
the Bull, I spoke thus to my self: Behold how heaven, sea and land, do obey
the commandments of this little boy when as a young man which was then by chance
present, and understood my words, said: This thing truly I can testify, to
whom for loves sake, so many adversities have happened. The^ said I, I pray good
fellow tell me what manner, and what they be yt thou have suffered? for thy
countenance does show that thou have had something to do with the mysteries
of this God. Then answered he: you do call me sir back, to recount a most
mingled and confused bedrole of unfortunate mishaps: all which will seem to you
to be but mere fables, and idle figments. Then said I, no I swear by Jove and
god Cupid himself, that the recounting of these thy misfortunes will not be
troublesome to me, but rather the more acceptable, because they may seem to be
somewhat fabulous: when as I had said so, I took the man by the hand, and led
him into a wood hard by, where many broad beeches, and dark shadowing plain
trees did grow, near unto the banks of crystal stream: which gently running
did yield a pleasant murmuring. There when I had chosen a fit seat I ^ad him
^it him down, and I my self sat down by him. Then (said I) now is it time
that you begin to declare your hard mishaps, for here is a place altogether
full of delight, and fit for such amourous discourses: then he from the
beginning began to speak thus. My Country is Phaenicia, borne in Tyrus; my name
is Clitophon, my father called Hippias, my fathers brother in law is called
Sostratus, for my father had two wives: This Socratus, because of an
inheritance which descended to him there by his mother, dwelt always at
Byzantiu^: My father dwelt at Tyrus, my own mother I never saw, for she died
when I was a child; my father therefore married another wife, by who^ he had a
daughter called Caligone; which he decreed to make my wife: but the destinies
which are more mighty the^ mortal man, had appointed the contrary, and reserved
another for that end. For oftentimes the gods do accustom to foretell things
to come to mortal men by dreams, not that by foreknowing of dangers they
should avoid them (for no man can avoid that which the Destenies have
decreed) but that when they fall out, they should bear them with more
patience: for sudden and unexpected misfortunes, do quell and rent the mind
stricken with their unlooked for coming: but those which are known before and
foretold, whilst the mind by little and little is brought to the cogitation of
them, do far less trouble them. Therefore when I came to nineteen years of
age, and my father not long after had appointed the marriage to be solemnized,
then fortune began to act her Commedie: for when I had laid me down to rest,
Morpheus began to fill my head full of his fantasies, and idle dreams: me
thought that I was so joined together with a maid, that from the nauill to the
head we were but one body, and then after we grew all into one; me thought
there stood a woman behind me, whose visage was grim, stature tall, ghastly
looks, bloody eyes, sharp cheeks, her hairs vipers and adders, holding in
her left hand a firebrand, wherewith in a rage she stroke me a blow, in that
part where both our bodies did come into one, and by force did rent her from me
again: wherefore being stricken with fear, I awaked out of my dream, neither
did I disclose this to any: but still by my self alone I thought upon them
often. In the mean season there came Letters from Byzantium, from my uncle
Sostratus, to my Father, whose tenor was thus.

Sostratus to his brother Hippias, sends commendations.
MY daughter Leucippe, and my wife Panthia, are coming to you: for open war
is proclaimed between us and the Thracians, keep you my dearest pledges
firm, till the end of the war: Farewell.


My father having read the Letter, rose up presently, and went unto the sea
shore: and not long after he returned again with a great train of servants
and maids, which Sostratus had sent with his wife and his daughter. Amongst
them was a most beautiful woman, of stature tall, in rich and sumptuous
apparel; upon whom as soon as ever I had cast mine eyes, I remembered Europa,
sailing upon the back of the Bull: her eyes did seem to be quick, rolling
with a pleasant kind of delight, her hair yellow and curled, her eye brows
were of a pure black, her eyes white, save that the middle was tempered with a
bright delightful read, like to that die wherewith the Lydian women do
color their yuorie: her mouth beginning to open her coral lips, like sweet
rose leaves, wherefore as soon as I saw her, I presently felt a grievous wound
pearcing to my heart. For beauty is sharper then any dart to wou^d withal, and
by the eyes making passage for his amorous wound, pearceth to the heart. In the
very self same moment of time, I did both praise her stature, was amazed at
her beauty, tremble in mind, and more eagerly admire her beauty, and
oftentimes did I strive to withdraw mine eyes from beholding her, but they
still resisted: for being allured with the sweetness and excellency of her
beauty, turned themselves thither again, and at length they inioyed the
victory. But the women being brought in, one part of the house was appointed
for the many father commanded supper to be made ready: and when supper time was
come, my father had appointed that on every side of the table two should sit,
he and I in the middle, the mothers on the left hand, and the daughters on the
right: but when I marked how directly opposite she was placed against me, a
sudden joy rose in my mind of a sudden, to think of her who now was the
opposite mark whom my thoughts should aim at. For what I did eat in that
supper I cannot very well tell: for I was like to the saints to whom meat is
offered, yet eat nothing: or else like to those who dream of supper: but
sitting up directly, my back leaning against the wall, I did altogether behold
the Maid, earnestly beholding and stealing, as it were her beauty. And this
was all my supper. After the Table was taken away, one of the boys of the
house came to the Table, and began to play on a Citterne: and first striking
the strings with his finger alone, gave a small shrill sound: then taking a
quill when he had timed it, he sung a song to his instrument, how Apollo did
blame Daphne for flying away, and how he himself pursued her: and even now was
about to take hold of her, that ye maid might be transformed into a tree, with
whose leaves he did plat himself a crown. The which song did minister more
heat unto my fire: for amorous talk is a certain vehement incitation of
desire. And although that a man by nature were temperat, yet by an example he
would be drawn to follow, and so much the sooner, by how much the example were
more excellent: for that same bashfulnesse, which did call one back from
offending, being expelled by the dignity of some worthier thing, is changed
into lice^tiousnesse. Wherefore I spoke to my self thus what was not Apollo
taken in love? and cast away al shame? and openly pursued a virgin, why do
thou therefore languish in slouthfulnes, and being overcome with shamefastness,
do prefer continency, before thy desire? what art thou better then a God?
But when it began to wex somewhat late, ye women went first to bed, and not long
after we also: others having bestowed the pleasure of their supper on their
bellies, but I on my eyes: for being full with the pleasant countenance and
most sweet looks, and even in a manner drunk with love it self, I went into
my chamber, where I accustomed to lie, but no sleep would harbor in my weary
eyes. For surely it is so ordained by nature, that when al diseases, yet
especially those of the body are more troublesome by night, and when we are at
rest they are most busy to torment us, and do afflict us wish greater grief:
for when our members are at ease, then has ye wound time to rage. And such is
the condition of a wounded mind: for when the body does cease from motions, the
mind being grieved does afflict one beyond al measure: for the eyes and ears
in the day time are occupied about many matters, and do not feel the sharp
cogitations, but withdraw the mind so, that it can have no time to grieve: but
if every part be detained with pleasing rest, the mind the^ gathering himself
together is tossed up and down with the daily storms of hard mishaps: all
which till then did lie asleep, but new are awaked and ready at hand: for in
mourning there are sorows: in cares cogitations: in dangers fear: in love a
continual burning fire: thus every sorrow has his passions. At length morning
appeared, and sleep taking pity of me, brought me a little ease: yet would
not this we^ch out of my mind, but al my dreams were of Leucippe, me thought I
talked with her, I played with her, I supped with her, and did attain more
pleasures then in the day time: I kissed her, and did attain more pleasures:
not long after came in one of the servants of the house, and awaked me, whose
importunatenesse I cursed, because he had interrupted me of so sweet a dream.
And rising out of my bed, I went of purpose, and walked in the Gallerie which
lay before this Maids door, and I brought with me a book, which looking down
I did read so, yt as often as I came over against her door, I cast mine eyes
upon her. And having walked thus a while drawing in more love by beholding, I
went my way, my mind miserably afflicted: and after this manner I spent three
days: I had a kinsman in the house, whose father and mother both were dead,
his name was Clinias, he was two years elder then I, and was in love with a
young boy, to whom he used such liberality, that having bought a goodly fair
gelding, the boy commending him, he presently bestowed it upon him. Evermore
did I mock and jest with him, that he had so much leisure from his business,
to spend his time in love, and still to be held fast in his delights: but he
smiling upon me, and shaking his head, said: I hope yet that at length the time
will come, that you be caught in loves snares also; to him then I came, and
having saluted him, I sat down by him: now (said I) O Clinias, do I suffer
punishment for the reproaches which I bestowed on thee: for now I my self am
taken in love also: then he clapping both his hands together, fell into a great
laughter: and rising up kissed my face, yt which showed what amorous watching I
had endured, and said: true it is that thou art in love, for thine eyes do
show as much: he had scant said these words, when Charicles (for so was the boy
called) came running in, and said: I am come to thee, O Clinias, wonderfully
grieved in mind, to declare unto thee: and here together with Clinias he fetched
a great sigh: the^ Clinias as it were depending of his soul, with a foultering
tongue, said. Thou do kill me with thy silence, what it is that tormenteth thee
thus? or with whom do thou strive? Then said Charicles, my father goes about
to marry me to a wife, and she is hard favored, and deformed too, that I might
be tormented with a double hell: for since a fair wife is a great trouble, how
can it otherwise be, but that an ill favored one m^st needs be twice worse; but
my father gaping after wealth, does affect much that family: woe is me, poor
wretch, which am sold for money, to be my wives bondslaue; which when Clinias
hear^, he wexed pale, and inueying bitterly against women kind, he vehemently
dissuaded him from marriage, saying: what, does thy father go about to marry
thee? What have thou deserved, that thou should be cast into bonds? do
not thou hear great Jove himself speaking for thee thus?

To these I Will give the price of the heavenly fire stolen away,
To be a plague which none shall shun, ne ever shall decay.
Such is the pleasure which is gotten in such matters, that it may be very well
likened to ye nature of the Mermaids, for they by the sweetness of their
songs, do utterly destroy those which listen to them: and thou may behold the
greatness of the mishaps ensuing, by the very preparation of the marriage: as
by the sweet sounding of the Music, clapping together of doors, and burning
of Tapers. Now who seeing such great tumults and stir, would not count him
unfortunate that goes about to take a wife? to me he seems to go unto a
battle: and if that thou did abhor ye study of humanity, then thou
might perhaps be ignorant in the misaduentures which have happened by women:
but when thou have profited so well in that art, that thou can remember what
arguments they have ministered for the stage, why should thou forget the
Jewel of Eryphile, the banquet of Phylomela, the slander of Sthenoboea, the
incest of Aerope, the cruelty of Progne in killing her own child? What and if
the beauty of Chriseis, did allure Agamemnon, the favor of Bryseis entice
Achilles, yet they were cause that both their armies were consumed by the
plague. Candaules king of Lydia, married a fair wife, but he was slain by her:
the nuptial torches of Helen burnt Troy: the chastity of Penelope, caused a
great number of gallant wooers to be slain: Phaedra caused Hippolitus, whom she
loved, and Clytemnestra, caused Agamemnon, whom she hated, presently to be
made away. O women ready to all wickedness, which are a like pernicious unto
them whom they love, as to those whom they hate. And what was the reason why
Agamemnon should be slain, whose beauty was divine.

His head and eyes were like to almighty Jove,
And did like majesty with his person move.
And yet (oh Jupiter!) such a man's head was cut off by a woman: and for fair
women let this suffice, in whose company a mean unhappiness is always
present. For beauty sometimes does ease calamities: and it alone is one good
thing amongst so many badde. But if she be (as you say) deformed, you are
punished indeed with a double hell: and who by any means can endure it,
especially being of so tender age, and rare beauty? Do not (by the immortal
Gods) O Charicles, cast thy self into seru^tude: nor do not croppe the flower
of thy age before the time: for amongst many other mischiefs which be in
marriage, yet this is one, that the strength of thy age must be spent there:
do not, I pray thee (good Charicles) do not, I say, undo thy self: and let so
deformed a Gardener croppe so fair and sweet a Rose. Then said Charicles,
the Gods and I have always had a care of this, and the marriage shall not be
yet this good while, and many things may be done by night: and we will
consider of it at our leisure. Wherefore, now it remaynes that I go and
exercise my self with the horse which you gave me, for as yet I never did
ride him. So he went away about to end his first and last race: but I went
forward to declare unto Clinias how all my matters stood, how I fell into
love, and how I enjoyed the sight of her: I told him also her lodging, her
supper, her beauty. At length perceiving my self to talk somewhat absurdly:
O Clinias (said I) I can never be even with grief, for love has cast all his
fury upon me, and has left me no place to take my rest: Leucippe is always
in my mind, in my eyes, in my heart, and al my cogitations: neither ever was
there any man to who^ like mishap ever happened, for my grief lies at home.
Thou talkest like a mad man, said Clinias, since it is not possible to enjoy a
more happier love then thou do: for thou have no need to go to another man's
house, no need of passengers between, fortune has not separated her from
thee, but even placed her together with thee in the same house: to another
which is in love, it is sufficient if he can but enjoy his mistress looks,
and he accounts it the greatest pleasure that is, but to satisfy his eyes
with beholding her: but they are thought most happy, who have liberty to talk
together: but thou do both see her, hear her, and eat and drink together
with her. And although that thou art thus happy, yet thou complainest, and do
bear an ungrateful mind toward Cupid, who has done thus much for thee: do
not thou know yet, that there is greater pleasure in beholding thy mistress,
then in touching her? For while the eyes do look one upon another, like unto a
looking glass, they do take in them the true proportion of the body: for ye
very images of beauty sent from the body, and by the help of the eyes falling
to ye heart, do there, although the bodies be separated asunder, enjoy a happy
meeting: and it is far more delightful then the carnal copulation of the
bodies, which does seem to me to be but altogether vain: and to tell you
briefly my opinion, what I think, continual use has greatest force to
persuade, and the eyes are the getters of love: and to get favor, daily custom
does most of all avail, whose force truly is such, that it will tame the very
savage wild beasts, much more women. Moreover, the equality in years will
avail much to obtain her favor for ever. Between the like is the best
coherence: and so it is ordained by nature, that every like chooses his like:
so that where she does perceive she is loved, she will requite it with a
mutual love again, for every maid would have her self accounted fair and
beautiful, and does rejoice to be beloved, and does commend her lover as a
witness of her beauty. And if there be any which thinks she is beloved of
no^, she then begins to misdeeme of her own countenance. Therefore this one
thing especially I exhort you to do, that you endeavor by all means to bring it
so to pass, that she may think she is beloved of you: and soon after will she
imitate you: but how may these de done which you tell me? I pray thee instruct
me better what I may do: for you before this time have sacrificed at Loves
altars, and have been a scholar in his schools, and know well how to behave
your self in these matters: for I am altogether ignorant, and a more nouice in
loves affairs, and one who never saw his colors displayed before. Then
answered Clinias, you need not take such pains to learn this of others, for
Cupid himself herein will be your master: for even as little infants who^ no
man teaches to suck, yet they by themselves do learn, and naturally do know
norishment to be in their mothers dugs: so young men being first with child of
love, have need of no master to instruct them to bring forth: but if grief
torment you, and the length of time do cause any necessity, although that this
be your first delivery: yet you shall not err in any thing: for this God
himself will take upon him to play the Midwife, as time and occasion shall
afford, so must you apply your talk: but above all things take heed of
unchaste and immodest dealings: but use the matter so with silence, as that by
your action they might conceive your meaning. For young men and maids are
affected with like modesty: and although they be desirous of copulation, yet
they would not seem to have any talk concerning such matters, for why they
think dishonestie in the words, but they who have bin well experienced in men's
matters, hold it no disgrace to talk more amply of such a subject: but
virgins, knowing the first assayes of their lovers to proceed for cause of
trial, by some pleasant actions, do seem to show their willingness to them:
wherefore, if in words at first you would have her to try dame Venus sports,
that speech will offend her ears, for she will blush, and utterly deny your
requests: and take them as a great indignity and disgrace offered to her:
neither at first will she grant, because she may not seem to yield of her own
accord: but in the end when she has perceived how ^long with your petitions
you have knocked at the posterne of her heart, then will she seem more
mollified, and yield her self more tractable to your desires: but not so much,
that you might think she is wholly won already: but then you must begin to use
some merry familiar toys between you, and when opportunity likes you best,
requite her kindness with a kiss: for the kiss of a lover to a willing wench
is a silent woing, but to an unwilling, is in steed of an humble petition. But
yet although she were loath to refuse this your kindness, she will seem with a
little violence to resist that by an opinion of necessity, this might seem to
excuse her maydenly modesty. And although she do resist, yet enforce her not,
but in res^^^^ng mark how she does behave her self; for in this matter you
had need to be circumspect: and if you perceive that she remain still in her
accustomed guise, use no violence, but think that as yet she is not
persuaded: and if that you would have her more tractable to your hand,
dissemble the matter cunningly: nor rashly do not you go about to mar your
whole match. Then said I, thou have helped me wonderfully O Clinias, in my
proceedings: and I do not doubt but that the matter will go forward as you would
wish: but I am greatly afraid, lest this new happiness be a beginning of
further mishaps, and cast me into a more burning fire: wherefore if this my
grief should daily increase, what should I do? or whither should I turn me? I
cannot have her to my wife, because my father has appointed already another
to supply that place: neither is she a forreiner or deformed; neither as it is
with Charicles, does my father sell me to her: but he does give me his own
daughter, the most bewtiful creature alive, except Leucippe: but I now am
blind, and cannot judge of her excellent favor, which truly does deserve to be
commended, for I do see nothing but Leucippe: and surely at this time, I am
between two contraries, for the vehemence of love, and the commandments of my
father, do draw my mind almost a sunder: who shall decide this controversy?
necessity does strive with nature, my mind dear father is willing to obey;
the might of the adversary withsta^deth me, he does show my torments to the
Judge; he is here ready with his arrows; holding firebrands in his hands
argues my case; I will yield unto you father, but alas I am compassed round
with a scorching fire. Thus did we dispute together of the god of Love and his
behests: when on a sudden, one of Charicles playfellowes came hastily running
in, presaging some ill news by his countenance; so that Clinias in a maze
cried out, Sure some harm is happened to Charicles: he had scant said so, but
the messenger told that Charicles, was dead: with which message Clinias was so
astonished, that like unto one strooken with lightening, his voice and senses
failed him, and presently fell into a swoune; but the boy telling forward his
tale, said; he got upon your horse Clinias, and at first, spurred him gently:
but when he had ridden two or three courses about, he stayed, and rayned him
up, wiping his face all dropping down with sweat: and as he was standing
thus, behold a sudden noise arose behind him; wherewith the horse being
afraid, gave a mighty Iumpe; began to run headlong about, biting of his
bit, writhing of his neck, shaking of his maine; incensed with fear; was
carried violentle every where: his forefeete prauncing forward, his hinderfeet
striving to overtake the former, hastened his course, and drove him the faster
forward; the poor boy, in this contention, was tossed up and down, like unto
a floting ship in the main^ sea, tossed on the waves with a mighty tempest:
thus was he unhappy boy shaked up from the head to the tail; from this
side to that; now every minute ready to fall: at length when he could hold the
raynes no longer, he then gave himself to the custody of fortune: but the
horse being violentye carried, went ranging abroad, leaving the beaten way, and
ran into a wood; where he dashed the poor child against a tree, and as a
bullet is cast out of the mouth of a roaring cannon, with such force fell he out
of the saddell; his face was deformed with so many wounds, as there were
sharp knags on the stock, which fearing not to kill, pearsed to the bones: his
body was tangled in the bridell, and was laid in the very high way to death,
but the horse was so astonished at ye fall, that he could run no further, and
being thus hindered from his flight, he began to strike him with his heels, and
did so tear his face with his iron shoes yt non^ could know his favor: when
Clinias had heard this, being in a sound amaze, held his peace a great while,
at length having obtained a little leave of sorrow to speak, he fell into great
howling and lamentations, and with all speed he did run to the dead body,
whom I also followed comforting him as well as I could, but in the mean
season, Caricles was brought in, a most grievous and lamentable spectacle to
behold, for he was all over so torn, cut, and mangled, that none which were
present there and did behold him, could abstain from weeping: but his father
took his death most heavily, weeping bitterly: what a one, O my child, did
thou go from me, and what a one art thou returned again! O most unfortunate art
of riding: thou art not taken from me by the accustomed kind of death: neither
haste thou the very image which a dead man should have: in dead bodies though
that the liuelynesse of the visage and other parts of the body depart, yet the
favor remains, which yet might something lighten my grief, for although
death take away the life from a man, yet he does leave the favor of his
countenance behind him, but yet these are al taken from thee: wherefore thou
do die a double death, both of body and soul also: so now thy ghost will
wander abroad, and thy soul is flowne away, which I shall never find more.
When O my son, will thou mary a wife? where now, O thou unfortunate horseman,
to thee will I sacrifice thy nuptial rights, and in stead of a bed thou shall
have a grave: for marriage, death: for the songs to Hymineus, himnes to Dis: for
bridal music, funeral lamentations. I did hope dear son, to have burnt
these tapers after another manner then these do now, but envying fortune, has
extinguished the^ together with thy self, and for nuptial, has caused
funeral lights to burn. O cruel lights, which from a wedding to a burying
form are changed. And after this manner did his father lament: but Clinias
contrariwise (for the father and lover and both mourn together) solitary to
himself, said: I was the cause and author of all this which has happened: Ah why
did I bestow such a gift upon him. Had not I a guilt cup, wherewith I used to
sacrifice, and could not I have given him that? but I must bestow a foul
beast on so fair a boy, and must go adorn him too in silver trapping, golden
bridell, and richly set forth all his other ornaments. O what a fool was I (
Caricles) to adorn him in Gold, that thus was the cruel author of thy
death? O most cruel beast, more sauadge then the wild beasts; most far,
unkind, and not knowing true beauty indeed; he wiped the sweat from thy
back, promised thee prouinder enough, commended thy pace, and thou have slain
him which thus gentlely has dealt with thee: for thou did not only scorn
the burden of so fine a horseman as he was, but also casteds him down, and
being down, did strike him with thy feet. O unhappy man that I am, to buy
him which should be the author of thy death. When all solemnities for the
funeral were ended, I went to Leucippe, which then was walking in the
Gardaine, within the Gardain there was a little arbor compassed round with a
little wall, at every corner was a pillar which did bear up the work in the
top, all this arbor within was set with pleasant flowers, sweet plants, and
wouen round with green boughs; and bound together with such art, as that
naturally they did seem to embrace one another; for the greatest of ye trees
which did grow there, were Iuie, Priuet, and this clipped about a thick plane
tree; the other about the sweet berry tree; so that the tree was the supporter
of the Iuie, and the Iuie a Garlande for the tree: about both these trees a
great vine did wind about; which being laden with ripe grapes, did yield
pleasant fruit for the gatherers: all the ground underneath was set with
pleasant flowers, and when the leaves of the trees shaken by the wind did
remove a little, and gave passage for the beams of the Sun, so that all the
flowers did seem then to strive, to show the beauty of themselves: the Rose
and the Daffodil did seem to color the place purple; which being blown with
a gentle Western wind, did breath sweet odours, refreshing the senses with a
pleasing smell, sending down a sweet refreshing to the inward parts within:
the Daffodil was almost like the Rose, which seemed as yet to retain the very
hew it self of fair Narcissus, when Echo with other of her sister Nymphs,
sought to allure the sweet boy: there were also Uiolets, whose color was like
to the color of a calm sea, on the top of which stood, a drop of pure
water, as it were a fair spring rising from the root, and cast the reflexe
like unto a glass, there seemed to be two Gardaines, one in deed, the other
but a shadow: In this arbor were diverse sorts of birds, whereof some were tame,
and fed with the hand, others were at liberty and wild, skipping upon the
tops of the boughs; as the Grasshopper and the Swallow, noted chiefly for
their chattering: some glittering with ye brightness of their feathers, as the
Peacocke, Parret, and Swanne: the Grasshopper did recount yt lodgings of Aurora,
the Swallow did sing of the banquet of Tereus: the Swanne did feed at the head
of a spring: the Parret did hang in a Cage among the boughs: but the Peacocke
amid the flowers displaying of his train, did strive to excel the brightness
of the flowers, and the bright shining of the other birds: wherefore that I
might make the maid know that my speeches did tend to love, I began to talk
with Satyrus, the argument of my talk being taken from the Peacocke, and she
by chance walking with Clio, stood just before him as he displayed his train.
Truly said I, the Peacocke does not do this, without great art, for being now
ready to love, and desirous to allure his female, adorneth himself after the
manner as you see: do not you see (and poynted with my hand) how the Peahen
stands behind the tree? to her does he show himself thus in his bravery:
showing the beauty of his plumes, wherein the eyes being set in order in gold,
bordered with purple, do cast a radiant shining to the eye: then Satyrus
knowing my meaning, and to what end this talk belonged, replied: And does the
force of love extend so far, as that birds be enflamed with a certain heat
of his fire? Then answered I: yea not only birds, but also Serpents,
foure-footed beasts, plants and stones are naturally inclined to love: for the
loadstone does love iron, that if so be that it touch it, or be but near it,
it draws it to it, as it were fed with an amorous heat: what I pray you, is
not that a kind of mutual kissing, between the loving stone and the loved
iron. Moreover concerning plants, it is the opinion of all Philosophers (which
truly I thought had been but a mere fable, until I saw the proof thereof) that
plants naturally did love one another: of which number is the Date Tree, for it
is reported, that there is both male and female, and that the male does
fervently love his female, as that if she be abandoned farther from him he
presently dies and withers away: wherefore the husbandmen knowing his
natural inclination, standing upon a high place, do accustom to look which
way he does incline (for he always does b^^d toward his female) they do
plant the female on that side. Moreover if a branch of the she be cut off, and
a hook being made be thrust into his body, it does revive him again: and
this is the marriage of the plants. Moreover, there is another natural
affection between the River Alpheus, and Arethusa, for this River does make a
passage no otherwise through the Sea, then through the land, neither is his
sweet water mingled with the saltness of the sea, but easily sliding through
the grosenesse of the salt water, makes a channel for his gentle stream; and
still continues his course, until he come to his beloved Arethus^: And every
five years when the games are celebrated at O^impus, the victors do accustom
to cast their Garlands which they have won into this River, which he does
bring to his Love: And such were the gifts which the Rivers could bestow. In
Serpents also, although there be not the same kind of love, yet to several
sorts, there are several inclinations: for the Uiper is a serpent which lives
on the land, and naturally does desire copulation with the lamperd, which by
form is a serpent, but by use a fish: they when they would accompany together,
the Uiper climbes unto the top of a rock, and there hisseth a while, whom
when the Lampred hears, she swimmeth to the shore, neither does she go forth
to this her Lover upon the sudden, knowing his venomous teeth to be full of
poison; but climing up to the top of a cliffe, does expect him there, until
he has cast all the poison from him: In the mean while, these two do behold
one another, but as soon as she sees the poison cast on the ground, and all
her fear is past, she hasteneth to her Lover, to enjoy their amorous
imbracings, not fearing now to kiss her spouse. When as I had made an end of
my speech, I earnestly viewed how Leucippe hearing this amorous discourse was
affected, which truly did so show her self, as that I ghessed she heard them
with a willing mind: but still Leucippes countenance seemed to me still to
surpass the glittering show of the Peacocks train, for her beauty might
contend very well with the flowers of the Gardaine: the form of the Dassadill
did shine in her forhead, the color of the Rose did glister in her cheeks,
the brightness of the Uiclet did appear in her eyes, her hair did imitate
the curling of the Uine, and such was the admirable beauty of her face: Not
long after she departed thence, for the time was come that she accustomed to
play on her Lute, neither did she depart away from me, for still her image
remained in my eyes. But Satyrus and I commended one another, I, because I told
these discourses, and he, because he gave the first occasion. As we were thus
commending one another, we were called in to supper, and we sat dow^ after the
same manner as we did before.

The second Book.
The Contents.
The description of the feast of Pr^^rygaeus Dionysius, and why he was honored
for a God amongst the Tyrians. The pleasant discourse between Clitiphon and
Leucippe. The first invention of purple, found out by a shepherd. After is
declared the rape of Calligone by Callisthenes, a young man of Byzantium, whom
he thought to have been Leucippe: The witty conference between Satyrus and
Conops: The manner of Clitiphons coming to Leucippes chamber in the night, and
how they were disturbed by Panthias dream. The manner of the flight of
Clitiphon and Leucippe from Tire: how they sailed toward Alexandria, and sell
acquainted with one Menelaus an Egyptian, who tells the cause of his
trauelles, and the pleasant talk between them.

WHen supper was done, Satyrus and I discoursed together of many things
concerning our love, but in the end we concluded to go to the maids chamber,
where we found her alone playing on her Lute; and singing also most pleasant
Ditties to her instrument: from beholding whom I could not abstain: she
first did sing of the combat between the Lion and the wild Bore, described in
Homere: then choosing of a more milder subject, she sung the praises of the
Rose: the tenor of whose song, although not in verse expressed, was in this
form. If Jupiter would appoint a sovereign over all flowers, he could choose
none fitter to supply the place then the Rose: this alone is the ornament of
the earth, the prime of all plants, the grace of all herbs, the adorning of a
Gardain, and the most fairest of all flowers: this does breathe forth love,
win desire, and rejoicing: with his pleasant leaves, gently blown with the
pleasant Zephyrus, do yield a fragrant odor, and such a one was her song: but
it seemed to me to see a true Rose indeed in her lips, retaining within them
indeed the true similitude of the Rose. Scant had she ended her song, when we
were all called in to a banquet: for on that day was the feast of Dionysius
Protrygaeus celebrated, whom the Tyrians do worship for their God: for on this
day they do sing the history of Cadmu^; sounding forth melodious hymns to
him, because they say he was first original of their stock: for in times past
none did know the use of wine, for the black wine, the wine of Anthosmia, the
wine of Byblis, of Moronae, of Chyos, of Icaria, was not yet found out; but
all first were invented by the Tyrians, and that the first founder was born
there. For it is reported that a certain shepherd, whom the Athenians do call
Icarius, traveling abroad the country of Phaenicia, by chance happened to
Tyrus, where lodging with this Dionysius, he did instruct him in the chiefest
grounds of husbandry: but yet the drink which he used, was no other then that
which was common to the cattle, which was fair water, for the wine as yet was
unknown. Dionysius commended the shepherd, thanking him for his instructions,
and did drink unto him in a cup of wine; when he had drunk it up, he
rejoiced for joy, and turning to the God, said: I pray you mine host from
whence have you this sweet red water? or else in what place have you found
such delicious blood? I am sure that this is none of that which runs through
the ground: for that goes down into ones belly with no delight, but this is
sooner in my nose, then in my mouth; and in the mouth it is cold, but in the
belly it does move a pleasant heat. To whom Dionysius answered: This water
comes out of the Uine branch, and this blood comes forth of the cluster of
Grapes: and forthwith he led the shepherd to his Uineyarde, and showed him
his Uines, and plucking off two or three bunches of Grapes and crushing them
together, this says he is the water, here be the fountains from whence it
does flow: And by this means as the Tyrians report was Wine first found out
for the use of men: wherefore this day is appointed holy to be solemnized to
this God: wherefore my father, that he might seem to solemnize this feast
with more magnificence, caused this sumptuous banquet to be made, wherein he
used two great bowls, the one was belonging to Glaucus of Chios, the other
proper to this God, which was made of engraued Glass: upon whose brinkes
clusters of Grapes did seem to grow, which when the Glass was empty did
seem green, but being full of lyquour, were read, and seemed to be ripe.
Among which, the picture of Dionysius was drawn, through which shining Glass,
I did more earnestly behold Leucippe, for Love and Bacchus are two violent
gods, which boysterously assailing the heart, does so heat it with an
unaccustomed fire, that they do co^strain one to forget all modesty, whilst
the one does yield his accustomed fire, ye other does minister matter for this
fire, for wine is the food of love: wherefore I did behold her more attentively,
and she in like manner did behold me. And after this manner we spent ten days,
wherein we neither did assay any thing, but only did behold one another. At
length I declared all my love to Satyrus, and beseeched him that he would help
me in this necessity. I did know all this, quoth he, before you told me, but
I would not seem to know it, or took the less notice of it: For a secret
lover, if any do detect his love will hate the reuealer unto death, and never
cease his hatred, until he have found a just revenge. But Fortune I see even
of her own accord has taken care of us: for Clio, which was appointed the
Chambermayde, has received me into her favor, and uses me in stead of a
lover, I therefore will shortly so compounde the matter between you, as that
to the furthering of this matter, she also shall lend her helping hand. But
yet it is not enough to make trial of a maids good will, by her countenance:
but you must speak somewhat effectually to her, and there also to use another
devise, to take her by the hand, and claspe her fingers, and in clasping sigh:
if then that you see she take this willingly, you may truly call her
Mistress, and kiss her the more often. Truly (quoth I) you have instructed me
very well, and spoken very well to the matter: but I fear greatly, least
that my weakness be such, that I am not able to be a fit Soldier to
march under loves Banner. Then said Satyrus, Cupid can not away with
slothfulness: wherefore, you must rowse your self up, and fettle you
forward to his affairs. Do not you see how like a Soldier he vauntes, with
his bow, arrows, darts, and all things courageous and full of valor: and
can you faint, having such a Captain? take heed you do not falsely usurp
the name of a lover, I will give the first onset: for I will send away Clio,
from her another way, when time and occasion shall serve, and when every body
is gone away. And when he had said so, he departed from me, but I was left
alone, wherefore I felt my self no little moved with Satyrus his words, and
imagining with my self how I might so behave my self, that when I came into
her presence I might not fail in any thing, saying thus to my self: how long
will thou effeminate fool be mute? Why do thou faint having such a
martial God to thy guide? Do thou think that they will come to thee? but
presently I began to sing a retraite, saying: but why do not thou repent
thee unhappy man? and love that other Uirgin which is more meet? Thou have
another at home, no deformed piece, why do not thou sue to her, and woo her
with some amourous discourses, love her, and take her to thy wife? since thy
father has persuaded thee to it, and will have it so? but from the bottom of
my heart love replied again. Do thou presume so much of thy self, that
thou dare take arms against me? and seem to resist my forces? I have wings
to fly, Darts to wound, and Torches to burn, how do thou think now
that thou can escape me, and fly the points of my Darts? howsoever thou
do thou shall never avoid these flames: but if thou do hold before thee
against my fire the sheeld of temperance, yet I will overtake thee by my
flight. When I had spoken thus solitarily to my self, I espied upon a sudden
Lucippe, coming to meet me: and as soon as I saw her I wexed pale, but
afterward I blushed: she then was alone, for Clio was gone away from her. And
although my mind was so stricken with fear, that I had nothing to say; yet at
length I said, God save you sweet mistress: then she^ pleasantly smiling,
seeming by her smile to know, to what end this salutation belonged, said:
what, am I your mistress? you speak amiss I am sure: no, said I, for some
god, I know not which it is, has sold me to you, as Hercules was to Omphale:
wha^ was it Mercury? for Jupiter demanded once a sum of him: and therwithall
she smiled. What Mercury, quoth I, what toy is that? when you do know very
well what I did mean. In the mean season while we were thus retorting our
speeches one to another, it so fell forth ye fortune befriended me. For by
chance the day before about noontide Leucippe was playing on her lute, I then
being present, and Clio sitting by, as I was walking up and down a waspe
flying about did sting Clio in the hand, who with the grief thereof cried out.
Leucippe arose, laying her instrument aside, and looked upon the wound, saying:
be of good cheer, and fear nothing, for with two or three words I can cure
this wound: for I learned not long ago of an Aegiptian woman to heal the
stingings of Bees, and Wasps, and presently she charmed it, and Clio confessed
afterward it was whole. And then as we were thus talking, by good fortune it
happened, that a waspe did fly humming round about my face, and occasion being
taken, I stroke her to my face, who instantly did sting me on the lip, so that
I feined my self to be in great pain: wherefore the maid running to me
presently, took me by the hand, and asked me where I was hurt, I answered in
my lip: and why do not y^ O dear Lucippe charm it? then she about to charm
it, put her mouth to my lip, and touching the very outward part of my lip,
mumbled some certain thing, I know not what: in the mean while I did closely
steal a kiss: but she whilst she was in her charm, did so use her self
therein, ye now she would open, now she would shut her lips: and it was so
handled that her charms were turned into kisses: where I took her in my arms,
and embracing her kissed her sweetly: but she going back, what do you do
now? do you charm also; but I do now said I, kiss the charm, for therewith
you have driven away all my pain: which when she had understood, she smiled:
but now I took heart at grace again, and suddenly I cried out: Alas, sweet
Leucippe, I am stung again more cruelly, for the sting has pearsed me to the
very heart, and now I crave more help at your hands for you carry a be in your
lips, which are full of honey, and your kisses have made a new wound, where I
beseech you to charm me again, but do not end your charm so soon l^ast the
wound wax fresh again. And while I thus talked, I embraced her, and kissed
more often: she seemed to stir a little for fashion, yet she stood still. In
the mean season, we espied a maid coming a far off: wherefore we parted
one from another. I departed thence so^rowfull and against my will, but how she
took the sudden p^^ting I know not: But from that time afterward my hope
began to increase, and I sensibly felt her kiss sticking on my lips, as if
it were some corporal or substanciall thing: the sweetness whereof I did
diligently keep as a great treasure, for that is the first pleasant thing
which happens to a lover, and it has his original from the fairest and best
part of the body. For the mouth is the instrument of the voice, and the voice
is the shadow of the mind, the touching therefore of the lips, whilst it does
engender a kind of pleasure in the nether parts, does also draw the minds as
it were mutually to kiss one another: neither do I remember yt ever such a
like motion happened to my senses, neither any thing which may contend in
pleasure with this amorous kiss. When supper time was come, we sat down
again: and Satyrus did fill the wine, playing there some loves delights, for
he would change ye cup which Leucippe did drink on with mine. But I still did
mark on which side of the cup she did drink, did put it likewise to my
mouth, and fayning a kiss sent unto me, I kissed the cup again: which when
she had marked, she imagined I kissed the very place where her lips did
touch: and when as the skinker had filled her wine, I marked her imitating me,
and drinking in like manner, wherein I my self took great delight: thus three
or four times we spent the time at supper in drinking of kisses, one to
another: when supper was ended and the table taken away, Satyrus came to me,
saying: Now is it time that you show your self a man or never. You know
Leucippes mother was not well at ease this night: wherefore she is gone to bed
alone: Leucippe with Clio is gone to the house of office alone, and at her
return you may have sufficient conference with her: and that you may have no
interruption of this your communication, I will lead Clio aside: wherefore we
went forth and watched them and it fell out even so as he had told me before:
where as he promised he withdrew Clio from her, and so she remained alone. Then
taking opportunity, being now somewhat boldned, I went unto her as a conqueri^g
soldior, not fearing the dangers of the war, for there were many things
which encouraged me, first wine, love, hope and the solitariness of the
night, whose sable veil covers often times the bonds of immodestie: wherefore I
went to her, and embracing her in my arms, I ceased not to kiss her? And when
I did assay to have done a more worthy thing, I heard a more sudden noise
behind us. Wherefore affraide we parted asunder there into her Chamber, but I
got me into a secret place, where being sad and pensive with my self, that I
had lost so fit an opportunity, I cursed the noise with the author thereof: at
length Satyrus came running to me, which said he saw all that passed between
us, and how he watched under a Tree, that non^ might take us of a sudden,
and how he perceiving a far off some body coming, he made that noise. Not
long after, my father had appointed my marriage to be solemnised sooner then
first he had appointed, but yet he was often troubled in his dreams, for he
dreamed that when the nuptial tapers were set on fire they presently were
extinguished, and we when the time was come we should be offered to Hymenaeus,
were fled away: Wherefore he had made ready all provision for the day: all
apparel ready for the bride: for her had he bought a rich and costly
Jewel, besette with diverse precious stones, the stones whereof did seem to
contend in beautye one with an other. The Hyacinth seemed to be like the rose:
the Amethist does glister like unto the color of gold: in the middle of the
jewel were set three precious stones, which were placed with such art, that
all of them seemed to participate one another color, and did show as if they
were al one substance, the bottom whereof was black, the top rising up in
manner of a spire was read, the middle white, participating also both the
black and read. The stone which was thus set in gold was made after the
fashion of an eye: Her gown was of purple damask? and not of the common
color, but of that which the Tyrians report the shepheardes dog found out,
wherewith the veil is colored, which is hong in the Temple of Venus: for this
color of purple was unknown long time, because it was included in a little
shell: (...) certain fisherman upon a time, had taken a number of shell fish,
and thinking they had been fishes at first, but looking upon the roughness of
the shell, he cast them away as not worthy to be eaten. Which when as a dog
by chance had gnawen with his teeth and the purple liquor running from his
mouth, had colouerd his chops, made all his snoute of a purple color: When the
shepherd saw his dog all bloody, thinking he had been hurt, took him
to the Sea side, and there washed him: But then the color waxed more fresh,
and his hands also were dyed with a purple color. Then looking about to
find the cause, he espied the shell all gnawne with the dog: Wherefore that
he might try the secrets of this color, and all the hidden virtue of the shell
fish, he took a lock of wool cut of his sachell, and dipped it into the
shell, and the wool was dyed with the very selfsame color, as he saw the
dogs chops before, and so he learned ye die of purple: which coming home he
showed unto the fullers and dyers in their country, which colors this day
has continued famous in Tyrus? Wherefore as the manner is before the marriage
begin, my father appointed a solemn service to be said? Which when I
understood, I now thought my self quite undone: and I did devise with my
self by all means, how this might be deferred until another time. While I
was in this brown studio, I heard a sudden uproar of men in the chamber
where they do accustom to kill the sacrifice, and it was after this manner?
When my father had killed a lamb for the sacrifice, and taken the entrayles,
and laid them on the altar, a mighty Eagle came roaring from about, and
snatched them away, neither could they that stood by it help it by any way,
wherefore she did fly away with her pray? And this was thought to be a sign of
ill luck: and from that day the marriages were deferred: wherefore my father
caused all the deuinours, and soothsayers, to be sent for: and he declared to
them all the matter: wherefore they said they should go to the sea, and at
midnight sacrifice to Jupiter Hospitalis, for thither they said, the Eagle did
fly, and the entral did there fall from her into the sea. But I greatly
rejoiced at this mishappe, which had thus delivered me from a perpetual
servitude: I commended the Eagle saying, that she worthily deserved to be
called the Queen of all birds. But that which was foretold by this ill luck,
fell out not long after, Callisthenes a young man of Byzantium, whose father and
mother both were dead, rich, su^ptuous, and given to riot, he hearing that
Sostratus had a fair daughter, although he never saw her, yet because of her
exceeding commendations, he desired to have her to his wife. For such is the
lust of intemperate men, that even with very fame they will be driven to love,
and will equally be affected by hearing, as if they had seen her. Wherefore
before the war was proclaimed to the Byzantians, he was very importunat with
Sostratus, that he would bestow her on him for his wife: But he misliking the
lewdness of his vicious life, answered him he would not: therefore
Callisthenes thinking that Sostratus contemned him, was wonderful wrath, and
although he loved his daughter indeed * whose beauty he conceived in his
mind to be without match, although he did never see her: yet he seemed to him
as if he scorned her: And he devised with himself by all means possible, how
he might be revenged on Sostratus. Moreover it is a law with the Byzantians,
that if any man do ravish a maid, he shall suffer no other penance then
marry her: Callisthenes liked this law very well, and sought out a fit time
for his purpose: and although that the wars did increase, and that he knew well
that she was at Tyrus, yet he never left of to work his ambush made, wherein
he was furthered by a strange accident: For there was this oracle given to the
Byzantians.

There is an Island in the sea, which of a plant is named,
Which by a little narrow creek is joined to the land,
Which compassed round with force of sea is often with tempest tamed,
Where Pallas does with Vulcan joy to join,
There unto Hercules give sacrifice divine.
When many of them doubted what Island it should be which was meant by the
oracle, Sostratus (for he as I said was general in the war) now is fit time
(says he) that we sacrifice to Hercules of Tyrus, for that is the place
certainly which is spoken of by the oracle, for it does answer it in all
respects. For there God has named it by the surname of a plant, because it is
an Island of the the Phaenicians, for Phoenix (which word signifies a date
tree) is a plant, and it lies in the sea and is by a vast promontory joined to
the land, and this does seem to hold it to the land, the other seems by
violence to break it off: this promontory joined to the land, seems to be
the neck of the Island and in the bottom of the sea it does not touch the
earth, for the water does run under it, so that it gives a new spectacle to
behold a City standing in the sea, and joined to the land? And that which is
spoken of the conjunction of Pallas, and Vulcan is to be interpreted the oil
and fire, which both are there in great abundaunce, for there is a holy place
compassed round with a well, where as a certain fire does cleave unto the
Olive Tree, and casts his flames about her branches, by whose heat the
Olive does flourish the better? So by this means the fire and the Plant do
grow in Freendshippe, and Pallas does not ^^ye from Vulcane. Then Chaerephon
fellow with Sostratus in the war, but higher in authority because he was
born at Tyrus, extolled him greatly, saying: you have rightly interpreted the
Oracle of the god: but that you may not think the nature of fire to be onely^
admirable, there are as strange properties of the water, for I my self have
beholden some of them. There is in Sicilia a fountain, whose water does ever
run mingled together with fire: wherein you may see the flame of the fire
rising from the bottom to the top, if you touch the water it is like snow,
and extreme cold, neither yet does the water extinguishe the fire, neither
the fire heat the Water. Moreover in Spain there is a River, which at the
first sight you would judge it to be like others, but if you lie down and
listen to it, you shall hear it make a great sound, for when there is a small
wind, you shall hear it yield a sound like unto a viole, the wind is in
stead of the stick, and the water does supply the use of the instrument: there
is also in Lybia a marish ground, where the sand is like that in India, and the
maids of Lybia knowing there to be gold, do accustom to get it after this
manner, (for the gold lies under the mudde, and there arises by a little
spring, wherein they put a pole anointed with tar, and thrust it into the
hand, and as a hook is to the fish, so is this pole to the gold: for it
catches hold of the pole, the tar being in stead of a bayte, for what
gold does touch it, does cleave to it, and is laid up upon the shore, and so
is Gold gotten in Lybia: Which when Chaerephon had said, so they decreede
to send one to Tyrus to sacrifice: Wherefore Calisthenes fayning himself one
of the sacrificers, did sail also to Tyrus, and there knowing my fathers
house, at what time the women should come forth to behold she pomp and
magnificence of the sacrifice, he laid his ambushes. In which show, there
was great store of perfumes, great variety of flowers: Of the perfumes, was
Cassia, Frankineense, Storax; Of the flowers, Roses, Daffadill, Myrtell, and
the sweetness of the flowers did seem to contend with the pleasant Odor
of the perfumes: and water hereof being drawn up into the air, did fill the
air it self with the sweetness thereof: But after followed many strange
and great offeringes for the Sacrifice: amongst which, the most chiefest were
the Oxen of Nilus: for they do not only excel in bigness and largeness of
the body, but also in color and fairness to the eye, for they are of tall
stature, thick neck, broad shoulders, large belly, with their horns not
flat to their heads as the Sycilians, neither deformed as the Cyprians, but
rising from the temples of their heads, are bowed so equally, that in the very
top there is no more distance between them then the very bottom, and they
do almost resemble the likeness of the Moon: and of the same color as
Homere does commend the Thracian Horses to be of. And in their going they do
carry their head so hye, as if they were kings over the heardes of the
Cattle: and if it be true that Jupiter when he did carry Io away, was
transformed into a Bull, surely then I think it was into an Egyptian. At that
time it chanced my mother in law was sick, and Leucippe desirous to stay at
home, (for she had spoken to us before that she might stay with my mother)
went not forth a doors: Wherefore it was so appointed that my sister should
go with Leucippes mother. Calisthenes, which never saw Leucippe, as soon as
he met my sister Calligone, he thought it had been Leucippe: for he did
know Sostratus very well: and being at the very first sight taken in love
with her, he showed her to one of his companions, whom he trusted well, and
he requested him to go call the men together to whom he had given in charge
to steal her away: he had also appointed the order and manner of her st^lth,
saying, that by and by all the maids would go unto the sea side. Which when as
he had said, neglecting the sacrifice he went his way: he had a private ship of
his own, which before he came forth a doors he had appointed to be it
wherein he vowed to bring her. Now all they who were the chief ouers^eers of
the sacrifice, were gone up, but Callisthenes went not from the shore, because
he saw the multitude coming after him: and that since his ship lay near unto
Tyrus, he might not be pursued aster he had carried her away: and when he came
to Sarepra a little village without the suburbs of Tyrus, situated upon the
sea shore, thither he brought the ship, and gave it to Zeno, for yt was his
name, to whom Callisthenes had given in charge chiefly to steal her away: he
was of a stout body, and had learned pyraey even from his infa^cy, and he
landing at Tyrus first sought out his fellow pirates to be his ayders in this
enterprise. There is a little Island near unto Tyrus (where the ships do ly at
road) which they do call Orollope: here did Zeno hide his ship in ambush. But
before yt day of solemnity came, which Callisthenes looked for, which the
eagle had foretold, and the soothsayers, had declared before, al things were
made ready: and as we did adorn our selves at the sacrifice the day before, so
did we now, neither was this unknown to Zeno: about midnight we came to the
place, and when we had stayed there a while, we washed our hands in the sea,
but Callisthenes had given them a watchword, yt upon the sudden they should
be ready to take her away: wherefore they brought the ship close to the shore,
wherein were ten me^: upon the land also were ten more which lay in wait in
women's attire with their beardes shaven: every one had his sword hidden under
his garment, and that they might be ye less suspected, they followed yt
sacrifice so that we might think them also to be women. As Soon as the fire was
made, then, a sudden clamor being made rushed in upon us, and put out our
lights. And when we being stricken with this sudden, sought to fly away, they
took away violently my sister, being gotten a ship-boord, did fly away, like
birds: many of us hearing the tumult fled away, others stood still and saw
it, and said the pirates have stolen away Calligone. Now had they passed the
middle of the sea, and came near unto Sarepta, where Callisthenes had
appointed to meet them: where receiving him unto them, they launched forth
into the maine. Therefore seeing my marriage to be broken off against my
expectation, I began to be of good courage, although I could not choose but
grieve, that my sister had fallen into such a danger. A while after these were
done, I spoke to Leucippe with these words: How long (O my dear Leucippe)
shall we stay at kisses? These are fair beginnings, but let us also do the
rest which lovers most of all desire: therefore first let us contract our selves
together, for if we will sacrifice to Venus, we shall not find any god more
favorable unto us then this. I iterated these speeches to her often, and at
length I prevailed with her, that she should let me into her chamber at night,
Clio also which was the Chambermaide promising her help herein. That part of
the house wherein she did lie, wa^ built after this order: there was a great
space, having two Chambers of the right hand, and two of the left hand, through
which went a little narrow entry, by which they went into them. This entry
had a door which opened with two leaves: this part of the house was the
lodging for the women. The inward chambers were opposite one to another,
whereof the mother had one, the daughter the other: of the other Clio had that
which was next to Leucippes, the uttermost was appointed for the pantrie. Every
night Leucippes mother accompanied her to bed, and departed not from thence,
until she did see her laid down: and she did not only shut the entry
doors, but also caused another entry door to be shut by another, and the
keys thereof to be given her in at a hole, which she kept in her own chamber:
but every morning she called the fellow, whom she had given in charge to lock
the doors, to open them again: wherefore Satyrus seeing that it was almost
impossible to get in, caused like keys to be made: which when as he had
tried, and saw they were fit for the purpose, he persuaded Clio to be
silent, that by no ways she should hinder our determination. There was one of
the Servant, a curious prating fellow, given much to his bellye, who seemed
worthy enough of his name (for he was called Cynops) this fellow seemed a
loofe of to watch, and mark whatsoever we went about, ever suspecting that in
the night we would assay something: wherefore at midnight he used to watch
the doors standing open, so that it was a hard matter to do it that he
should not know: which Satyrus perceiving, wont about to grow in
acquaintance with this fellow, and would often jest with him merrily, and
call him Conops (which signifies a Gnatte) and thus would descant upon his
name. He knowing Satyrus meaning, did seem to jest with him again, still
carrying a suspicious mind: wherefore turning to Satyrus said: Go to friend
Satyrus, because you scoff at my name, I will tell you a tale of a Gnatte. The
Lion upon a time accused Prometheus, that since he had made him so large,
great, and strong, and had armed his jaws with teeth, his feet with hooked
nails, and had made him stowter then any other wild Beasts, yet endued with
all these qualityes, he feared the crowing of a dunghill Cock. UUhome
Prometheus answered: Why do you thus rashly blame me? I gave thee all the
excellentest gifts I could, but herein thou dooest carry a base cowardly
mind; wherefore the Lion wept, and condemned himself of fear and cowardice,
wishing rather to die then live. And as he went walking in this melancholy
cogitation, he by chance met with the Elephant: whom when he had saluted,
he fell into a great discourse. And as he was talking with him, he marked
him often shaking his ears: I pray thee, (quoth he) what meanest thou by
this, that every Minute thou shakest thine ears, and never let them rest?
then said the Elephant (and by chance at that instaunt a Gnatte did fly
about his head) because I see this little fly humming about me, which if he
get into mine ears I am undone. The Lion hearing this: wherefore then (said
he) should I wish to die, since I am in this case, and so much the more
happy, by how much a Cock excels a Gnat? But Satyrus perceiving his speech
to be full of subtlety, smiled to himself, saying: But now friend Cynops,
also I pray you mark my tale of a Gnat and a Lion, as it was told of a grave
Philosopher. But I thank you first for my tale of the Elephant. The Gnat on a
day very bold, meeting with a Lion greeted him thus. Surely you do greatly
deceive your self, if you think your self king over me, as you do over all
other beasts whatsoever: For since you are neither fayrer, valianter in mind,
nor better, although you excel in a little strength, why then should you be
king over me? you scrat with your nails and byte with your teeth, and what
woman when she sighteth does not do this? What is the largeness of the body
which does adorn you? Where is your beauty? You have a broad breast I must
needs say, a broad pair of shoulders, a thick neck, all staring with grisly
hairs; and do not you see how filthy and loathsome your hinder parts are:
my greatness is the whole air, as much as I can compass about with my
wings: my beauty is the greenness of the fields; which to me is in steed of
a garment: which when I leave flying I put on; neither do I ever go into war
without a Trumpette: for my mouth is both my Trumpette and my Daxte, so that I
am both a Trumpetter and a fighting Soldier also. I do make my bow and
arrows my self, my wings carry me through the air, and being thus
carried, where I please I can wound and sting; which, whosoever he be that
receives, suddenly exclaim, and look about for the Author, but cannot
find him.

I am both present and absent also: and at the same instant I stand stoutly to
it, and fly away: I do ride sometimes upon a man, and sometimes wound him,
and laugh to see him scratch.

But why do I talk thus? Come on let us go lustily to this battle. And as
he thus spoke, he flew in the face of the Lion, and humming about his head, did
sting him in the eyes, and every part which wanted hair: the Lion very
angry, turned himself, now this way, now that way, seeking for his enemy,
biting and fighting with the air. The Gnatte taking more delight in his anger
and fury, set upon his lips: but he bowing himself down to that place
where he felt it smart, laid him down: but the Gnatte like a Wrastler,
rushing through his teeth, and passing through his mouth shut, escaped away:
but his teeth deceived of their prey, did resound with the gnashing together:
at length the Lion being weary with so vain a combat, being in a great
fury, did lie still: the Gnatte flying about his head, did humme in token of
the victory: but being now fraught with pride of his new gotten victory,
soared up aloft, and by chance fell into a Spiders Web, and there was
quickly taken: but when he saw that there was no way left to get out, then
he began to blame his own folly, saying: What a wretch was I that durst
provoke a Lion, yet can not escape out of a poor Spyders web: which when
Satyrus had said, I pray thee Conops where are the Spyders Webbes, which thou
should fear, and therewithal he fell a laughing: not long after, Satyrus
marked how much he was given to his belly, provided before a potion to make
him sleep: and invited him to Supper: he suspecting some harm, at first
denied, but after his belly the best perswader of all had alured him, he
granted him: But when he came to Satyrus, and had supped, he would very
willingly have departed: but Satyrus gave him this potion last in a pot: which
when he had drunk, he stayed no longer then he could go to his chamber, for
the potion began to work with him, but came running to me, and told me that
Conops was sound a sleep, wishing me now like to Ulysses, to be valiant and
courageous; wherefore I went presently to Leucippes chamber, he stayed at the
door: but I, ( Clio closely conueying me in,) entered into the chamber, being
partly stricken with joy, partly with fear: for the fear of the danger did
trouble the hope of my mind, the hope also of obtaining, did mingle my fear
with pleasure: that part of my mind which was in hope, was troubled with
fear; but that which did grieve, did result with joy: but a little before I
entered into ye wenches chamber, I know not what horrible thing happened to her
mother in a dream, for she seemed to see a thief armed with a naked sword, to
enter in and take away her daughter, and laying her upon her back, and with his
sword ripped her from the lower part of the belly to the breast, wherefore being
thus astonished with fear, she leapt out of her bed, and with all speed she
could, going softly upon her tiptoes, she came readily to Leucippes chamber; I
then being scant laid down in the bed: but hearing the noise of the door
opening, I skipt quickly out of the bed, and knowing in what danger I was,
with all the speed I could I got me out of the chamber: Satyrus standing at
the outermost door received me thus troubled and frighted; and so both of us
escaping in the dark, we went every man to his own chamber, her mother at
first being taken with a giddiness in her head fell down, but being recovered
again, she went unto Clio, and buffeted her about the face, pulling her by the
hair, and at length groned out these words: O Leucippe thou have taken away
all my hope; woe is me poor wretch: O Sostratus, thou do fight at Byzantium
for others marriages, but here at Tyrus I know not who has defiled and
polluted thy daughters bed. Alas what shall become to my Leucippe? I never
hope to live to see such marriages prepared for thee: I would to God thou had
stayed at Byzantium: I would by the laws of war thou had suffered this
reproach; I would that some Thracian horsman had committed this villainy: for
then that violence would have caused this mishap to be without shame. Now (O
unhappy wench as thou art) the infamy of that thing which has made thee thus
unfortunate, will redound to thine own shame: how have these nightly visions
deceived me? I dreamed this hard misfortune, neither is there any thing more
true, now I see thy belly is cut up in most cruel manner: and so much moreover,
that no sword can divide it alike. O hard chance! have thou this injury offered
thee, and I know not the author th^reof? O cruel times! what was he any
servant? then Leucippe being of a good courage that I had escaped so well, said
unto her mother, I pray you good mother do not rail thus against my
virginity, neither have I committed any thing which deserves these words at
your hands, neither do I know him whatsoever he was, whether a good man or a
thief, I lay here affrighted, that I could not speak a word for fear, for
fear is the bond of the tongue, but thus much I know, that my virginity is
violated by none: wherefore Panthia falling down again upon a sudden,
mourned bitterly: in the mean season we consulted with our selves what was
best to be done, and in the end we concluded, and thought it the best
couns^ll, to go away before it was day, lest that Clio perhaps by
punishment, should be constrained to reveal us. This opinion liked us well,
wherefore we so dealt with the Porter, that he might think we went forth to
our Lovers, and we went directly to Clinias: it was then about midnight, and we
could hardly entreat the Porter to open the gates, and Clinias his chamber was
in ye upper part of ye houss, who hearing us talk, was amazed in his mind: and
with as much speed as might be, he went to meet us: not long after followed
Clio, for he also had decreed to go away with us. At the same time Clinias
perceived well what had happened unto us: but Clio did know what we purposed to
do. Wherefore as soon as we came into Clinias his chamber, we declared unto him
all the matter, and what had happened, and how that we determined to forsake
our Country. Then said Clio, And I also will go together with you, for I know,
as soon as it is day, I shall be put to exceeding torment, until I have
confessed: and I do think it better to die, then to fall into their torturing
hands. Then Clinias took me by the hand, and led me away from Clio, and told
me that this counsel liked him well, and that first we should send away Clio,
lest that the whole matter should be revealed by her, and we should stay some
few days, until we had disposed of all things to our minds: and if it
happened well, he also would go together with us: but said Clinias, if her mother
do not know yet who that should be, for if Clio be sent away, there is no
body to detect you, and perhaps Leucippe will go with us: we concluded upon
this, and we gave Clio to one of the servants, to be carried speedily to a
ship, we staid behind to provide all things necessary for our journey. At
length we thought good that Leucippe were moved herein, that if she were
willing to depart, we also should take her with us; but if not, we also would
stay there, submitting our selves wholly to fortunes pleasure: that which
remained of the night, we spent in sleep, and betime in the morning we came
home. But Panthia rising up very early in the morning, sent for Clio, that
she might talk with her about this matter: but when she saw she could find
her in no place, she went back again to her daughter, saying: What is the cause
you will not tell me the whole discourse of this which has happened? Behold Clio
she is run away. Then Leucippe being now somewhat more bold, said: What should
I tell you more? or what truth should I bring? if you can make any trial of my
maydenhead, I pray you do. But it remains now, said Panthia, that we get more
witnesses of this our mishap: and with that she went forth a door, Leucippe
being now left alone, and being full with her mothers words, was driven into
sundry cogitations: she grieved that she was taken; she blushed that her mother
had so reviled her; she was angry that her mother would not believe her: for
bashfulnesse, grief and anger, are three cogitations of the mind:
shamefastness falling into ye eyes, does take away their liberty: grief
being spread abroad into every corner of the heart, does quite extinguish the
heat of the mind* anger as it were barking about ye heart, does ouerwhelme
reason with yt some of madness, the cause of all these is the speech, which as
it were directing a dart and aiming at the mind, does grieve and afflict it
with many wounds: for since there are three darts, reproach, declaring of a
mishap, and the hitting in the teeth with ones faults, there must needs be
then three wounds: that is, anger, grief and shamefastness, it is proper to
all these three darts, to make deep, yet not bloody wounds, whose medicine
is only to retort the dart upon the caster, for the speech which is the arrowe
of the tongue, is driven back by speech, which is another weapon of the
tongue: so by that means the disquieted part of the mind is appeased, and is
made merry from the grief; but if one have to deal with his superior that he
cannot gainsay or retort, then are the wounds made deeper by that silence: for
except the griefs raised by the heat of the speech do cast out their foam,
they do make themselves more grievous with their own heap. Leucippe being
troubled with the vexations, was in great perplexity: in the mean season I
sent Satyrus to know of her whether she would fly away with us also; but she
preventing his speech said: I pray you by all the gods, carry me whither you
will, so that I may be out of my mothers sight, for if you depart and leave me
behind, I will end my life with an halter: which when I heard, this news
wiped all the grief from my mind: wherefore we stayed two days my father being
from home, we provided all things which were necessary for our flight: part of
that potion wherewithal Cynops was cast into a sleep Satyrus reserved, and
whilst he served us at supper, he gave it to Panthia in a glass: wherefore
the table being taken away, every one went to his own chamber, but Panthia
feeling the potion to work, caused us to make more have: wherefore Satyrus gave
unto Leucippes bedfellow of the same potion, whom he did feign to be in love
withal. Moreover, he gave some of it to the Porter, which made him instantly
to sleep: in the mean season, Clinias stood without the doors with a Coach
ready furnished, expecting our coming: after all were fast a sleep, about the
first watch of the night, with all silence we departed out of the house,
locking the doors fast again, and laying the keys under the door. Satyrus
led Leucippe forth by the hand, and by very good chance, Cynops, which did
accustom to watch us, was sent forth a Town of an arrant: wherefore having
departed thus out of the house, we came thither where Clinias stayed for us:
we were in number six, I, and Leucippe, Satyrus, Clinias, and his two men:
after we were gotten up, we directed our course toward Sydon: the other part of
the night being spent, we came unto a city which was Berytium, where hoping
to find a ship ready to sail from thence; neither did our expectation deceive
us; for as soon as we came into the haven, we found a ship ready to launch
forth, and we went into it before we asked of them whither they went: all our
necessary things being brought into the ship, we were even now about to sail
forth, when Lucifer began to appear: Then did we know that we sailed toward
Alexandria, a most famous City of Egypt. Then did I begin to rejoice, that
we were thus safely come to sea, the ship scant out of the haven, and new
entering into the maine Ocean, after that a fit wind served us, there began to
arise a great noise of the Sailors in the ship; first drawing of the Cables;
the noise of the master exhorting them; then was the cross piece brought
forth; the Saileyard hung up; the Sails ready to be hoysed up; the Anchors
plucked up; the haven being left, we began to sail forth a prosperous iourny;
the land did seem to go back from the ship, as if that it did sail it
self; then was there a great rejoicing and clapping of hands throughout all
the ship, and many prayers bestowed on the Gods; praying them to send a
prosperous navigations: In the mean while the wind increased, the sail was
full, and the ship sailing very safe: there was by chance in the same ship a
young man sitting by us, which because it was now dinner time, very courteously
invited us, that we also would eat with him: wherefore when Satyrus had made
ready that which he provided for us, we did eat together in common, making
our selves both partakers of our dinner and talk also; when I began thus: I
pray you sir what countryman are you, and what is your name? Then answered he,
I am an Egyptian borne, my name is Menelaus: but by your leave, may I demand
the same of you? Then quoth I, my name is Clitiphon, his Clinias: both
Phaenicians by birth. And if it please you sir, first to declare unto us the
cause of this your travail, we also will recompense you with the like. Then
said Menelaus, the sum of this my navigations, is ungrateful love, and an
unfortunate hunting; from which, although I did diverse times earnestly exhort
him, yet I could not prevail: wherefore when he would not obey my gentle
admonitions. I also did then accompany him in hunting, and upon a day when both
of us went forth on horseback, we discoursed of many several kinds of
hunting, but of all I commended to him the hunting of the Hare and such little
beasts, and so long as he pursued such game, I was well satisfied in mind: but
when by chance a wild ^ore rushed forth of the woods, which he seeing, being
nothing afraid, went to meet him, and wilfully did run upon him: I still
crying, stay, stay, hold your horse, or else you are slain* the boore did
seem to be of such a huge bigness, when seeing him coming upon him, ran
also forward to meet him, and both of them did violently rush one upon
another: which when I saw, I was suddenly astonished with fear: and fearing
least the boore should get underneath him, and fling down his horse, I cast a
dart which I had at him, and it so chanced (I would that chance had never bin)
the boy ran by and received the wound: but in what case do you think I was in
then? and if at that instant there was any life in me, it was even like unto
those, who at every moment are about to give up the ghost, and that which was
most to be grieved, my hand which cast the dart, being held forth, was
presently benumbed, as having a due reward for so an unlucky chance, and as it
were hating of it self for being author of so vile a death: wherefore the
parents of the boy accused me in the court as principal of his death: which I
did not deny, and I willingly liked of their accusation, which if they had not
brought, I would have sacrificed to his soul: wherefore I judged my self worthy
to die, but the judges moved with pity, banished me for the space of three
years: which time being passed, I now am returned into my country again,
while that Menelaus did recount these strange misfortunes: not much unlike to
the hard chance of Patroclus* Clinias, being put into remembrance of his
beloved Charicles, could not choose but weep, wherefore said Menelaus, what do
you weep for my misfortune, or whether are you banished also for the like
mishap* the^ Clinias not without many ^i^he, repeated ye hard hap of Cha^icles
and the horse: after whom also I recounted my History. But when I saw Menelaus
very sad, by the remembrance o^ his greefes, and Clinias also weeping for the
death of his Charicles, being destrous to wipe away both their sorrows, I
began a discourse mingled with an amorous delight, for Leucippe was then
absent, who imediately before, went into a more close place of the ship to take
a nap, and turning my self to them, I smiled, Clinias (said I) for the most
part in argument ouercometh me, and even now (for he desires to inueigh
against women, as his manner is) he may do it the better, because he has found
a like companion of his love: what is the cause why so many are in love with
boys? surely I my self cannot tell, neither see any cause why? Then answered
Menelaus, what, is it not I pray you better then the love of women* boys are
more perfect then women, and their beauty is of more force to delight ye
senses with pleasure. But I pray you (quoth I) how is it more vehement? what,
for because as soon as it appears it is gone again, neither gives any
possibility for ye lover to enjoy it? but is like to Tantalus in the river
Stix, that when he would drink of the water it flies away from him: neither
is there any sustenance left for him to receive: and that also which is drunk,
is first taken away: before that he^ which drinks can be satisfied: evermore
he must, depart so from his lover, as if there had been n^uer no such love,
or else but new began, and the pleasure is mingled with a kind of sorrow:
and he is ever dry, but his thirst can never be quenched. Then said
Menelaus: but you Clitiphon, do not seem to know which is the cheifest
felicity in love: that always is most to be wished for, which brings no
lothasomenesse, and wherewith one is never satisfied: for those things which
remain the longer to us for to enjoy them, do take away the delight thereof
with too much sacietie, but those things which sometimes are taken away, are
always new and do daily flourish: and as much as is taken away from them by the
shortness of time, so much is added to the greatness of the desire, and their
pleasure does not fade: and wherefore is the Rose accounted the fairest of all
plants, but because it soonest does fade away: surely I do think that there
is two kinds of beauty which is amongst mortal men, the one heavenly, the
other common; which indeed are the very giuers of all beauty: and the
heavenly beauty scorneth to be joined with our mortal; and therefore strives
to fly up to heaven: the common beauty creeps on the ground, and cleave to
every base body: and if you will that I shall bring you a witness for this
which I have said, mark you the Poet Homere, whose verses are these: The
Gods incensed with beauty of this Boy,
To heaven him brought to serve great Jove above:
In filling of sweet Nectar and Ambrosian wine,
Who can deny, but that the cause was love.


Never was there woman for beauty brought up to heaven, although Jupiter loved
women well. Alcmena fell into lamentations, and was constrained to hide her
self: the Tower and the Sea kept Dianae prisoner: Semele was consumed by fire:
But when he fell in love with this Phrygian boy, Ganymedes, he took him up to
heaven with him, that he might dwell together with him, and serve him at his
table: and cast Hell down from heaven, which did supply the place before, for
she was a woman. But I taking his words out of his mouth, thus replied. Nay
quoth I: woman-kinde seem to be most heavenly, and that for a strong reason;
because their beauty does not so quickly fade; that comes next unto
heauenlinesse, which is farthest from corruption: and contrary, that ought not
to be called heavenly, but earthly; which is most subject to alteration:
because it is most like to men's nature. Jupiter loved this Phrygian boy, and
took him up to heaven: what then? This does not detract any thing from women's
beauty: for a woman's love, he transformed himself into a Eull; so he did not
for the love of him: for the love of Leda, he changed himself into a Swan: and
oftentimes did he take the shape of a Satyr, Gold, and many such like things.
But let Ganymedes fill the cup for Jupiter, while Juno lie with the Gods:
since the Goddess has a boy to be her cup bearer. It pittieth me truly, to
hear or think how he was carried up to heaven, a ravenous bird snatched him
away, and he was no otherwise dealt withal, the^ those who fall into the hands
of a tirant. Was it not I pray you, a grief to see a boy catched up in the
talents of such a bird, his head hanging down, as if he were now ready to
fall: such a carrion devouring bird did not carry Semele to heaven, but the
fire which is the chiefest of the element: and let not this seem strange unto
you, that some have been taken up to heaven in flames of fire. For Hercules
went no otherwise to heaven. Do you laugh at Danaes imprisonment in the Tower,
and her seruituds at the rock? I pray you remember Perseus: this one thing
satisfied Alcmena, that Jupiter for her fake, took three whole days from the
world. But if omitting these fables, you will make mention of that true
pleasure which is conceived in women, although herein I have not bin much
conversant (but one who has experience in these matters, may speak more if he
please,) neither has there been any use or delight, wherewith I have enured my
self, yet I will speak as much as I can: their bodies are tender to embrace,
their lips soft for to kiss, whose whole proportion of the body, is only
made to move delight: and he which does enjoy a bewtifull woman, has the true
felicity of all pleasure; for he does imprint in her lips, as they who seal
in wax: she also does kiss as it were by art, seasoning her kisses with a
sweeter delight; neither is it sufficient to kiss her lips, but also to ^eed
as it were upon her mouth: In touching of her tender breasts, what great
delight there is, I leave to them whom experience has made perfect herein; and
even in their natural actions, she does so delight, as that he might think
himself in another world. The kisses of boys are rude, their imbracings
unapt, and unnatural: whose delight does languish, and is veyd of all true
pleasure indeed. Then said Menelaus, you seem not to be a neuice in this art;
but one, who have served in Cupid his wars a lon^^ime: you have reckoned up
so many curiosities of women. But now mark you me again, and I will show you
what pleasure is reaped in the love of boys. In a woman, not only her words,
but also all her actions, are full of subtlety: if some be fair, they may
thank the Painters shop: all whose beauty, is compacted of nothing else,
then of painting, coloring, and curling their hair, and in kissing: from
whom, take away this painting and counterfetting of colors, and truly you will
think them barer then a Iaye (as the Proverb is) when all his stolen feathers
are plucked from his back: but the beauty of boys is not besmeared with the
counterfeyt of painting, neither spunged up with borrowed perfumes: the very
sweat of the brows of a boy, does excel all the sweet savors of Musk and
Ciuet about a woman: and a man may openly talk and play with them and never
be ashamed: neither is there any tenderness of flesh which is like to them:
their kisses do not savor of women's curiosity: neither beguile with a foolish
error the kisses of them are sweet and delightful, not proceeding of art, but
of nature: and the very image and picture of their kisses are so sweet and
pleasant, that you might very well think, that heavenly Nectar to be between
your lips.

The third Book.
The Contents.
The description of their shipwreck, how Menelaus was cast on shore at
Paralia, and how both the Lovers were driven on the coast of Pelusium: of their
going toward Alexandria, and how they were taken by thieves: the manner of
their delivery from them: with their entertainment of Charmides: a cunning
shift devised by Menelaus and Clinias, to save Leucippe which was appointed to
be sacrificed: the merry meeting again of all these friends, with the
discourse of their dangers.

THe third day the ship held on her course with a prosperous weather, when on a
sudden, a black darkness arose, and obscured all; and a contrary wind
began to arise: wherefore the master of the ship caused the cross piece
to be taken down: the shippe-man in haste plucked down the sails, because
the wind blowing so vehemently, and the storm beginning to beat more sorely
upon her side, she was not able to carry such sail: the tempest thus
thickening, did put us into great fear: one part of the ship seemed to sink
down, another was hoysed up so high again: and we thought we should have
fallen down again headlong: no man being able to sit steadfast in his place:
wherefore the tempest increasing, we went upon the hatches of the ship, that we
might something lighten her bur^hen: and being balassed with an equal weight,
her course might be the surer: but all this was to no end, for the force of
the waves being now waxen so great, did toss her up and down, as if it were a
Ball or an empty Tun. And while we thus sought to ballasse her even, the
wind changing into the South, did strike the ship with such violence, that
between the force of the troubled waves, and the violence of this rain,
bringing wind, we thought the ship would have presently splitte her self,
and all of us together in a moment should have perished. Wherefore a sudden
outcry arose in the ship, and all of us were constrained to go down again
into the ship: and thus three or four times this chance happened to us; and
with the ship we were carried we know not whither: being thus tormented
with fear and grief, we every one made our prayers to our own Country
Gods; but being joined together in one, we earnestly prayed to Neptune, that
he would remember us, and pity our case; who like to Leander are now floating
upon the maine: the God being displeased, would not listen to our prayers:
wherefore we expected nothing but death, which truly as it seemed, was not
far from us: for after noonetide, the Sun was so taken away from us, that
we could see one another no more then if it had been by Mooneshine; the fire
began to sparkle forth of the clouds, and lightening flashed in our faces:
all the heavens did rebellow with thunder, and all the air was filled with a
huge noise: the waves rising up from below and meeting together, did make a
great roaring: between the heaven and ye sea, there did resound the whis^ngs
of diverse winds: the sails torn from the ropes fell down: and we did
greatly fear, least the nails would fly out, the boordes fall asunder, and
the whole ship be dismembered: wherefore seeing all they fly so back, the
sea so rough, the air so tempestuous, we went down into the ship as it were
into a dark Cave: having no hope of safety lest, we committed our selves to
the choice and direction of Fortune: from the fore part and the hinder part of
the ship, many waves and great billows did strive to meet together: the
billow rising, the ship was hoysed up aloft: but falling down, she also did
sink down to the bottom: of which waves, some are like to mountains, some to
great gulfs: but those seemed most dangerous, which circling round, did as it
were wind and suck in whatsoever approached near them, there was a great
confusion of voices amongst us, whereof some were praying, some crying out, some
exhorting one an other, some plucking cables, anchors, sayle-yardes, others often
stearing the ship, the water roared, the wind whistled, the women cried out,
the men prayed, the sailors exhorted one another, the mariners comforting
themselves, all places were full of heaviness and sorrow: at length the
master commanded all the burdens to be cast out, neither then did he make any
difference between gold, silver, and the basest things which were: but all
were cast into the sea: the merchant flinging out their wares, wherein all
their hope was. Now was the ship almost empty, but yet the storm ceased not
at all: At length the master being weary, knowing not now what was best to be
done, caused the stearing-yarde to be cast away: submitting himself and the
whole ship, to fortunes direction. Moreover he cast forth a little cock
boat, wherein he had the mariners to go, and he himself went down first;
they also followed him: but a greater mischance happened, for they began to go
to buffets, for the mariners had cut the rope wherewith the boat was tied
unto the ship: The other which were in the ship seeing they had cut the rope,
did make the more have to go down to them: but they would not suffer them to
come in, threatening them with their swords and weapons which they had in their
hands, that they would wound him whosoever offered to come down: they as chance
served them, took one thing or another, some the broken end of an old oar,
other a broken board of the ship, and every one something, as came next to his
hands: the sea used violence for a law, neither was there ever such a manner
of fight by sea: for those which were in the boat, fearing often that the boat
would sink, being oppressed with the multitude of them which were about to
come down, did strike and lay about them, with staves and swords: they of the
contrary side, did fight with broken oars, and half plankes; some scant upon
the head of the boat, did fall into ye water; others did strive to thrust
those forth which were newly come in: the whole law of freendship and modesty,
was quite fled from amongst them: and every man bent to his own safety:
neglected another, for the very greatness of dangers does most commonly break
the laws of friendship. In the mean season one of the passengers being a
strong and stout man, got hold of the rope, and almost brought ye boat to the
ship side, and every one were made ready, that as soon as it came to the side,
to leap down into it, but two or three assayed to leap down at length, but
hardly they got into it, but first grievously wounded, others assaying the
like, fell down into the Sea, but the shipmen afraid, cut the rope, and loosed
the boat, and suffered it to go whither the wind would carry it: the
passengers which were in ye ship going about* to sink it, but the ship being
tossed upon the waves, being carried round about like a circle, at length it
was blown upon a rock, where imediatly it was split into diverse pieces, the
mast whereof, part was hole, part broken, most of the company which were in
the ship, feeling the salt water, died presently, and they were happy which
had so speedy an end, for they stayed not long in ye horror of death: for a
lingering death in the sea, does sooner dispatch him then he is aware: for the
eyes being filled with the unmeasurable vastnes of the sea, do bring a great
fear unto the beholders, and by so much the death is more grievous, by how
much the sea is broader. Others striving to swim, were by the force of the
billows, dashed against a rock and so died: many taking hold of the broken
planks of the ship did swim like fishes, many half dead floted up and down,
the ship being thus broken, a good Angel preserved the fore part for us:
wherein Leucippe and I sitting, were carried through the rage of the sea.
Menelaus and Satyrus and others more, got the mast, and so did swim on that, we
saw Clinias not far off sitting upon the cross yard, who hellowed to us,
wishing us to sit fast: and as he was thus speaking, a sudden wave came
behind him ready to ouerwhelme him, which thing caused us to weep: but by
the destenies means, who were favorable to him and us also, brake the sorce
thereof, and seemed to slide away under him, and then we saw him again But I
with many tears being shed, prayed unto Neptune saying. O most sovereign
Neptune, take pity upon us, and spare the relics of this shipwreck, for
this only fear has brought a thousand deaths unto us, but if it be thy will
that we also shall perish, do not divide our death but grant us this, that one
wave may ouerwhelme us all: or if the destenies will, we shall be meat for
fishes, grant that one fish may swallowe us all, one vault hold us all, that
being swallowed of one fish, we may seem to be buried all in one grave.
After I had made my prayers unto him, the force of the wind ceased, the rage
of the Water was appeased, the Sea round about being full of dead courses,
the waves carried Menelaus unto the marshes of Egypt, which was all inhabited
with thieves: we also about night, by good fortune, landed at Pelusium, and
entering upon land, we gave God thanks for our safe arrival, we lamented the
death of Clinias and Satyrus, because we verily thought they were dead. There
was at Pelusium an image of Jupiter Cassius, which was drawn so youthful,
that he seemed to be almost like Apollo, holding out his right hand, wherein
was a pomegranade, the meaning of which picture is not made known to all:
wherefore about to make our prayers to this God, about to demand of him what
was become of Clinias and Satyrus, (for it is reported in that country, that
this God does foretell things to come, and shows what has been past) then
went we round about the temple, where in the inward part of the chaunsell,
we found two pictures made by Euanthe, that famous Painter of Athens, whose
picture also we saw there: in one of these pictures was drawn Andromeda, in
the other Prometheus, bound to a rock with chains: and therefoe I think the
Painter did draw them both together, because their punishents were almost
alike in every respect: for both were bound unto a Rock, and had two
tormentours of their bodies, whereof he had an Eagle which evermore did
devour his Entrails, for her was appointed a huge misshapen Monster, which
driving a mountain of waves before him, came now ready to devour her: the
people were Argiues, which were their beholders: some came to help and pity
them, others to grieve and torment them near with their presence; but amongst
them, there were two who came to help them, and deliver them from these
dangers, Hercules and Perseus: Hercules, he with his bow and arrows did
strive to kill that ravening Eagle. But Perseus soaring aloft with his wings,
and encountering this huge monster of Neptune, drew forth his Gorgons head,
wherein he transformed him into a rock. The rock wherein Andromeda was tied,
did seem to be made hollow fit for her bigness: as if it were not made by
art, but did grow so of his own accord. All the other part of the rock, the
Painter had made with such art, as if you verily saw it with your eyes:
therein did the damsel sit, with so goodly a countenance, as that if you
would but only consider the beauty it self, the very picture might be worthy
of admiration: but if you would behold the chains and the monster, you would
think you saw before you a sepulcher ready prepared: in her countenance, was
palenesse mingled with her beauty: neither were her cheeks so pale, as that
they wanted their accustomed ruddinesse: with such a pleasing fear had the
painter so graced her, as yt she seemed not to fear the horror of death, the
ugliness of the monster, neither the reproaches of her enemies: her hands were
stretched forth and bound unto the rock, which did seem to hang no otherwise
from the arm, then a ripe bunch of grapes from the vine: the whiteness of her
arm, did seem to be mingled with a kind of blewnesse: her fingers seemed to
languish with grief; this was the usage of the maid, every hour expecting
death. Moreover, after the manner of brides, as if she should be married to
Pluto, they adorned her in a black garment, covering it with a kind of
twisted net, which was white, coming down to her foot, in form like unto
a Spiders Web: not spunne after the order of wool, but as the Indian women
accustom to work their silk, which they do pluck from the trees. Against
the maid did rise a mighty Whale out of the sea, which did drive the water up
before him, as if some mountain had risen up from the bottom of the sea: the
most part of his body was in the water, but no so much, but that you might
behold ye largeness of his shoulders, the orders of his scales, the bowing of
his back, the sharpness of his chine, the windings of his tail, his mouth was
wide open, of such an innumerable bigness, that it reached unto his shoulders.
Between the Whale and the maid, came Perseus flying from above; his body all
naked, save that he had a little Cassocke upon his shoulders; at his feet he
had shoes whereunto wings were tied, which lightly carried him through the
air: his hat was like unto the helmet of Dis: in his left hand he held the
Gorgons head, which looked with a grisly countenance, this same he used in
steed of a shield: for he did seem in the picture to look grimly, shaking his
head, and tossing of the Serpents which grew on the monsters head, seeming to
threaten the Whale: in his right hand he held a sword, made after the manner of
a Fauchion, wherewith encountering the monstrous fish, he laid at him with
such force, that if Neptune himself had supplied the place, he perforce
should have yielded: but at length he enjoyed the victory, delivering her
from the bonds: whom, in presence there of all the Country and her parents,
he married: and this was the picture of Andromeda. It remains now, that I
declare the History of Prometheus, as it was lively drawn in the other Table.
There was first drawn Prometheus, bound in chains upon the top of a steep
Rock. Then Hercules holding a Bow and Arrows in his hands: the Eagle did
feed on the bowels of Prometheus: which with her beak striking upon his
belly, and plucking out his entrails, making the wound still the greater,
until she had found his liver, which being devoured, yet did grow again:
upon his hippes did she stand, which griping with her talents, caused the
blood to issue forth, like streams out of a Fountain: wherefore he being in
most grievous torment, turning the other side, did renew his own pain: for
the farther off the liver sunk down, the deeper she struck into his belly:
He seemed to grieve with this exceeding torment, for he did pluck up his
brows, pull in his lips, grind his teeth, and if you had seen the picture you
would have pitied: showing to you as it were the pattern it self of all
grief. Prometheus being thus laden with misery, Hercules came to aid him,
who putting an arrowe into his bow, and leuelling at this blood-sucking
tortorer, seemed to draw the string to his very breast. Prometheus being now
full of fear and hope, sometimes looked upon his wound, sometimes upon
Hercules, hoping to end this cruel torment ere long.

But when we had stayed there two days, and had been well refreshed after our
great dangers, we hired an Aegiptian ship (for we had alittle money left)
and we directed our course toward Alexandria from the River Nilus: determining
there to lead our life, hoping that it might so come to pass, that we might
find out some of our old friends again. When we had sailed on forward a good
way, we heard a great noise of an uproar in a town near by, behold our
stearman as affraide, was about to go back again: But upon a sudden all the
shore was full of wild and Sauadge men, they were all of a great stature; of
color somewhat black, not like the Aegiptians, but almost of the same hew as
the Indians are of for the most part, their heads were uncovered, their feet
were little, their bodies big and gross, their speech barbarous: Wherefore
the Master of the ship, stayed his course, saying, we are all undone: the
river was but narrow, and four of the thieves coming toward us in a little
boat, quickly landed us, and took away all our money, and whatsoever else was
in the ship, which they thought worth the carriage, then they bound every
one of us, and laid us in hold, saying: that the next day we should be
carried to their King (for so these thieves called their Prince) who did lie two
or three days journey from that place where we were taken, as we understood
by them which were taken with us. In the mean season the night came on, and we
as we were, lay bound, our keepers also were fast a sleep. I then as much as
it was lawful for me to do, began to lament ^he hard misfortune of Leucippe:
and meditating with my self, grieved greatly in mind, because I was the sole
cause she happened into such calamities: neither durst I mourn or weep
openly, but softly to my self: O gods or devils wheresoever you be, and
hear: have we offended so much, that we have deserved to be oppressed with
so many calamities, in so short time? You have cast us hear amongst the
Aegiptian thieves, who are inexorrable, and will be moved with no petitions.
But the Grecian robbers have been moved by prayers, and have taken pity on
their captives. For fine speech oftentimes does move men to pity, and the
tongue which is the intreater for the grief of the mind, does often move the
angry minds of the hearers: But how shall we pray to them? what oath may
we give? how can a man yield a more pleasant speech to persuade, then the
songs of the maremaydes: but that is not meant by murdering villains: I may
now pray by beckenings and gesture of my hands, for they cannot understand my
speech: O grievous calamities! O hard misfortunes! but yet although my mishaps
are greater then all men's opinions, I will less lament them: But O Leucippe,
with what mouth shall I complain of thee? with what eyes shall I weep? O most
constant in keeping thy faith! O most kind toward an unhappy lover! behold
the magnificent preparations for your marriage: a prison for your chamber, the
ground for your bed, ropes and fetters for your bracelets and Jewels, and in
steed of Himeneus merry hymns, weeping waylings, and lamentations. O sea we
have thanked thee in vain, and I cannot choose now but reprehende thy
benignity: because thou have dealt more gently with those whom thou did cast
away, the^ with us: for whilst thou have saved us, thou have tormented us more
cruelly: envying yt we should die any other kind of death: then perish by the
hands of the thieves: thus did I lament with my self, but that which is proper
to greatest dangers I could not do: to shed tears: For in the meanest
mishaps, tears do, flow most abundantly: and with the authors of mishap, do
execute the place of prayer and petition: and they do lighten the grief; as
the swelling of boyles when they are broken, for they do fly in abundance,
leaving the eyes: for grief meeting them ready to come forth, says their
last, and take them with him to the lower part of the heart: Wherefore leaving
their course in the eyes, they do run down to the heart, and there do augment
his grief. Then turning to Leucippe which sat altogether silent: wherefore,
said I, my most sweet Leucippe, art thou thus silent, and say nothing to
me? Because, said she: O Clittiphon, my voice first ^ayled me, then my breath:
whilst we sat thus talking, the day began to appear: and there came into us a
strange fellow, I know not what he was, having long shaged hair, grim of
visage, and sternely began to behold us, being brought thither upon a wild
horse with a thick mane, bare, having no couerings, neither trappings upon
him: (for such were the thieves horses) this fellow was sent from the king, to
see if there were any captive maid taken, whom he should carry back with him,
for a sacrifice to be offered for the good success of army. Then did the
keeper cast his eyes upon Leucippe: But she catching me in her arms, and
cleaving tome, began to cry out and lament: but one of the theeeues carried her
away by violence, another did beat me the while. Then setting her upon a
horse, they carried her away, keeping us until more fitter occasion did fall
out to send us: but after we had gone a furlong or two on of our journey, there
was heard a sudden noise of trumpets, drums, and flutes, after we saw a
great troop of horsemen, and another army of footmen: But as soon as the
thieves saw them, they made themselves ready to fight; and not long after,
there were fifty men ready in arms to resist them; whereof some had long
targets reaching down to their feet, others short bucklers, and every one as
he could proceed upon so short warning, came forward to meet them. The
greater part of the thieves, did begin to fling hard turfes at their enemies:
for the Aegiptian turfe is swifter then any arrowe: and it does excel them in
weight, swiftness, and hardness: for being cast, it does hurt two ways:
either it raises a swelling like the blow with a stone, or wounds like a
dart: but the soldiers esteemed these thieves nothing at all, because with
their bucklers they defended themselves against their forces: being now weary
with casting, they opened their army: but the light harnised men, whereof
eueryone had a sword and a target, ran first to join battle: they
skirmished together hot on both sides, many wounds and blows being given on
either party: But we which were captives, seeing that the thieves had the
worser side, their army being broken up, we went to the enemy: who not knowing
what we were, at first would have slain us: but when they saw us naked and
bound, they perceived how the matter went with us, and willingly received us
into their army: appointing us to come last, that we might rest our selves. In
the mean season, there came a fresh supply of horsemen: the army being spread
abroad, they went to compass in the thieves: and being brought into a narrow
straight, they slew them: whereof some strooken, fell down dead, some half
dead, yet fought: other reuolting, submitted themselves into the soldiers
powers. But the day being passed and night coming on, the chief General of
the soldiers, whose name was Charmides, called every one of us captives before
him, and demanded of us what we were, and how we fell into these thieves
hands? to whom every one recounted his mishaps, and I also declared at length,
the whole history of my travails: he when he had understood all things of us,
commanded us to follow him, promising that he would bestow armor upon us: for
he had decreed, that as soon as his armies came which he looked for, to set
upon the strongest force of the thieves, which was said to be ten thousand. But
I called for a horse, for in that exercise I did greatly delight: which as soon
as he was brought, coursing him about, I showed an example to all the company
of horsemen, so that Charmides gave me great commendations: wherefore that same
day he invited me to be one of his guestes: and at supper, he requested me to
tell him all my misaduentures: which when he had heard, he was moved with no
small pity: For oftentimes it so falls: out, that he which hears another
man's mishaps, does after a manner together suffer with him, and pity also
most commonly does get goodwill: for their mind which does conceive them, is
mollified with grief: and by the hearing of mischances, is drawn forth in the
same sort, that he does change sorrow into pity, and pity into freendship.
But I had so moved Charmides with my tale, yt he could not refrain from
weeping. Moreover, he appointed an Egiptian servant to attend upon me: The
next day he provided furniture, carriage and weapons, for the field,
endeavoring also to fill up a trench, which was a hinderance for ye carriage;
beyond the which, we did perceive a great number of thieves in arms, who had
raised up an altar of claye: and not far of had placed a tomb, from the first
squadron, we perceived two men which led a maid bound, who because they
were in armor could not easily be known: but yt maid was my Leucippe whom
they perforce had taken from me before. Preparing her thus for sacrifice, they
tied fetters about her head, and leading her round about the altar, a certain
Aegiptian priest (as it was most likely) did begin a hymn, for ye shape of his
mouth and the opening thereof did show that he did sing: at length a sign
being given, all departed from the altar. Then one of the men which lead her,
certain bordes being fastened into the ground, taking her in his arms, laid
her upon ye top of them, and bound her fast to the table whereon she lay,
after the same manner as Marcyas was bound to a tree, when Apollo did flea the
skin from his body: and thrusting in his sword at the lower end of her belly,
ripped her up to ye heart, wherewith instantly her bowels fell forth of her belly:
which they taking in their hands laid upon the altar, and after boiled them,
then cutting them asunder, devoured them most sauadgely. The general and the
soldiers seeing this intolerable villainy, could not choose but exclaim at
this so cruel and inhumane a Tyranny: and many turned away their faces; but
without any life, soul, se^ce, or understanding, altogether astonished did
behold this: for the greatness of the cruelty had almost drawn me out of my
wits, and peradventure those things which are fabulously reported of Niobe, may
be very well true; for she being thus esteemed for the death of her children,
was the author of the fable: others thinking perhaps, because beholding so
heavy a spectacle, they did not move, she was transformed into a stone. After
that this sacrifice had an end as it seemed to me, the thieves took the dead
body and laid it in the tomb: whence plucked down the altar, and not looking
back they departed, for so the priest had charged them. At night all the trench
was full, and the soldiers went forth and pitched their Tents; then we went to
supper. Charmides seeing me thus sad and pensive, used all persuasions,
exhorting me to be of good courage. But I about one a clock in the night,
seeing all in a dead sleep, taking my sword in my hand, went to the tomb, that
there I also might sacrifice my self; and drawing out my sword, I came near
unto ye tomb, saying; O wretch Leucippe: O most unfortunate of all creatures
alive: I do not lament thy death, because that either far from home, or thus
violently thou did die; but that which makes me most wretched of all men,
because thou wast a sacrifice for so unclean thieves; whom being alive, they
did not only rent out thy very bowels, but ripping thee up most butcherly from
the lower end of thy belly to thy very heart; but also divided the secret parts
of thy womb, building up a most execrable altar, and most hateful tomb for
thy sweet body. Here do thy wretched corpse lie, but where are thy entrails?
If they had bin burnt with fire, I should have thought the misfortune a great
deal the less; but since their sepulcher is the ravening guts of the thieves,
what misfortune can be compared to this mishap (O cruel altar; O kind of
meat never heard of before: could the gods behold such sacrifices from
heaven, and not consume them with fire? But now O Leucippe, take these
sacrifices worthy of thy ghost: when I had said so, I took my sword, and being
in despair, setting it to my throat, I was now about to give me my deadly
wound: but behold I saw two men running in have toward me (for the Moon did
shine bright) wherefore I stayed my hand, thinking they had been thieves, I
wished rather to be slain by them: but coming somewhat nearer unto me, they
showted with a loud voice, for they were Satyrus and Menelaus. Having noted
them well, I gessed them to be my friends by their gesture in coming: but so
far was it from me to show them any kind of entertainment, that I wished
rather to dye then behold them, the cruelty of these mischances had so rent
my heart. They took me by the right hand, and did strive to take away my sword
from me: But I cried out, no by the immortal gods, do not envy this my
happy death, or rather the remedy of my sorrow. For Leucippe being thus
taken away from me, what Antidatory is now left to preserve my safety? will
you then go about to pluck my sword from my hands, knowing that the sting of
grief has pierced to the quick, and grated me at the very heart? what will
not you have me die an immortal death? Then answered Menelaus, if you would
kill your self for no other cause then this, then by Hercules, you may very
well cast away your sword, for Leucippe is alive, and will be here to reprove
this your womanish condition. But I casting mine eyes sternely upon him, said;
Can you see me tormented with so great mishaps, and laugh at me? Ah remember
Jupiter Hospitalis: Then he tumbling down the grave with his foot, said; Go
too Leucippe, witness your self whether you be alive or no: since Clitiphon
will not believe me. Scant had he ended his words, when the Sepulcher began to
move three or four times: and I heard a slender voice coming from the bottom
thereof, wherefore being astonished with fear, I looked gasily upon Menelaus,
thinking that he had been skillful in the Magic art: he took away the grave
stone, and presently Leucippe arose, looking with a dreadful and fearful
countenance: her belly was cut up from the bottom to the top, her bowels being
all taken away: and looking upon me, fell upon my face and embraced me: I also
took her in my arms, and sat down upon the ground. Being now thoroughly come
to my self again, I asked Menelaus, what the cause was why he would not tell
me how this had happened: what is not this Leucippe which I see? which I hold?
which I hear speak? it is she: what visions then were those which I did
behold yesternight? surely either that was a devilish illusion, or this is a
dream. Then said he, you shall see that in an instant she will recover her
entrails again: and the wound of her breast will be whole again, and no
skarre will be seen: Cover you your face, and to this, O Proserpina I do call
upon thee: wherefore believing him, I did see he began to speak, and to do
strange things and while he was speaking, he took away from Leucippes belly,
those things wherewith he deceived the thieves, restoring her into her former
shape: he commanded me boldly to look upon her. But I being very fearful,
thinking Proserpina her self had been there, I uncovered my face, where I did
behold my Leucippe, free from any wound: then greatly wondering at this strange
miracle, said I: O dear Menelaus, if thou be minister to any god, I pray
thee tell me where we are? for what do these mean which I do behold? Then said
Leucippe, I pray thee Menelaus do not hold him in admiration any longer, but
delcare to him the means wherewith these traitorous Rouers were deceived. Then
said Menelaus, thou know Clitiphon that I am an Egyptian, as I told you
before when we were in the ship: the most of my living lies here in this
Town, where with the Governors I am very well acquainted: For when we
suffered shipwreck together, the water brought me to the shores of Egypt: the
thieves which were governors of that Town, took me together with Satyrus:
wherefore they brought us to their Captain, but because many of them knew me,
they delivered me from bonds, and bad me be of good courage: and promised also
that they would help, in whatsoever was in their powers to do. Then I
requested them also to let Satyrus to go free, which they did willingly
grant. In the mean season, it was revealed to them by an Oracle, that he
should sacrifice a virgin, and offer it up as an oblation upon their Altars:
and taste together of the liver and bowels of her which was dedicated, but they
should bury the body, and go back again: hoping that this sacrifice would
hinder the coming of the enemies: what remains, I pray thee Satyrus declare.

Then said Satyrus, when as I was brought a captive to the army, and was
certified of the misfortune of Leucippe, greeuing for her hard mischaunce, I
wept, requesting Menelaus that he would preserve her safe, wherein I know not
what God it was which was so favorable to us. The day before these sacrifice
should be, we sat down upon the shore, heavy and full of sorrow, thinking
what we should best do in this matter: the thieves having espied a ship
wandering and floting about the coast*made violence upon her, the mariners
within knowing them to be thieves, striued to go back, yet al in vain: for
when they saw that they could not retire, they began stoutly to resist. In
that ship there were certain stage-plaiers, who accustomed to play Homers
fables in theaters, who with the rest of his companions adorning themselves as
they do when they play upon a stage, began to offer force upon the thieves,
and for a short space they did well endure: but with a fresh supply came in
aid many fishboates of thieves, who imediatly sunk the ship, all the men were
put to the sword: there was a certain chest amongst other fardels, which
floted about, whereof they did not know, but only Menelaus and I: wherefore we
privily conveyed it away, hoping some treasure to be laid therein, we privily
opened it, wherein we found a cloak and a knife, whose handle was four
handful broad, the blade was three fingers broad, when Menelaus had wrenched
by chance unawares, the knife slipped forth as long as the handle was, which
there lay covered like to a case, and turning it the other way, the blade
again ran up and was hidden in the handle, when we thought that those
players did use to make fained wounds upon the stage. Then said I to Menelaus,
if now you will do your good will to save her, you shall see the Gods will lend
us their aid, and we may preserve the maid alive, and satisfy the thieves
expectations: the manner, I will declare how it shall be done, we will provide a
young sheeps skin, and fashion it like a man's belly, which we will fill with
the entrails and blood of some beast, and make it fast to her body.

The Maid adorned after this manner, having a garment put over it, shall be
all bound with fillets: and you see it falls out very fitly, agreeing with
the Oracle: which gave this answer, that a woman adorned with such a garment,
should be cut through the middle. Now you do perceive that the knife is made
with such art, that if you would thrust it into my body, it runs up into
the heft as it were into a sheathe; and those which behold it, would think it
went into her body, when all the blade is hidden in the heft; the sharp end
of the knife only coming forth, which does cut the feigned skin; and if
you pull the knife again out of the wound, it runs forth again as much
as is hidden before in the heft: and so by this devise we may deceive the
beholders, which think that all that which came forth of the heft was thrust
into her body.

This may we do, and they never epsy our craft. Moreover, we will cover the
outward parts with a thin cloth, as it were for modesties sake: and the
skin being cut, the entrails shall leap out; which we taking forth, will
lay upon the altar: neither at that time shall the thieves come to the dead
body, which being thus contemned, we will lay in a Tomb.

You heard a little before the king of the thieves say, that we should show
him something done courageously by us, wherefore you may make it known and
satis^^e him, that you are ready to do this deed: which when I had said, I
made my prayers to Jupiter Hospitalis, making mention both of our living and
shipwreck together: then thought I with my self, Clitiphon is yet alive: for
when I demanded of Leucippe where he was, she answered, he was carried
amongst the prisoners; and that whilst the thieves fought the last battle, he
with other captives fled to the enemy: Wherefore the gods sent down their
help, to deliver this poor soul from this present death; and fortune
favored our attempts, wherefore I provided all things which were necessary
for this action. But Menelaus went unto the Thieves to consulte with them,
what should be otherwise ordained in the sacrifice, but the king committed the
whole charge into their hands. Then said Menelaus, we already have provided
all things belonging to this sacrifice: and as it is declared by the Oracle, we
have already prepared the maid, which at the time and hour appointed, shall
not be wanting to satisfy your expectations. Therefore we apparelled Leucippe
after that order as we had appointed before: and bidding her to be of good
comfort, showing that she should go into the tomb: and remain all the day
time until night, and from whence we would fly unto the enemy, and come again
and deliver her from this fear: which when I had said, we brought her to the
altar: what was done afterward you your self did behold: with this speech
of his, my mind was wonderfully distracted: neither did I know what to do,
wherewith I might sufficiently requite Menelaus for all his courtesies:
wherefore falling down at his feet, I embraced him, and worshipped him, as if
he had been some god: when a new pleasure began to revive my languishing
spirits. After I perceived that Leucippe was safely escaped out of these
dangers, I demanded what was become of Clinias: Menelaus answered, that when
the ship was broken, he saw him riding the cross piece: but what fortuned
afterward to him, was unknown: wherefore I could not choose but be sorry in
the middle of my joy. But not long after, we departed thence, and went unto the
army: and in my Tent, we spent the rest of the night: but strange report of
this night, was bruted round about: when it was day, I brought Menelaus to
Charmides, and declared to him all the whole matter: who being delighted with
the news, received him into friendship, and demanded of him, what number and
force the adversary had. Menelaus answered, that the next village was full of
the wicked robbers, who lately had sent for aid, being now about ten
thousand strong. The^ said Charmides, but five thousand of our men, are able to
resist the force of ten thousand of thieves: although we also shall have more
aid from them which do defend Delta and Heliopolis against the invasion of
the barbarous and wild vagabounds.

In the mean season there came in a messenger running in have from Delta,
which brought word that an army was coming from thence, which contained two
thousand men: saying that they had set forward five days before, had not a
sudden tumult of the thieves called them back: and as they were coming now,
theholy bird which carries his fathers sepulcher, did astonish them with his
flight: Wherefore they were also constrained to stay again. Then said I: I pray
you what bird is that, which they do so much honor? Or what sepulcher is that
which he does carry about with him? The bird is called Phoenix, and has her
original amongst the Aethiopian^? She is of the color and bigness of a
peacocke, her feathers are painted with purple, and ^^ld, she is called the
bird of the sun: for her head does signify as much, whereon she has a
crown, which shows the whole course of the sun, it is of an azure color,
partly shining like a flame, casting forth pleasant rays like to the beams of
bright Phoebus, being in the meridian: she is of this quality; that the
Aethiopians enjoy her alive, but the Aegiptians have her d^^de: for when she
dies (which comes not to pass of a long time, for she lives six hundred
years) her son brings her to the river Nilus, and makes a tomb after
this manner: he takes as much myrrh, as will suffice to lay the carcass in,
and making it hollow with his beak lays it in the middle, as it were in a
tomb. The body being thus laid in the ground and covered with earth, ^yeth
toward Nilus: a troop of birds following as it were companions at the
Funeral, and coming to the City of the sun, which is the place, where the
dead body does lie, flies up to the sun: So it comes to pass that living
she abides in Aethiopia, but being dead, she rests in Aegipt.

The fourth Book.
The Contents.
Charmides General of the army, falls in love with Leucippe: he declare^h it
to Menelaeus, craving his help therein: Leucippe falls mad: Charmides by a
notable stratageme of the thieves, with all his army was slain: Leucippe is
cured again by Chaerea.

AFter that Charmides had understood the cause of the staying of ye army, and
knowing the forces of the thieves to wax stronger, he determined to return
back, and to stay so long, until his aid were come: but when we came unto the
village, we had a lodging appointed for Leucippe and me, near unto Charmides
house; wherein as soon as I came, I took her in my arms and kissed her,
determining to abstain no longer from my desire. But when I saw my enterprise
went not forward, how long said I, shall we want the fruits of Venus? Do not
you see how many dangers in so short space have fallen out unlooked for? for
we have suffered shipwreck, fell into the thieves hands, and lastly, you were
offered in steed of a sacrifice: wherefore while we are in safety, let us not
refuse a fit occasion offered, before some greater mishap do fall out. Then
said Leucippe, but yet it may not be lawful; for when I was offered upon the
altar as a sacrifice, I greatly lamented my misfortune; and in my dream Diana
seemed to appear unto me, saying; do not weep, for thou shall not die, I my
self will help thee, keep thou as yet thy virginity, until I shall
otherwise appoint thee, for thou shall marry none but Clitiphon. I although I
did grievously take this delay, yet I rejoiced with the hope of the thing to
come: and when she had made mention of her vision, I did remember also that I
had dreamed to the like effect: for the night before, me thought I was in Venus
temple, and there standing alone, I did behold an image erected before me,
and when I had approached near to say my prayers, I shut the door; and being
troubled in mind, there appeared a thing to me in shape of a woman: which
said, that as yet it was not lawful for me to enter into the temple; but if
that I would stay a little space, it should come to pass, that the doors
would open of their own accord, and also that I should be created a Priest
unto the goddess: this therefore I told Leucippe, neither did I strive to
offer her violence any more: but thinking upon her dream, I was somewhat
heavy in mind. In the mean season, Charmides who was ever desirous to see
Leucippe, having a fit occasion serving him for the purpose, sent for us both;
bechance certain fishermen of the Town had taken a beast in the River, a
spectacle not unworthy to be seen: the Egyptians did call it the Horse of
Nilus: and truly his back, head, belly, and feet, are like to another Horse,
saving that his hoof is cloven; in bigness of body he is like to an Ox, he
has a short tail and full of hair: all the other parts of his body being
without, his head is round and great, his jaws almost like to a Horse, his
nosthrils somewhat broad, and breathing forth a fiery kind of smoke, as it
were the breath of a furnace: the wideness of his mouth reached to both his
temples, his teeth were crooked, made altogether both in form and standing
like to a horse. Charmides invited us to see this beast, Leucippe: was there
also together with us: earnestly we did behold the beas^, but he whose mind was
occupied about an other matter, never cast his eyes from Leucippe. Therefore we
judged him to be in love with her: and because he would have us stay the longer
there, that he might the more satisfy himself with the sight of her, he
began to find some discourses: and first he did declare unto us the nature of
the beast, and the manner of taking him, saying, that it was a most ravenous
creature, how that he would devour a whole field of corn: neither is he caught
without a pretty wile, for ye hunters marking in what place he accustometh to
lie, to dig a pit and cover it with turfes and reeds, laying under it a little
coal made of boords, whose doors are open to the height of the pit, then
hiding themselves until he fell in, they rush upon a sudden and shut the
doors of the little house, and so is taken, which else by no means could be
caught, because he is of so great a strength: he is most strong in every part
of his body, but his skin is so hard that it cannot be pierced with Iron, and
worthily may he be called the Egyptian Elephant: whereupon Menelaus demanded of
Charmides to e^presse the nature of them: who answered: I have heard report of
them which are the curious searchers of their nature, to affirm their
qualities above all creatures to be most admired. And that I will not suffer
you to be ignorant herein any longer, know that she is of a long life, and
does keep the seed of her belly ten years before she be delivered of it,
and when this time is past, she brings forth her young of large proportion,
and for this cause I think that he is of so huge mighty body and invincible
strength, and a most long life, for it is reported that he lives longer then
the crows which Hesiode writes of. The iaw of an Elephant is like the head of
a Bull, and if you saw his mouth you would think he had two horns growing
therein, which are his fore teeth, from between which comes down a long
snout, which is in form and fashion like unto a shaulme: by this he takes his
meat and sustenance, and whatsoever is thrown to him he will eat it, with
conueighing it into his snout, if it be good he brings it down into his
mouth, but if it be bad he gives it to his m^ster: there sits upon his
back a Moore, which is his horseman, he does fawn and fear, and does
understand any which speak unto him* and does suffer himself to be beaten
with an Iron rod, which is in steed of a whip: and I do remember that once
I did behold a strange fight, a Grecian once lying down, joined his head to
the Elepha^ts, who without any resistance stryked his head with his snout,
wherein I meruailed at the boldness of the man, and the gentleness of the
beast, but the Grae^ian answered, that he first did give him food to eat,,
before he would open his mouth and breath forth the pleasant breath of the
Indian spices, which he did use to do, to take away the headache. But the
Elephant which knows the cure which he does effect, does first deny his
aid, until he have received his sustenance: like unto a proud Physician,
which first will have his foe before he minister any thing to his patient: but
taking first his reward, he will thank you, holding open his mouth until you
be cured, knowing well that he had sold this sweet odor. Then said I, how
comes it to pass that so deformed a creature has so sweet a savor? Of his
meat (said Charmides) whereof he feeds: the country of the Indians is very
near the sun, and they be the first people which inhabit the East, and do
feel the force of his bea^^s more hot. In Greece ther^ grows a flower, which
in India is not a flower but a blossom, such as those which grow upon trees: as
it grows it has no savor, neither is in any estimation, whether because it
will give no pleasure where it is known, or whether it do envy his
countrymen: but if it be ^arried a little out of his country, it yields a
sweet and odoriferous savor, this is the Indian flower which is commonly
called the black rose: upon this Elephants do feed in those countries, as
Oxen do of grass amongst us, wherefore being fed with so sweet meat, they
cannot choose but s^nd forth a sweet breath. After Charmides had ended his
discourse, not suffering us to go far (for he which is wounded with love, is
burned with his heat, and cannot find a remedy for his grief) took Menelaus
by the hand, and said: I do verily perceive that thou art Clitiphon his good
friend, by those things which thou have done for him, wherefore thou shall not
find me worse: I would therefore have you give him thanks as from me, which you
may easily do, for in so doing you shall restore health again to my soul: for
Leucippe has wounded me, preserve thou my life, and for these thy good turns,
here I give thee these fifti^ pieces of gold: Leucippe shall have as much as
she will demand. Then said Menelaus, I pray you take your money again, and
give it to them who sell their good turns, and will do nothing except they be
hired. I since that you have accounted of me as your friend, I will do my
endeavor that you shall know, you did not amiss when you received me into your
friendship, which when he had said, he came to me, and told me all that
Charmides had said: wherefore we began now to think with our selves what were
best to be done herein: in the end we concluded to deceive him, for we could
not deny him, for fear least he should have used violence upon us, neither
could we escape away, because all places thereabouts were beset round with
thieves, and he also had so many Soldiers about him. Therefore a little
while after, Menelaus went unto Charmides, saying that he had concluded the
matter, showing how that at the first she was very obstinate, but when I had
moved her with petitions, telling her of your kindness showed unto her, she
granted me my requests: but yet she entreated this one thing which you must
needs grant, that she may have leave to go to Alexandria, for that is the
place where she was borne, and her friends do dwell there. Then said
Charmides, thou do demand of me this which can hardly be granted, for in
war who would defer to fulfill his desire? is there any man which now is
about to join battle, which is sure of the victory when there are so many
passages ready which lead to death? request you this of fortune that I may
return safe from the war: and now at this time am I about to fight with
these thieves, but there is another battle sought in my heart: the armed
Soldier does assail me with his Bow and arrows, I am overcome, and hereby
wounded with his darts: wherefore send for a Physician for me speedily, for the
wound does wax green, and when I am ready to send fire amongst mine
enemies, love has set my heart on fire with his torches. First therefore
Menelaus quench ^his fire, and it is the sign of best luck, first to
encounter amorously with his love, then to join battle with the enemies: let
Venus send me unto Mars. Then said Menelaus, you your self may see what a
hard matter it is to do it, that her lover which is now present should not
know. Then said Charmides, this may quickly be done, for we may send
Clitiphon some other way. But Menelaus seeing Charmides wonderful learnest of
his love, fearing least he would do me some injury, divised a very good
course, saying: will you know the cause indeed why you should stay? the
Maid began yesternight to be in her flowers, wherefore then she must
abstain from a man: wherefore* said Charmides? I will stay three or four
days until she be well again, I hope by that time her months will cease,
in the mean time she shall do that which she may: she shall sit in my
sight, and kiss me, and talk with me, for I do delight to hear her speak,
to take her by the hand, and to touch her soft body, for these are some
easements to a wounded mind. What may not a man kiss her now? I know that
cannot hurt her flowers: which when Menelaus returning from him had told me,
at his last words I could not choose but exclaim, wishing rather to die then
any one should enjoy her kisses, then which nothing is more sweet, pleasant,
and delightful. For with venerean sports a man may be satisfied: neither is it
any thing worth if you take away kissing: kisses have no end, neither do bring
satietie, or make a man loath them, but are always fresh. And there are
moreover three most excellent things which come from the mouth, her breath,
voice, and kisses, and the lips which in kissing do touch one another, do
yield that pleasure which rises form the fountain of the mind.

Believe me Menelaus (for in necessity I am not ashamed to reveal any
secrets) I my self have never had any thing of Leucippe but kisses, she as
yet is a Uirgin, neither can be made a Wife, but by kissing: which if any man
strive to take away from me, he first shall take away my Soul. While I am
alive none shall rob me of this felicity: wherefore said Menelaus, we have
need of good and speedy counsel: for a lover so long as he is in hope to
obtain, he bears all things patiently, for he does conceive in his mind
the very possession of that which he would. But if all his hope be taken away,
then his desire changed, he striued to take away the hinderance: in the means
season, while we were thus consulting together, there came one running in to us
hastily, who seemed by his countenance to be somewhat frighted, and told us ye
Leucippe fell down in a swound turning up her eyes as if she were dead: but
when we came to her and demanded of her what had happened to her, she rising up
came toward me, and looking upon me with sower countenance, struck me upon
the cheek with her fist, and spurned Menelaus with her feet, who went about
to hold her, wherefore we perceiving she had fallen sick, and the impatience
of the grief forced her to a fit of madness: we went about to hold her, but
she withstood us, and wrastled with us a great while, having no regard to cover
her hidden parts: wherefore a great tumult arose in our lodging, so that
Charmides hearing of it, came running to us to know what the matter was: at
first he looked upon Menelaus very sternely, thinking that we had gone about
some knauerie to beguile him, but afterward when he saw the truth, his
mind was changed, greatly lamenting this mishap. But Leucippe, the cords being
brought, was bound upon her bed: which when I saw her tender hands were tied
with such hard ropes, most of them being gone forth, I turned me to Menelaus,
saying: Loose, I pray thee loose, for her tender hands cannot abide to be tied
thus roughly: let me alone with her, I will hold her down in steed of a cord,
let her rage upon me if she will: What should I live now any longer? Leucippe
knows me not, and h^re lies bound, and I behold her in this case, yet moved
with pity, I do not unbind her: did fortune therefore deliver us out of the
hands of thieves, that thou by madness should be made a laughingstocke for
us? O wretched and unfortunate that we are! shall we never have better hap? that
which we feared at home, have avoided, that we might try the force of the
raging Sea: we escaped shipwreck, fled out of the hands of the thieves, because
the Destinies had appointed our end to be madness, which if thou escape, I
fear lest fortune have some greater affliction to present us withal: who is
more wretched then we? to whom is prosperity to be granted? But fortune
mocketh us, and seems to laugh at us when we repent: but Menelaus comforted me
being thus sad and pensive, saying, that these troubles were too violent to
last long, and that this frenzy of hers was engendered by a hot blood, and
dispersed abroad through the veins, striking up into the head, sought to
distract the mind by confounding all the senses: wherefore the Physicians were
sent for, to try if they by their art could help her. Menelaus went unto
Charmides, to request him that he would send for his Physician, which was in
the army, which he commanded instantly to be done. For lovers do rejoice to
apply themselves in any thing which may tend to their good. The Physician being
come, devised with himself what this sudden sickness might be: wherefore
first he gave her a potion to sleep, that the sickness might leave some of
his force: for sleep is the remedy for all sickness. But to proceed, he
gave her as much as a grain of Pomegranade, which being beaten together with
oil, he bound it to the temples of her head, saying, that afterward he would
give her a purgation for the ease of her belly. Leucippe being thus anointed,
fell presently into a sound sleep, and so continued until the morning, but I
sat by her watching all the night, and looking upon her bonds, I said: alas
poor Leucippe can thou sleep so soundly being bound? what dreams do now
trouble thy head? has this sleep yet recovered thy wits again, or whether
do thou dream of idle fantasies? Being now awaked, she began to talk
somewhat idly, and immediately the Physician came to her again, and gave her
another medicine. In the mean season letters were brought from the Deputy of
Egypt unto Charmides, wherein he was commanded to bring forth the armies, and
presently join battle with the thieves: wherefore all were ready in arms,
about to march forward to meet their enemies, every captain with as much
speed as could be brought al their companies together under their colors, and
alarm being given they went every one to his several tents. In the next
morrow, betime in the morning he brought forth all his armies, the situation of
the village was in this form. From the places which are above the Egyptian
Thaebae the River Nilus runs down, and comes along by the City Memphis,
where it sends sorth a little stream, which coming from the main channel,
compasses a little piece of ground. There is a little village called Syrus,
which also is divided from the land by another little fleet, so that of one
stream there seemed to come three rivers, whereof two do dissperse themselves
abroad into the country the third directing his course straight toward the
sea, and compasses that land which is called Belta. But none of these Rivers
do carry their whole stream into the Sea, but being divided do run through
many Cities bordering near about: and every part of these do excel the
greatest river in Greece in bigness: neither yet, although the stream be thus
divided, is the force of the water weaker, but is nauigable both with greater
and smaller vessels, to them which inhabit there-abouts: for the river Nilus
serves for all uses of the country: and it is a most admirable thing, how
that in the self same place you may behold a ship, and a plough, an oar, and
a mattocke, a mast, and a spade, the houses of mariners and husbandmen, the
lodgings of fishes and oxen, and where as you did steare your ship, there also
may you guide your plough: the greatness of the river does continue in
longitude, rising at a certain time with a higher stream: and the Egyptians
do daily expect his coming, and count how many days he accustometh to stay:
but he rising at his accust^med time, euerfloweth his banks, and waters all
the country round about him. There may one see as it were a contention
between the Water and the earth: for while that he does strive to ouerflow,
the earth does suppe it up, so that the Water does contain equal compass
with the earth. In this country do the thieves inhabit, for the water falling
again does make marrish grounds, which do not stand with Water, but are full
of lime, wherein they do row the little boats which will contain but one
person: for being but little, a little water will suffice to carry them, and
if in some place the river be shallow, they take up their boats and carry
them upon their shoulders, until they come to the water again: in these
marshes there are certain Islands, whereof the most are not inhabited: they
are full of paper rushes, which grow so thick, that between their stalks it
is impossible to pass, but one by one: their tops grow all thick together.
Nither do these thieves hide them, here they do lay their plots of their
villainy, here do they shroud their wickedness, the rushes serving them in
steed of a wall. In many of these Islands which are compassed with the marshes,
there are built cottages, so thick as they seem to be a scattered town,
whereof the greatest, which contained the most number of houses, was called
Nichocis: thither did they get themselves as it were into a strong hold, where
in the situation and strength of the place they did trust much: the passage to
it was very na^row, of length it contained an hundred twenty three paces, in
breadth but twelve. After they perceuied that Charmides approached near unto
them, they devised this stratageme among themselves: they appointed all the old
men to go foremost in te band, carrying in their hands Olive branches, attired
after the manner of petitioners in sign of peace: they commanded the
strongest of their youth to follow next after, being wonderfully well armed,
and placed in battle array. So determining that the old men should carry
their branches in sign of peace, and that they should shadow the Army of men
coming behind, with their boughs, the young men dragged their weapons after
them that they might not be seen. Being placed in this order, they went
forward to meet Charmides, desiring him that he would take pity on their
old age, and spare their whole City, promising that they would give him a
hundredth talents of gold privately, and as many men, if he would cease to
besiege their city, which he might send unto the governor of Egypt as
spoils taken in war. All which they would have done if he would have accepted
of the condition: but Charmides having heard what they could say, would not
grant them their requests, wherefore (said the old men) if you will not have
pity upon us, we must endure this misery patiently, and if that we shall
die, slay us here before our City walls, that in our fathers habitations
where we had our beginning, there also we may make our end, having this city
to be our tombs, and we our selves will be the auth^urs of our own death When
Charmides heard this, he dismissed his army, sending them back again to their
tents. Now the thieves had laid certain spies which did see all that was
done, to whom it was given in charge, that as soon as they saw the enemies
coming, breaking down the bank of the river, they should let the water in
upon them, for there are diverse ditches made, with high banks, which do keep
in the Water of Nilus yt it shall not ouerflow until time require, which when
they will let the Water round about, they pluck down the banks: wherefore
the spies seeing them come near, plucked down the banks, so that the Water
began to ouerflow amain, and in an instant the old men got themselves away,
the young men which dragd their weapons behind them, began to rush upon them:
the Waters increased and waxed so high, that all the marshes were overflowed,
so that it seemed a little Sea. This assault being given thus on the sudden,
they slew all which they met, but first they dispatched Charmides: the other
soldiers were in such an amaze, they know not what to do: the darts came so
thick upon them, that they were now in despair of succor, fly they could
not, the straights were so narrow, and offer violence to them they were not
able: the Water now came up to their middle, wherefore many astonished with
fear, stood still expecting their death, others striving to go forward, were
borne down with the force of the Water, some indeuouring to fly away, stuck
fast in the mud: the waters being overflowed, took away the use of their
bucklers, neither could one tell which was the field, or which the marish, for
he which thought he was upon the field running apace, stuck fast in the
s^ime, and pursued was taken of his enemies, and he which was in the marish
supposing he had been upon the firm land, and making quick speed, was
drowned in some hole: without doubt this was a new kind of misfortune and
shipwreck by sea, when as round about there was not a ship to be seen;
neither was it so strange, but even ouercomming humane cogitation, in the
water was fought a battle by land, and on the land was suffered shipwreck.
The thieves being now aloft with this success, began to vaunt and brag,
thinking how that they had gotten the victory by valor, not by deceit, or
ambushes; for the nature of the Egyptian is, that in adversity he is of no
courage, but in prosperity he plucketh up his heart again: so that he is ever
in the extremes; for either he cowardly yields, or else does proudly
dominere. Ten days were now expired, since Leucippe fell into her madness,
which did not seem to cease any thing at all; wherefore one day as she was in
a sleep, she spoke very earnestly these words; For they cause, Gorgias did I
fall mad: which I hearing, as soon as it was day, I told to Menelaus;
thinking with my self whether there were any in the Town which was called
Gorgias. Whilst I went down out of my lodging, there met me a certain young
man, which after he had saluted me, spoke to me in this manner; I am the
preserver of thee and thy wife: wherefore being amazed; what said I, art thou
Gorgias? He answered no: but I am Chaerea. Gorgias was he which was the cause
of her mishap: then I being more astonished then before, what mishap said I? or
what is this Gorgias? Tell me I pray you, what these sayings do mean? Then
said he, this Gorgias was an Egyptian soldier, which now is dead, for he was
one of the first which was slain of the thieves: he was in love with your wife;
and when by nature he was given to sorceries, he made an amorous Potion, and
persuaded your Egyptian servant, that he should mingle it with Leucippes
drink: but so it came to pass, that he made the Potion stronger then he
should; and in stead to make her love, he made her mad: all this Gorgias
servant told me yesternight, which escaped out of the same war, where his
master was slain: and it seems to be most likely, that by the sacred
Destinies decree, he was saved alive for your sakes. Thus having ended, he
demanded of me four pieces of gold: promising it I would give him so much, he
would presently restore her to her health, saying, that he had a medicine now
ready mingled, which would cure the former disease. But beside this reward
said I, I will give thee immortal thanks for this thy good turn: but first
send for this man which you talked off. So he departed from me: but I coming
home, did give my Aegiptian servant his desert, striking him three or four
times upon the face, and with threatening words, I asked of him, what that was,
which he mingled and gave to Leucippe, and for what cause she fell mad:
wherwithall he being afraid, declared all to me as Chaerea had spoken
before. We procured him therefore to be shut up in prison: In the mean time
Chaerea returned with Gorgias man, to whom I presently paid the money, saying.
I pray you mark this of me, and hear my opinion herein: you know that the
potion was the cause of all this mishappe, wherefore I do not think it good,
that her belly being once infected with drugges, you go about to distemper it
with the like: But proceed on forward, and show me what is in your medicine,
and make it ready while I do stand by: which if you shall bring to pass, I
will give you both, well double my reward.

Then said the Servant you do seem to fear, not without a cause: But those
things which are to be provided are edible and common, and I my self will eat
as much of them before, as I will give unto her. And immediately they went and
bought every thing, and before me they pund them, and being divided into two
parts, this first said he, will I drink: this other part, I will give to the
maid, which after she has dronk, she will sleep all the night: when morning
comes she will both be freed of her sleep, and disease. So he did drink up
one part, the other he commanded to be kept until night, and then to be
ministered unto her: and he promising that the medicine would work after this
order: having taken the money departed away, the rest I promised I would give
him when Leucippe was recovered again. When the time came that I should give
her the medicine, mingling it together in my hand, I spoke after this manner: O
Physic begotten of the earth and Aesculapius, and by him first given to
mankind, I pray God that his promises of thee do prou^ true: Be thou
favorable unto me, and driving away this savage and corrupt poison, restore
this most beautiful virgin to her health again: having kissed the pot, I gave
it to Leucippe, who having received it not long after, as he had declared, fell
into a great sleep: but I sitting by her as she was asleep, said unto her as
though she heard me, what do thou now repent thy self? do thou know me?
let me hear thee speak to me: go too tell me something, on thy dream; for
yesternight thou did talk of Gorgias: worthily is thy felicity, being awake,
great, but greater when thou art asleep, for being awake thou did fall into
madness, but the dreams of sleepers do pretend things to come. As I was thus
talking with her as though she heard me, the morning began to appear:
Leucippe awaking called me by my name, but I coming nearer unto her, enquired
of her health: but she seemed to me not to know any thing that she did: but
seeing her self bound she fell into a great admiration, and demanded of me
of whom she was bound: then seeing her restored to her wits again, leaping
for very joy, I unloosed her, and I declared all things which were done: which
when she heard, she blushed, and understood how that she had been mad.
Wherefore I comforting her, badde her be of a good courage: which I declared to
Satyrus, demanding of him the rewards to give to Chaerea, for he kept all our
provision safe since the shipwreck, neither afterward did either Menelaus or
he or any of us remain in the danger of the thieves.

In the mean season a new army was sent from the chief City against the
thieves, which did determine to overthrow the City also, we being now
freed from the injury of the robbers which inhabited the river, determined to
go to Alexandria, taking Chaerea with us, whom, because he made the potion, we
received into our company. He was a fisherman of the Island Pharos: but at that
time he did serve in pay under the pirates, and the war being ended, he was
dismissed: Wherefore when sailing had been long intermitted because of the
pirates, their forces being now vanquished, all the river was full fraught
again with vessels: and the rejoicing of the mariners, the applause of the
passengers, the number of ships and boats, the fayrenesse of the river, did
breed a great delight to the beholders: for the passage upon the river, did
seem as though the river did celebrate a festival. But I being delighted
with the river, desired also to taste the sweetness thereof: the very first
day I did drink it without any wine, because being mingeled with a liquor of
greater force, the virtue of it is extinct by a more forcible:

Therefore I took up the water in a glass, which did seem to strive with
ye Crystal in whiteness: the taste in drinking, was sweet and cool. I do
know certain rivers in Greece so cold, that one is not able to drink thereof:
Wherefore it comes to pass that the Aegiptiaus, when Nilus ouerfloweth, do
never fear the scarcity of wine. I did marvel at their manner of drinking
thereof, for they neither use cups, glasses, pots, or any other such vessel,
but do drink from their hands: if any of the sailors be thirsty, he boweth
down out of the ship, and in the hollownesse of his hand takes up the water,
but I did there behold another beast, which in force did far surpass the Horse
of Nilus, the name whereof was a Crocodile, he is in form both of a fish, and
also a beast, which lives upon the land: there is a great space between his
head and his tale, but the breadth in proportion does not answer to his
length, his skin is roughe with scales, his back is black and like to a
stone, his belly is white, he has four feet bowing somewhat inward, like
unto a land tortesse, his tail long, thick, and solid like unto his body,
his teeth stand like to the manner of a saw, wherewith if he fight with any
beast he fears them, his head grows to his body no separation seen, for
nature has hidden his neck: the other part of his body is very horrible to
behold, especially when his jaws hang down, and his mouth is open: so long as
he does not gape, his head seems to be solible, but when he opens his
choppes it is otherwise: in eating he moves his upper iawe, but never his
nether: moreover his gaping is so wide, that it reaches to his shoulders, and
near by adjoining to his belly: His teeth are many, set in three ranckes,
whose number is (as they say) so many as there be days in the year: you would
wonder to see the hugeness of his body, when he goes upon the earth, to
think what incredible strength he has.

The fifth Book.
The Contents.
In this fifth Book is set forth the rape of Leucippe by Cherea: the love of
Melite toward Clitiphon: their sailing to Ephesus: After it shows how
Sosthenes the steward of Melite, bought Leucippe of a Merchant which had
redeemed her from Pirates: how she under the name of Lacena, unknown of
Clitiphon, perceives his love to Melite: The returning home of Thersander
Melites husband, whom she long since had thought to have perished in shipwreck.

WHen three days were past, we came to Alexandria, and entering into the gates
of the Sun (for so they are called) my eyes were filled with the beauty of
the city, for from the gates of the Sun, to the Moon, (for they are under
the safeguard of those gods) a long row of pillars supporteth ye building on
both sides: in whose middle is a street, from whence many ways do come, so
that the people walking in the city, do seem as it were to have undertaken a
voyage. Having walked two or three furlongs into the city, I came to that
place, which has his name of Alexander: and I did behold another city, which
was distinguished after this order: There was a long row of pillars equal in
height, which seemed to be vauted over, making a fair passage through, so that
it does serve to walk safe from a tempest or foul weather. But this city
seemed to me populous, and there were so many, that except the building were
very large, they could not be contained. By chance, at the same time the
festiual day of the great God, which the Grecians call (...), the Egyptians
Serapis, the Latins Jupiter, was celebrated: wherein the the lights did shine
through the city, a sight worthy the beholding: for when evening came, and
now the Sun was set, neither was it night altogether, but about twilight, me
thought the city did then contend with heaven in beauty; I saw Melichius
Jupiter, and his temple, whose godhead when we had worshipped, we made our
prayers, that here might be an end of all our calamities: and then we departed
thence and came to Menelaus, who had hired a house in the city; but the god
would not grant us our prayers, for there was another danger behind, which
fortune seemed to threaten upon us: for Chaerea had loved Leucippe privily long
before: who gave her the medicine hoping to have occasion thereby to come into
acquaintance with her, and that he might preserve her for himself: whom, when
he saw how hard a matter it was to get, he went about to lay wiles and ambushes
to take her away: wherefore having gotten certain thieves like himself
together, he told them all what he purposed to do, therefore counterfeiting to
celebrate his birth day, he invited us to see the Island Pharus: And as we went
out of the house, there appeared to us a sign of ill luck, for a hawke
following a swallow, struck with his wing Leucippe upon ye head: wherefore
being troubled in mind, and looking up into the air, what strange sign (said
I) is this O Jupiter, which thou show unto us? But rather if this bird be
truly thine, why do not thou show us a more manifest sign? wherefore
turning me about, (for we stood near unto a Painters shop) I did behold a
table, wherein was drawn the mishap of Progne, the violence of Tereus, the
cutting out of the tongue of Philomela, and containing all the whole history
thereof. There was to be seen ye sampler which Philomela wrought, Tereus also
sitting at his table, and a servant holding abroad the sampler, and Philomela
pointing in it with her finger, Progne did seem to grant to her desire, and
looking eagerly, knitting the brows, did seem as though she would be revenged
upon Tereus, which had dealt thus traitorously with her sister, which did stand
by, having her hair plucked off, her face beaten, her garments rent and torn:
her white breast did lie open, her right hand wyping her eyes, she did
greatly and grievously accuse Tereus: with her left hand, she endeavors to
cover her naked breasts with a piece of her torn garment: Tereus plucked her
to him with all his strength, straightly embracing her in his arms: in the
other part of the picture, the women brought to Tereus in a dish, the relics
of his son to supper, which was his head and hands, laughing together and
trembling: but he rising up with his drawn sword in his hand, seemed to thrust
down the table with his arm, which now did neither stand nor fall; yet seemed
as though it did fall. Then said Menelaus, if you will take my counsel, I
think it good if you did not go to Pharos, for two signs of ill fortune have
happened to you: the flying of the hawk, and the threatening of the picture:
for the soothsayers and diuinators do warn us not to despise such tokens as
th^se: but if that we have any affairs at all, we should talk with them for
whose cause we undertook the travail, if there be any likelihood in the
matter: do not you see the picture full of filthy love, impudent adultery,
women's mishaps, to conclude, full of al iniquity? I truly would defer this
going to another end. This speech of Menelaus seemed to be very true,
wherefore I badde Chaerea farewell, which went away very sad, saying that to
morrow he would come for us again. Then Leucippe turning to me (for women are
desirous to know every toy) I pray you said she, tell me, what this picture,
these birds, and these women, about that impudent man do mean? Then said I,
those which you see now to be birds, were once men, the women there, Progne
and Philomela, (for these were their names) were sisters born at Athens, this
was turned into a Swallow, the other into a Nightingall, the man's name was
Tereus a Thracian borne, and the husband of Progne was transformed into a
Lapwing. To satisfy the lust of a barbarous man, one woman is not sufficient,
especially when occasion serves him to fulfill it by violence: the love of
Progne toward her sister, did give the occasion to this intemperate man, which
following his own sensuality, did fall into all intemperance and immodestie:
for she sent him being her husband, to see her sister, which departed her
husband, but returned her sisters Lover: and as he returned he made another
Progne, which when he would have made known, he gave her a reward for her
virginity lost, he cut out her tongue: notwithstanding he had thus dismembered
her, yet she found out a dumb reporter of her misfortune, for in a cloth with
Stella, she wrought all the villainy committed by him: her hand served in
steed of her tongue, when she could not deliver to the ears what she had
suffered, she laid it before the eyes. Progne having read the work, and
knowing how her husband had ravished her, she determined to torment him with a
new kind of punishment, surpassing the common opinion. And when both these
women did burn in anger, a conspiracy being made, they provided a supper far
more delectable then the marriage of Philomela: They did set his son before
him at dinner to be eaten. During her anger Progne was not his mother, Itys was
not her son, for she had forgotten that she brought him soorth into the
world: for the rage of slander is far more mighty then the grief of the
womb: although that this was troublesome to them, yet when they saw they
should revenge him, who had violated the laws of wedlock, they did recompense
this trouble with pleasure of revenge.

After Tereus sitting down at this supper, and having eaten sufficiently, these
women smiling and fearing, brought forth in a Charger the relics of his
son: which when he saw, perceiving that he had eaten the seed of his own
loins, he shed tears abundantly: then incensed with choler, drawing out
his sword ran upon them, but the air took them up suddenly, changing
them into birds, with whom also Tereus was taken up, who as yet all do carry
about them a remembrance of their deed: the Nightingale evermore flies away:
the Lapwing pursues her: which signifies that hatred does remain still after
their mutation. And by these means at that time, we avoided his wiles,
rejoicing greatly we did not fall into our enemies hands.

The next morning Chaerea came again, and we for modesties sake could not deny
him the second time: wherefore taking ship we came to Pharos; Menelaus
staying behind, because he was not in his perfect health, Chaerea first
brought us unto the top of the tower, showing to us the most admirable and
wonderful building thereof from the top to the bottom.

There was a high hill standing in the Sea, whose top did almost part the
clouds, at whose foot the water did beat: so that it seemed to hang over
into the water: in the high tower, which is built upon this hill, there hangs
a light, which as it were a guide does direct the sailors by night: when we
had seen this, we were brought to the furthermost part of the Island toward
the Sea: the Sun being now ready to go down, Chaerea departed from us,
faining as if he would go about some necessary business: not long after a
great clamor upon a sudden was heard before the gates: upon the very
instant, violentlye came rushing in a number of men with swords drawn, which
altogether ran fiercely upon Leucippe perforce, and took her away. I seeing
my Leucippe thus carried from me, was wonderfully disquieted, and running
amongst the middle of their swords I received a great wound in my thigh, so
that I fell down, all full of blood, but they getting her into a ship
swiftly fled away. The governor of this Island, hearing the concurse and
clamor, which is accustomed to be made at the coming of pirates, came running
down, who knowing me well, for I served in pay under him in the war, I
showed him my wounds, and requested him that he would follow these pirates:
he getting into one of the ships which lay in the port, whereof there were
many, pursued them with as much speed as he could. Moreover I, my wound
being bound up, desired to go with him also in the ship. The pirates seeing
that we were now come something near them, and prepared ready to fight, tied
a maid with her hands behind her, unto the hinder part of the ship, and
one of them cried with a loud voice: Behold the reward which you seek: and
with a sword stroke of her head, which they took and hid in the ship; but
the body they cast over boorde into the Sea. Which when I saw, I fell into
great schriching, and outcries, about to cast my self headlong into the sea:
but they which were with me restrained me against my will: Wherefore I
requested them to stay the ship, and to go down and take up the dead body,
that it might be buried. The governor commanded the rowers to stay, and one
of them to go down in a little boat,, and take it up: Then two of the
mariners slyding down by a rope, went in a cock-boate and brought up the
carcass into the ship but the pirates in the mean time did hasten their
flight: yet we came near unto them again, who when they saw us approaching
to them, by chance they espied another rouer coming near, which they knew
by the colors, (for the pirates do use purple tops) and to them they prayed
for aid: wherefore the governor seeing they were strong, without hope to
prevail; retired back; but they stayed their flight then, and would have
fought with us. When we were returned to the shore, and had gone forth out of
the ship, I took the dead body in my arms, and embraced it, and I began
lamentablye to complain. Now my dear Leucippe, thou have dyed two deaths,
both by land and sea: and although I have the relieues of thy body, yet I have
lost thee; neither is that part of the body which is restored to the land,
like to that which the Sea has kept, for the least part of thy shape is left
to me, the Sea possesses it alone: but although fortune has dealt so with me
that I cannot kiss thy lips, yet I will kiss thy throat: thus complaining
with my self, I buried the carcass, from whence I returned back to
Alexandria: where I had salve laid to my wound, against my will. Menelaus ever
comforting me, I led my life with him there in great sorrow. After I had passed
six months ye greatness of my grief began to diminish: For time is ye
medicine for sorrow, which does soften the wounds of the mind, (for the sun
is full of mirth) and grief, which does overcome all measure, yet is not so
heat, except the mind do rage in heat: and if it be pacified with the pleasure
of time, it waxes cold:

But as I walked one day toward the market place, there came one behind me and
struck me upon the shoulder with his hand, and after salutations embraced me,
and kissed me: I at the first was ignorant who he was, being amazed at these
kind of salutations, which received them no otherwise, then if I had been a
mark to whom they had been leuelled at: but afterward looking better upon
his face, for very joy I cried forth, (for he was Clinias) I embraced him, and
gave him the like kindness back again: and having brought him home with me,
he declared to me how he escaped shipwreck. I also recounted to him all that
had happened to Leucippe: and thus he repeated his manner of shipwreck. The
ship being broken, I got me to the hinder part thereof, I was constrained to
hold the very uttermost parts thereof, for it was full fraught with company,
where I did endure the force of the water and weather: being thus tossed up and
down, this relic of the ship by chance was dashed against a Rock, and with
the force thereof, recoyled back having no harm: wherefore swimming the rest
of the day, having no hope of recovery from these dangers, we wandered about:
at length being weary, I committed my self wholly to fortunes disposition, but
behold a far off I espied a ship coming toward me, when I rejoicing,
held up my hand as high as I could, beckening to them to succor me: but they
which were in the ship, whether they did pity my case, or were driven so by
the winds, directed their forepart of the ship toward me: and one of them
did let down a Cable to me: which when I had taken hold of, they plucked me
up into the ship. This vessel sailed toward Sydon, and diverse there were
therein which did know me, which did take great care about me: when we had
sailed two days, we came into the City, but I requested the Sydonians which
were in the ship, Xenedamas the Merchant, and his father in law Theophilus,
that they should not detect me to any of the Tyrians, if by chance they did
meet any, nor how I had escaped shipwreck: which when Clinias had spoken,
adding likewise, how yt he had heard ye Sostatus at his return from the war,
had promised his daughter in marriage, I began to bewail the inconstancy of
fortune, saying: O unhappy man that I am, does Sostratus at this time go about
to marry Leucippe? and should I have another wife? he truly has not exactly
the number of the days, which would not have us married before we were gone:
how wretched and unlucky was I that day? now may they betroth Leucippe being
dead: now when it is time for me to mourn, they would have me sing a song to
Hyminaeus. Alas what shall I do now? what a bride would fortune give me now,
whose dead carcass is not wholly given unto me? Then said Clinias, it is not
time for thee to complain now, but rather consider with thy self whether it
be better to return into thy country or stay here: neither, said I, likes
me at this time, for with what face can I look upon him, from whose house I
fled away in such manner? wherefore it remains now that I depart hence before
any of my friends come to make inquiry for me. As we were conferring thus
together, Menelaus and Satyrus came in, and after he had embraced Clinias,
Satyrus turned him to me saying: A fit occasion serves you now, therefore be
advised before you let it pass, and here dispose of all your affairs, taking
the counsel of your friends before rashly you enterprise any thing, let
Clinias be your judge therein. Venus surely does favor you, and perhaps you
will little account of that which she has bountifully bestowed upon you.
There is therefore an Ephesian woman lodging in this City of rare beauty, and
singular behavior, which is taken in love with you so extremely, that if she
be frustrated of her desire, it is thought that she will fall mad. For
comeliness and grace you would think her a goddess, her name is Melite, very
welthie, and not yet come to her ripe years, which very lately lost her
husband in shipwreck, and and she does wish that you would be her Lord, not
her husband, and to you she will give both her self and her wealth: for your
sake she has stayed here two months, and requesteth that you would go back
with her to Ephesus: but you despise her, neither do I know the cause thereof,
except Leucippe be raised from death again: then said Climas, Satyrus seems
to give thee good counsel. For why should thou say, since beauty, riches,
and love do offer themselves unto thee, whereby all things do abound, to enjoy
pleasure, to the necessary use of the life, and to get a good name in the
Country, that is, not to be accounted the least: favors are granted thee by
a goddess, therefore I wish thee to follow Satyrus his counsel, and satisfy
the will of the goddess. Then I sighing said: Go to, lead me whether soever
you will, since Clinias will have it so: but is this woman so importunate that
she will have all things dispatched before she come to Ephesus: I swear when
I lost Leucippe, that here never any should have my Uirginitie. Which when
Satyrus had heard, he immediately went to Melite to carry her this happy
news, which when she heard, she fell down astonished for veri^ joy: not long
after he returned again, earnestly entreating me this night to go thither
to supper, that we might make a beginning of our marriage: wherefore attyring
my my self, I came to Melites house, who as soon as she saw me, ran
presently to meet me, receiving me with many kind embracings and sweet
kisses. She truly was both comely and fair, her very body did carry such a
majesty, as if that she had been Venus her self, her color and her
cheeks was so pure and perfect, that you would not say it were smered with
painting, but as it were mingled with blood and milk: her hair was thick,
and did hang down in curled locks like Jewels of gold, wherefore it
delighted me much to behold her: in the mean season a sumptuous supper was
prepared, and being set upon the table we sat down. But Melite did take
a little of every thing which was set down, feeding of naught but love,
earnestly with fixed eyes did behold me. For there is nothing so pleasant or
delightful unto lovers, as to behold the thing which they love: for love
possessing the whole heart, does stop the passage for the food. But the
pleasure which is received by the fight, sending down by the eyes into the
mind, remains there, and does steadfastly imprint the image of the thing
seen* as it were in the glass of the mind, for the flowing it self of
beauty by hidden beams, piercing to the heart, does ingraue the form of the
thing beloved. Which when I marked, I pray you said I, why do not you also
eat of those delicates which you have prepared? Truly you seem to me as if
you were a painted guest. Then answered she: what meat can be more dainty,
what wine more precious then your sight? With these words embracing me in her
arms, she kissed me, then often repeated this, Thou art my joy, my food,
and whole delight. And after the matter fell out after this manner, when night
came, she was very earnest with me to lodge there that night: but when as I
had repeated to her that which before I had spoken to Satyrus, although very
hardly, yet at length she let me go upon this condition, that the next day
I should meet her in this Temple, and there we should determine the matter
before the Goddess. Wherefore the next day at the time appointed, I went with
Menelaus and Clinias, and there we did swear: I also took my oath that I
loved her as sincerely as ever I did Leucippe before: she likewise did swear
that I should be her husband, and she would make me Lord of all her
substance: all which was confirmed there between us, but the nuptials should
not be selemnized before we came to Ephesus, and that there as I had sworn
before, Melite should succeed in Leucippes place.

Afterward we went home to her House, where, as before, a magnificent supper
was provided, for that was called the nuptial feast, but the rest we did
defer until we came to Ephesus. As we were at Supper some merry conceit
came unto Melites mind, which made her leave her melancholy looks.

When every one had wished us a prosperous marriage, she whispered in my
ear, saying: As tombs are built in vain for them, whose dead bodies are not
to be found to be buried, so do I see my marriage to be provided for me, and in
this madness did she slilie rest with me: wherefore a prosperous wind serving
us fit, we hastened to our ship, and hoysing up sail we left Alexandria:
Menelaus followed us to the shore, and having taken his leave, and wished a
prosperous navigations, he departed from us. He was a most courteous young man and
most trully friend, who for our departure shed many tears, and we also being
not able to refrain from doing the like, Clinias thinking it a grief to
depart from me, went with me to Ephesus, where he staide so long, until all
his affairs went well with him in his own country: but our ship sailed
forward with a prosperous course, and night coming on, every man went to his
chamber appointed: but Melite embracing me between her arms, began to kiss
me, and to repeat her marriage, saying: now have we passed Leucippes bonds,
and come to our appointed end: this is the day decreed, wherefore should we
defer it until we come to Ephesus? do not you know the calamities of the
sea to be dangerous, and that the changings of the winds are mutable. O
Clitiphon I burn, believe me I burn, and I would I could show unto thee the
greatness of my fire: I would that by my embracing and kissing I could put the
same force into thee, which loves flames have already kindled in me. But this
my fire is greater then any common flame, which wanting matter to feed it, is
quickly burnt out: since all lovers do greatly desire to embrace one another,
this my heart working a more fervent operation in me, will not be contented nor
satisfied with it. O hidden fire! O fire shining in the dark! O fire unwilling
to transgress thine own laws! But why do not we* O my most dear Clitiphon,
sacrifice together at Venus Altars. Then said I, good Melite do not seek nor
with me to violate my word before I have done my sacrifice to the dead, for
as yet we are not passed the bonds of this unhappy maid, until we are
arrived on another coast. Did you hear me tell you how that she lost her
life in the water: the vastness of the Sea, through the which we now are
carried, is the tomb of Leucippe; for what do you know? may not her ghost
wander here about this ship? For their souls who perish in the waters, do
not descend to hell; but as it is said, do flote about the waters: And
perhaps she may be about us, as we do embrace now. But does this seem a fit
place to you, to end the marriages? do you think that they can be sole^nised
amongst the boisterous waves, and raging billows of the sea? would you have
us to begin our marriages from so unsure a bed? Then said Melite, by Castor
you talk very pretily? Truly I do think that any place may be a fit
chamber for lovers; No place is prescribed to God Cupid, we have heard that
the sea is the most fittest place for his mysteries: what I pray you was not
his mother gotten of the sea? Wherefore I think we should do an acceptable
thing, unto this god, if we honor his mother so much, as to finish our
nuptials in this place: For are not they, your ropes, and cords, which tie
the maste, the crospeece, and the sail yard, present tokens, and signs of our
marriage? why then do we differ it? is it not the best sign of all to
begin ones marriage under the yoke? the cables are tied together and the
masts erected by them: that is an argument too, that fortune would have us
celebrate the^ here: behold Neptune married his wife Amphitrite in the sea, the
troops of the Nereides did accompany them, and the sweet murmuring of the
winds about the cables, did seem to sing the bridal song to Hymenaeus: do
not you see the sail, which does swell as it were, like a belly great with
child? which I truly do hold tokens of good luck, coniecturing that it will
come to pass that shortly you shall be a father: Wherefore when I saw her so
ready for it; let us dispute thus Melite until we do come to the land:
Moreover I do swear unto thee again, by the sea, and by the good fortune of
this our journey, that my desire is of no other then of thee, if Leucippe be
not alive: and now we must keep the laws of the seas, for I have often heard
it reported of mariners, that a ship ought to be kept clean and void from
all libidinous acts, either that they be holy, or else because we ought not
to deal any thing lasciuiously among those dangers which are always ready
at the sea. let not us therefore, defile the sea with our marriages, or mingle
terror to our nuptial rites: we will not be the seekers of our own mishaps,
if the joy do not fall out which we do expect. Which when I had said, soothing
her up with kisses, I brought her to be of my opinion: the rest of the night we
spent in sleep. The first day from our departure we arrived at Ephesus, where
I did behold the magnificent house of Melite, the rich furniture, the stately
hangings, the great number of Servants: when we were come home, she appointed
a sumptuous feast to be made, and in the mean while she carried me forth of
the City, about half a mile into the country, whither we both did ride in a
coach to take the air: when we came thither, we went to walk under a most
pleasant thicket of trees, so artificially planted, that on what side soever
you did look, they stood all of even rows: as we were walking together, there
came unto us a maid heavy laden with chains, carrying a spade, her hair
cut, her body all ill favored, in long and ragged garments, and falling down
at our feet, she cried: O mistress take pity upon me, and deliver me which
once was free, but now am bound, since it has pleased fortune to have it so:
with that she held her tongue. Then said Melite, rise up good woman, and tell
me who thou art, what countreywoman, and who he was which bound thee thus, for
thy countenance although thou be plucked down with adversity does show that
thou art nobly borne. Then answered she: the steward of your house did bind me
thus, because I would not submit my self to his filthy desire, I am a
Thessalian borne, my name is Lacaena, to you humbly entreating, do I give my
whole estate, deliver me then from these miseries wherewith you see I am
oppressed, and let me be your creditour until I pay you two hundred pieces of
money, (for so much did Softhenes give for me when he bought me of the pirates)
which believe me I will pay you again so soon as I can: in the mean time let
me entreat you to accept of my service, humbly beseeching you to behold how
hardly he has used me: then turning her back, and putting off her upper
garment, she showed her back full of great wales and bl^w strokes, which when
I had heard, I was greatly astonished, for she seemed to represent Leucippe in
countenance. But Melite bad her be of good cheer, saying: I will deliver thee
from these miseries, and afterward thou shall dwell with me at home. Presently
they caused Softhenes to be sent for, and to deliver her from these bonds: but
Softhenes being afraid with so sudden a message, came in presence, to whom
Melite said. Thou vile varlet, when did thou see me use the meanest servant I
had in so hard a manner? but tell me quickly, laying all untruthes and
dissemblings aside, what she is, I know not truly mistress what she is, a
merchant whose name was Callisthenes sold her to me, saying that he bought her
of pirates, assuring also that she was a free woman, her name was Lacaena.
Melite dispossessed her steward of his office, and made her one of her cheifest
maids and caused her to be washed and apparrelled in a new gown, and brought
into the city. Then having given certain instructions about her husbandry,
for which cause cheefely she came thither, she returned in her coach home to
the City: when supper was brought in we sat down, but Satyrus seemed by his
countenance to have some weighty matter to speak unto me privily, made a sign
to me to rise, wherefore I fained as though I went to exonerate my belly. I
came forth, but Satyrus saying not a word, gave me a letter, which being
sealed, before I could break it open, a chill cold did shiuer through my
bones, for the letter was written with Leucippes hand, after this manner.

Leucippe to her master Clitiphou sends salutations.
DO not marvel though I call you master, for with what other name I should call
you I know not, since you are my mistresses Husband, although you do not very
well know the great troubles which I have suffered for your sake, yet I thought
it necessary to certify you of a few things: for your sake I left my mother,
and undertook with you a voyage: for your cause I was a sacrifice, and after
fell into the hands of pirates, I suffered shipwreck, and also I suffered
another kind of death: for your sake also I was bound in iron chains, I
carried a spade, I dug the ground, and was scourged, that you might become
another woman's husband, and I another man's wife: but I pray the gods forbid it.
I have endured these calamities with a valiant mind: but you not hurt, free
from wounds, go about to solace your self with new marriages. But if you
think I deserve any thanks at all for these mishaps which I have suffered,
request your wife that I may be set free as she has promised, and pay her the
money which Sosthenes laid out for me: and because I am not far from
Byzantium, take care that I may be carried thither: and if you do not believe
me, think that my troubles are satisfied with this one thing. Fare well.

The gods send you joy of your new marriage.

These do I write unto you being yet a Virgin.


WHen I had read the letter, my mind was distracted into a thousand parts, I
did burn in love, wax pale, and sometime maruailed, otherwhiles I did believe
the letters, being perplexed between fear and joy. Then said I to Satyrus:
what, have thou brought this letter to me from hell? or what do these mean?
What is Leucippe alive? Yea said Satyrus, and that is she which you saw bound
in the country, but the cutting of her hair has so disguised her, that she
can scant be known of any: why do thou (said I) fill mine ears with such
good news, and will not show me my cheifest felicity? Be silent (said
Satyrus) and dissemble the matter cunningly, least you cast us all away, before
some more surer counsel be had in the matter: you see that this is the
cheifest woman in the city, and almost mad for your love, and we are now
between the two nets, destitute of all hope. I cannot said I, for a delight
and pleasure is spread throughout all the veins of my body, and the letter does
expostulate with me: Wherefore I red over the letter again, and answered in
particular, every thing as if she had bin present, being now absent: Thou
speak to me (O most sweet Leucippe) and where thou did write this, thou
have suffered all these misfortunes for my sake; I must needs confess, I was
the author of all these thy miseries: but when I came to these words, which
contained the reproaches and hard measure offered to her of Softhenes, I wept as
bitterly, as if I had stood by and seen them: For ye cogitations turning the
very edge of ye mind, to those things which are signified in the paper, does
represent to ye mind those things which are written, no otherwise the^ if they
were opposite before the eyes: But when she objected my marriage, a blushing red
did cover all my face, as if I had been taken in manifest adultery, the very
letters had moved me so far: Then turning to Satyrus I cried. Alas what
shall I do? what excuse shall I use now Satyrus? We are now taken manifestly;
Leucippe knows all: and I pray god her love do not begin to be turned into
hatred: But I would willingly know how she escaped safe the pirates hands, and
whose carcass yt was which we buried. The^ said Satyrus: she will tell you all
at more leisure, but necessity bids you to write back and pacify her, for I
did swear yt willingly you would not marry Melite? what have thou told that I
am married? now thou have undone me; for as yet all the whole city is
ignorant of my marriage. Moreover I do swear by Hercules and my good fortune,
that I am not married to her. Then said Satyrus, I hope sir you do but jest: as
though it is not manifestly known that you have bin in bed together. But I
know, said I, that I speak of greater knowledge, for Melite has not enjoyed
me according to her will. But first tell me what I should write, for this
change has wonderfully moved me, so much, as yt I know not what I may do.
Then said Satyrus I am not wiser then you: therefore begin to write, love
will indite the rest: but dispatch as soon as you can, and have very great
care what you set down: wherefore I wrote a letter after this form.

Clitiphon to Leucippe sends salutations.
AL health to my dear mistress Leucippe. For I present do behold you present:
but by your letters, as though you were absent: The selfsame thing does make
me happy and wretched. But if omitting all other things, thou wi^t look into
the truth of the matter, making no prejudice of me, you shall find that my
virginity (if there be any virginity of men) has followed your example: but
if for a wrong cause you begin to hate me, I earnestly beseech you, that you
would change your opinion. For I do promise (as the gods be my helpers) that it
will come to pass, that you shall verily know, that I am in no fault. Farewell.

And let me understand from you, that you be favorable to me.


THe letters being written and sealed up, I gave the^ to Satirus to convey,
requesting him to speak no more of me the^ becommed him: being thus full of
pleasure and sorrow, I returned to supper, but it came into my mind how that
Melite would not let me depart that night, because the marriage was not full
finished between us: neither could it be that Leucippe being found, I should
once look upon another: Wherefore I determined to set my countenance so, as yt
she might knew my mind to be changed, and least she should enforce my promise:
for I fained that I had caught a shaking with a cold. Melite although she
perceived, that I went about to seek an occasion, because I would not keep my
promise, yet she could not openly convince me: Wherefore not having supped, I
rose up ^o go to bed: and she also leaving the middle of her supper, rose up
and followed me: I being new come into my chamber, feigned my self to be very
sick. But she coming to me said: wherefore do thou do this? or why do thou
go about to despise me? we now are come from the sea, and arrived at Ephesus,
where ye place was appointed for the marriage* What day still shall we expect?
how long shall we imitate them which do lie in some holy place? you offer
me great store of water, but will not let me drink thereof: Shall I sit so
long by the river side, and yet not quench my thirst? Thus my marriage is like
the banquet of Tantalus. Which when she had said, weeping most pitifully, she
cast her head into my bosom; insomuch that I was wonderfully grieved to see
it, neither did I know what to do, because she seemed to complain not without
a cause: yet I answered her thus: I do call my country gods to witness, my
most dear Melite, that I do endeavor most earnestly to fulfill thy desire: but
I know not what evil this is which has happened to me, for I have fallen
suddenly into a sickness, and you know, that they who have not their health,
and do give themselves to Venus sports, do labor in vain: and as I spoke, I
wiped away the tears which ran down her cheeks, swearing a great oath; that
when I was recovered, I would do whatsoever she would impose upon me: by this
means I pacified the woman's mind which was already incensed. The next day
Melite sent for those maids, to whom she had committed Leucippe to be
accompanied withal: and demanded of them, how Leucippe did behave her self
about her work: they answered, that she omitted nothing which was appointed
for her to be done: wherefore she caused her to be brought unto her; who
as soon as she was come: thou know said Melite, what courtesy I have showed
thee, and to repeat over my manifold kindness ever bestowed on thee, I
think it superfluous: wherefore I request of thee nothing but this, that thou
would requite me again in those things, which I know are in thy power to
do. I do hear it reported, that your Theslalian women, do so allure their
Lovers with inchauntments and sorceries, that they do wholly cast their minds
^^om all other women, and to burn with such a desire of them, that they do
think them alone to be their only felicity: since therefore that thou art a
Thessalian borne, I would willingly entreat thy help herein.

The young Gentleman which I saw walking with you yesternight, said Leucippe,
you say is your husband? for so she had learned of one of her fellows: what
husband said Melite? truly I have never had more to do with him then with this
stone: but evermore he tells me of one dead Leucippe, (for so I think he does
call her) whom neither eating, drinking, nor sleeping, he can forget: for his
sake did I stay four months at Alexandria, requesting, entreating, promising,
and ouerpassing nothing which might serve to allure him: but as if he were
iron, a stock, or any such thing which wants sense, he neglects my
prayers, neither does he obey time, almost granting me this one thing, that I
should only enjoy the sight of him. I do call Lady Venus her self to
witness, that I have been in bed with him five nights, and have risen up
again no otherwise, then if I had lain with an Eunuche: so that I seem to be
beloved of an Image, who does not enjoy his lover but by sight: wherefore I as a
woman, do request of thee a woman, that thou would bring me some remedy
against this proud mind of his. Leucippe having heard this, was wonderful
glad* when she knew that I had frustrated all Melites hope: saying that she
would go into the Country to gather herbs to make this medicine. Melite being
now encouraged again with a new hope, cast all her care aside, for the
expecting of happy things, although we do not enjoy their presence, does
delight us much. But I which was ignorant of all this which had passed between
them, behaved my self toward her after the accustomed manner, cogitating with
my self, how I might deceive Melite the night to come, and talk with
Leucippe: neither do I think that she went into ye country for any other cause,
but only to confer with her self, and return in the evening. In the mean
season while the Coach was harnised for Leucippe, and we scarce had sat down
to supper, there was heard a great tumult, and sudden concourse at the gate:
presently one of the servants being out of breath with haste, came running in,
and told us, that Thersander was alive, and at the door: this man was Melites
husband, whom she thought to be drowned, his ship suffering shipwreck: and
this fame did come of some of his own servants which then were with him in his
voyage, who seeing the ship dashed asunder against a Rock, thought that he
also had perished there. Scarce had she servant brought up this news, but
Thersander following him, came immediately into the parlour, and hastened
toward me to take me, for he had heard at his very coming, all things which
could be reported of me. Melite although strooken with this sudden chance,
yet she went to embrace her husband, but he thrust her back with great
violence, and casting his eyes upon me, said; What is this the adulterer? and
violently rushing upon me, being wonderful wroth, struck me a blow upon the
face, then he plucked me by the hair, and casting me to the ground, he did
beat me with a cudgel: I being amazed at this sudden: violence, did neither
ask him what he was, neither why he did strike me, nor durst offer to speak a
word unto him: but I thinking with my self upon the matter, as it was indeed,
although I could resist, yet fearing to do it, I besought him with prayers to
cease of beating me: at length he weary with striking left of, and I weary also
with entreating arose up: but what art thou said I? or wherefore have thou thus
shamefully misused me? but he being more incensed because I replied again,
laid hands upon me, and called for bonds and setters, wherewith having bound
me, he cast me into a close chamber: and as I was going, it so fell out, that
the letter which Leucippe sent to me, fell out of my bosom, and Melite took
it up privily: not long after, when she was alone, she read it, and having
found Leucippes name, was certified of the whole matter, and therewithal she
was astonished: yet she did not believe that she was the same which we found in
the Country, because she never heard that Leucippe was restored to life again.
But having read over the letter, and cogitated upon it, she perceived the truth
more apparently: then being oppressed with bashfulnesse and anger, with love,
and slaundering, she began to be drawn into diverse opinions, for both she
feared her husband, and also could not choose but be angry with the letter: but
love was opposed against her anger, that having aid of slander, at length
got the victory: wherefore when night was come, Thersander went to a
friends house of his in the City, but Melite went to the man who had the
custody of me, and having talked with him, she came in to me, the other
Servants not knowing but only two, whom she had appointed to stay at the door
until her return again, and having found me lying upon the ground, and
coming near to me, although she could not speak all her mind at that
instant, yet her countenance did seem to deliver it, saying: O unhappy woman
that I am, and borne first to my own perdition, which also do so much desire
that which I cannot attain; O more then mad, which love him that despises me,
which being tormented with grief, do take pity upon him which is light
affected, and yet I cannot cease to love the author of these so many my
mishappes: against me there is both a man and a woman conspiring, whereof the
one does scorn me, the other is gone to gather herbs, and yet could not I
know before, that I craved aid of my veriest enemy. Having spoken thus,
incensed with fury, she flung it into my face, which when I understood I was
astonished, and cast down my head as if I had been guilty of some heinous
crime. But she began still to lament and weep, crying out, Alas, alas, what
shall be come of me, affliected with so many calamities, for thy sake I lost my
husband, neither yet could I enjoy thee: but shortly also I shall loose thy
sight, which alone is granted to me. And moreover, for thy cause my husband
hates and detesteth me, accusing me of adultery, and that with him, with whom
I never received any delight or pleasure, so much shame and reproach has
happened to me. Other women by their dishonesty can reap their pleasure, but I
alone without pleasure have gotten reproach and shame, and ignominy. O trecher!
O barbarian! O thou Clitiphon more cruel then pirates more hard hearted then
tyrants* can thou find in thy heart to see a weak woman burning in thy
love, and so cruelly tormented, and cannot thou take pity on her, since thou
also art in love? Do thou not fear the wrath of Cupid? Do thou not care
for his firebrandes and secret mysteries? art not thou moved so pity with
these tears, which these eyes have shed so abundantly, wherwithall even very
robbers will be moved to compassion? what, were not my prayers of force to
persweade thee to embrace me, or to do that which I have long desired? did
neither the opportunity of the time serve, had neither my embracings or
dalliance any force to move? Moreover, that which was the most reproachful of
all, abandoning my kissing, embracing and toying, as if you were nothing
affected toward me: I pray you what is this but a shadow of marriage? you did
not ly with one which was past child bearing, who did refuse your kindness,
but with a young one, a loving, and another perhaps will say, fair and
beautiful. O thou Eunuch: O thou gelding: O despiser of beauty: Now do I
beseech the immortal gods, that al thing may fall out contrary to thy
desires: that the three sisters may conspire to cross thee, which thou now
do prepars against me. Thus did Melite speak not without tears: then did
she held her peace a little: as soon as she saw yt I replied nothing, and cast
mine eyes upon the ground, her mind being changed she began to utter these
words; What I have hitherto spoken sweet youth, choler and grief forced me
thereunto: but now love constrains me to speak. How could I be angry, or
cast such reproaches upon thee, when as I was all in a heat, and the very fire
did possess the inward parts of any body? Now at the length obey: I do not
desire many days, or perpetual marriage, which thou have hitherto prolonged, the
more unfortunate I: one only acco^panying is sufficient, and so little aid will
drive away so great a wou^d: Come therefore extinguish this fire a little, and
whatsoever I have spoken more sharply against thee, pardon me, since it is
incide^t to passions: it cannot otherwise be but she yt loves unhappily, must
rave sometimes: neither do I forget how filthy a cause I plead. But yet I am
not ashamed to declare the secrets of love. To some Cupids darts are not felt,
and the wounds of lovers are made known to none, but those which are in love:
this day remains yet: wherein I pray thee perform thy promise. Remember
Isis, and do not seem little to regard that oath which thou swarest in her
Temple: but if thou would performs thy promise as it was confirmed by oaths
between us, I would not care for a thousand Thersanders: But because Leucippe
cannot be found by any means, I would wish you to marry some other, although
that al things seem to offer war against me, and the very dead are risen
from their graves. O sea! thou have preserved a Sayler, but by preserving him,
thou have cast him into greater dangers: two dead persons are revived again to
my perdition, as though one Leucippe were not sufficient: but let her live, so
that Clitiphon do not live in sorrow. Who can endure this, that wicked
Thersander should return now? and I standing by, to strike thee, and could not
help thee? As yet, good gods, all thy face is full of blew wales, I think
Thersander was blind. But now O master Clitiphon, (for thou alone do
possess my heart) I beg this one thing, that thou would give me now the
first and last thing, which I will crave of thee: this little delay seems
longer to me then many days: so neither you have lost your Leucippe, neither
she dyed a false death; do not neglect my love, for whose cause, when amongst
other commodities, yet thou shall have Leucippe restored again unto thee: had
not I loved thee, and brought thee hither, thou wou^dst yet have thought thy
Leucippe to have bin dead. Moreover you are to thank fortune for this
kindness, as a man did upon a time, who having found a great treasure in the
earth, honored the place where he found it, consecrating an altar, offering of
sacrifices, he crowned the earth. Thou do not only give me no thanks for
finding thy treasure with me, but also do despise the author of this thy
good turn. Think that for my sake love did speak to thee in this manner; O
Clitiphon, grant me this one thing, which am standerd bearer to thee in thy
war, that Melite do not depart from thee untouched: it is my fire which
burns her, wherefore Clitiphon obey the commandments of thy God; since thou will that I shall look to all thy other affairs, I will deliver thee from
bands; although Thersander would not have it so: and I will adorn a chamber
for thee, wherein thou shall live as long as thou will together with her, whose
company is only thy desire. To morrow in the morning look for Leucippe, for
she shall be with thee: she said that this night she would lodge in the
Country, that she might gather the herbs by Mooneshine: for so did I make
sport of her, as of a Thessalian woman: I did crave aid against thee, for my
hope being spent, what could I do otherwise then seek for remedies, by herbs
and charms, which are the comforts to miserable Lovers? And that thou may
cast away all fear, Thersander in a fury is gone to his friends house, that
some god might seem of purpose to have sent him forth, that I might obtain
these things of thee freely: at length yet grant me my desire. When Melite had
pleaded thus (for love taught her to speak,) she loosed my bands and kissed my
hands, first put them to her eyes, then to her heart, saying; Do not thou
see, how it leapeth, and lifting it self up and down ever panting; full of
fear and hope together: (I would it were full of pleasure;) it seems with
trembling to entreat for me. After I was losed from my bonds, she embraced me
weeping, and I also was in a great passion: and that I might confess truly, I
was afraid lest the god of love would be offended with me; especially because
Leucippe being recovered, I should shortly dismiss Melite, and the marriages
which were appointed between us were not solemnized: wherefore I embraced and
kissed her again, and not long after, I fulfilled all the expectation of her
long desire: we neither had bed, nor any other such preparation which is
required for such matter, for Love himself is his own crafts master, and he
provides all things necessary out of hand, making any place fit for his
secrets. And this also is most certain, that unlooked for sportes are evermore
sweeter then those which are provided, and expected long before: for she
always brings with her, her cousin Pleasure.

The sixth Book.
The Contents.
This Book shows, how Clitiphon by Melites means escapes from Thersander,
who before had laid him in hold, and how he was taken and brought back again,
and cast into prison. Thersander falls in love with Leucippe, and with
Sosthenes help seeks to win her favor: but still he is rejected by her.

AFter that I had somewhat eased Melites grief, Now, said I, will you give me a
sa^e passage to be gone, and restore Leucippe to me as you promised before?
Then said she, fear not, for Leucippe shall not be long absent, but adorn your
self, apparel and cover your face with this scarf, Melantho which tarrieth
at the door, together with a young youth, shall go with you, and he shall
direct you in the way: which, as I have already prescribed unto him, shall
bring Clinias and Satyrus to you: Leucippe shall not tarry long after you:
which when she had said, he put off her apparel, and attired me in the same,
and kissing me, she said: How much more bewtifull art thou in these garments,
then in thine own? I have seen^ Achilles painted in such apparel. But my
sweet^ heart Clitiphon, look well to thy self, and have a regard of thy
health, and keep these garments for a remembrance of me, I also will do the
like: and daily embrace it in memorial of thee. Then she gave me an hundredth
pieces of gold, and sending for Melantho (for she was the most trusty of all
her maids: to whom she had committed the keeping of the door,) and told her
what she should do for me, and then she had her to return to her again. I
as soon as I was made ready, went forth of the chamber, the keeper thought
that I had bin his mistresie: Melantho by beckening signified the same unto
him: and passing through the secret part of the house, I came to the privy
door, whereas a youth a freeman born^, being appointed by Melite to accompany
me, tarried there for me. After that, Melantho returned to her mistress into
the chamber, which yet was scarce shut, and caused it to be opened, certified
her of my departure: but she calling the keeper unto her, who seeing the matter
to go contrary to his expectation, (and for a virgin, a heart as it is in the
Proverb, being astonished, had not a word to say,) said; I did ever doubt that
thou would not let Clitiphon depart: wherefore I devised this wile, that by
this means thou might excuse thy self to Thersander, as saying thou did not
know him. Clitiphon will give thee ten pieces of gold for a reward, if thou
stay here, but if thou will fly away, it will be better for thee. Then Opafion
(for that was the keepers name) said, Mistress, I like nothing better the^
that which you have appointed, wherefore it liked Melite well that he would fly
away, and would not return again, until these tumults and her husbands anger was
appeased, so he departed from them: But fortune seemed to be no more favorable
to me the^ she was before, for she was about to bring a new danger about,
persuading Thersander to meet me departing away; who was counseled by his
friend where he did lodge, that he should not lie far from his wife, returned
home from supper: For by chance the festival day of Diana was solemnized, and
all places were full of drunken men: great multitudes of persons did run up and
down ye market place all the night, which I did think to be ominous to me,
knowing some greater danger to hang over my head: for Sosthenes which bought
Leucippe, was thrust out of his office, who understanding that his master was
come, did not only abstain from her, but also desirous to be revenged upon
Melite, first he accused me to Thersander, then he fained many things of his
masters Bawd: that he might alienate his mind from Melite. Wherefore said
he, I have bought O master, a maid of so excellent beauty, that you cannot
conceive it in your cogitation: of whom I would have you believe, as well
hearing as seeing: her did I keep for you when I heard that you were revived
again, which although I did certainly know of, yet I would not make it
known, because you should apparently perceive my mistress disloyalty, that a
stranger and an impudent adulterer might not deceive you: for yesternight
Melite took her from me, and thinking to let her go, but fortune does preserve
such excellent beauty for you, who alone are worthy to enjoy her: she now
does live in the country, and wherefore she was sent thither I cannot
certainly tell: wherefore if you think it good, you may keep her shut up,
before she return to her mistress. Which when Thersander had heard, he liked
it well, wherefore he commanded it to be done. Sosthenes with all speed went
into the country, and having found the house where she did lodge, bringing two
laborers with him, he determined to lock her up. So soon as he saw her alone,
rushing violently upon her, stopping her mouth with his hand, carried her away,
and being brought from the other maids, he shut her up in a close chamber of
the house, saying: behold I bring thee a heap of good news, wishing thee
well, that when you have obtained that which you would, I hope you will not
forget me, neither fears this violence, nor think it done for your harm,
for here you shall enjoy my master to be your lover. Leucippe being stricken
with this unlooked for mishappe, was astonished. Sosthenes came to Thersander,
which then was returned home, and told him what he had done, and he commended
Leucippes beauty to the heavens, so that Thersander conceiving in his mind a
most admirable beauty. When the festival was ended, he commanded Sosthenes
to go before, and he himself would come after unto the maid: this place was
about half a mile distant from the city. In the mean time I being attyred
in Melites apparel did meet them going upon a sudden, and first Sosthenes
espied me, saying: behold the adulterer escaped, and coming apparrelled in
your wives ornaments, the youth which went before me knowing them very well,
having no time to give me warning, for fear ran away, but I was presently
taken: Thersander began to cry cut for aid, which she watch hearing, came
(...) to him in all haste: he began more and more to augment (...) crime,
repeating all things which he could remember, as well those things which were
fit to be spoken as not, and called me adulterer and these. In the end he
carried me to the prison, laying to my charge that I had defiled his bed: but
all this moved me nothing, not the reproaches of being in prison, nor the
slaundring of my good name did affright me, for I did ^^st that I could convict
him with sufficient proof, that I was no adulterer, because the marriages were
openly solemnized. But that did grieve me worst of al, that I had not Leucippe:
for the mind is the presager of mishaps to come, but never of goodness: never
any good thing came into my mind concerning Leucippe, all things were
suspicious and full of fear, my mind was troubled, my spirits daunted, and I
my self in great veration and anguish. Thersander, when he had cast me into
prison, went very mercy with Sosthenes to Leucippe, where coming into the
house, he found her lying upon the ground, and meditating upon the words
which Sosthenes had reported to her before, showing by her countenance the
fear and grief of her heart. For the mind cannot be seen, but by the
countenance it may plainly be discerned as if it were in a glass. If she be
pleasant, mirth it self shines in her eyes: but if contrariwise, she be sad,
grief and sorrow contracteth her brows and sits in her cheeks. But
Leucippe hearing the doors open, scant had cast her eyes upon them (for they
had a candle) but she cast down her head again. Thersander seeing her
beauty which came out of her eyes, which was like to a flash of lightning
coming forth of the clouds, did shine in his face, and instantly vanished
again (for the eyes are the cheifest seat of beauty) he instantly was in
love, and being overcome with the force thereof, began to watch when she would
cast up her eyes again: but when he beheld her sad, pe^siue, and heavy,
looking upon the ground, how long, said he, shall thy eyes be fastened on the
ground? how long will thou show the b^^ut^e of thy countenance to the earth:
why do thou not rather look up? When Leucippe had heard him speak thus, she
wept bitterly, the Crystal te^res in abundance began to water her ruddie
cheeks: A tear does move the eyes, and disquiet them: for if they before
already, it makes them worse, and increases their pain: but if they be
clear, and the black sight compassed with a round white circle, they moysten
with the tears, and are like the little bubbles of a clear spring, their salt
moisture running down the bosom, the white part does as it were wax soft
with the dew, but the ^ight seems to be purple: so that, yt is like the
violet, this a daffadill: But when her tears were such, they could easily
cover the grief of the mind: and if that they had congealed, when they had
fallen down, we should have had a new kind of amber. Thersander therefore
while he does behold the virgins beauty, and sorrow together: with the one
being drawn^ into an admiration, with the other fraught with anger, his eyes
were full of tears: for it is so ordained by nature, that women's tears should
move pity: and so much the more, by how much they are the fresher: but if
she be a beautiful woman, and the beholder her lover, then will not his eyes
rest: but they also moved by some compelling cause, do shed tears also:
for the beauty which in fair Women has his chiefest seat in the eyes, do
^^owe from thence into the beholders eyes, and do draw from thence abundance
of tears: whereby it comes to pass, that the lover receiving her beauty
into her eyes, keeps also his tears there: neither does he desire to wipe
them away, but holding still the motion of his eyes, keeping them in as long as
he can, fearing least they should fall before they be seen of his lover, for he
does think to show by that sign yt he is in love. The like happened to
Thersander, he wept, a^ it is most likely that he might show he was moved with
a kind of humane desire: willing to insinuate into the favor of Leucippe, and
because he saw her weep, he also would do the like. Then turning him to
Sosthenes, he said: Comfort thou her, for thou see in how great heaviness
she lies: I although unwilling, will depart hence, that I may not here be
troublesome unto her. Afterward when I see her more mild, I will speak unto
her: in the mean time said he, be of good comfort maid, for so soon as I
can I will take away this thy sorrow. Then about to go forth he spoke to
Sosthenes saying: take heed that thou speak no more of me then becomes
thee, and to morrow morning by day light look that thou come unto me, and
certify me of this matter. In the mean season, as soon as I was gone, Melite
sent a servant to Leucippe into ye country, which should hasten her homewarde,
telling her that there is now no need of medecines: he presently came thither,
and finding her fellow strangers complainig that they could not find her,
returned back in all have and told his mistress, who understanding that I was
cast in prison, and Leucippe was carried away, was overwhelmed in a sea of
cares: and although she could not certainly know all the order of this mishap,
yet they laid all the blame upon Sosthenes: wherefore she labored diligently
to have Leucippe found out, and that she might persuade Thersander that she was
in no fault, she cunningly devised a tale which seemed to contrary the truth.
For when he came home and exclaimed again; Thou have delivered the adulterer,
thou have set him free from his bonds, thou have sent him out of the house:
why do not thou follow him: why do thou stay here? rather follow thy
lover, that thou may behold him bound in more stronger chains. Then said
Melite, what adulterer do you mean? are you well in your wits which talk thus
vainly. If you will lay aside your choler and hear what I shall say, you may
easily know the truth. This one thing I request you, that you would show your
self an equal judge, and casting slander out of your ears, and placing reason
in steed of anger, I pray you listen to my tale. This man is neither an
adulterer nor my husband, he is a Phaenician, born in Tyrus, inferior to none
of ye country. As he sailed, fortune seemed to frown upon him, for his ship was
split, his merchandice all lost in shipwreck, which when I heard, being moved
with the misfortune of the man, being also mindful of you, I entertained him,
thinking with my self that it might so fall out, that you also might wander
abroad, and some woman would take pity upon your adversity: and if indeed
you had perished in the waters, as it was reported abroad, do not think
then that I did amiss if I succored all such as suffered shipwreck. How many
do you think I have relieved which have endured the violence of the Sea? what
number do you believe I have buried, which have perished in the water? and if I
could get but a board of some broken ship which came to land, I would take it
up, saying; Perhaps my Thersander was carried in this ship. Of those which
have escaped the danger of the sea, he is one, and the last: whom when I
offered, what other thing did I do then be obedient unto you? he sailed as you
did: and therefore dear husband, I pitied his mishappe as a picture of yours.
Now do you know after what order I brought him hither: Moreover, he did
bewail the death of his wife, whom he thought to have perished, although she
did not; whom I know not who it was which did certify me that she was alive,
and did lodge at our Steward Sosthenes his house. And the matter was found out
thus; for going into the Country we found a woman, which bewayling and making
great moan, followed me: you know where Sosthenes dwells, she is with him in
the Country: you may demand of him of all things concerning her, at your
pleasure: if you can find I have not spoken the truth in any thing, then shall
you accuse me of adultery lawfully. Thus spoke Melite, faining as though she
had not heard of the rape of Leucippe: determining also in her mind, that if
Thersander had gone about to have known the truth of the matter, she would
have brought the servants to witness, with whom she went that morning into the
Country, that now she can be found in no place: neither did she move this
enquiry of Leucippe to him, for any other intent, then yt she would have him
believe ye rest to be true which she had spoken: and although she seemed to
answer every thing oppositly enough, yet she would infer this also: and y^ sweet
husband I would not have you think that these are fables, remember how I led my
life while we lived together: wherefore you do wrong me to think amiss of me
now. This report of the young man proceeded to his honor, because the cause was
not known to many, why I did receive him into familiarity, and if a man must
believe fame, were not you thought to be drowned in the sea? for flaunder and
fame are two mischiefs propinquall, to wit, because this her daughter is more
sharp th^n a sword, more hoter then fire, and more apter then the Maremayde to
persuade: she is more voluble then water, more swifter then the wind, more
quicker then the lightening: wherefore the speech which is uttered with
slander, flies in manner of an arrow, which wounds him being absent,
against whom it is sent: for he which hears and easily believes, being
incensed with anger, does rage against him which is wounded: but fame
proceeding from such a wound is manifold, and dispersed into diverse places: and
being driven with the wind of the speech, and being kept up with the feathers
of the tongue, is carried round about every where, and falls into their ears
which she meets. These two plagues have co^spired against me, the same do now
possess your mind, and drive my speeches from your ears, which when Melite
had said, took Thersander by the hand and would have kissed it: but he moved
with the likelihood of her words, remitted his anger conceived: for that which
she had reported of Leucippe, agreeing with Sosthenes words which he had
signified to him before, did take away all suspicion from him: yet he would not
believe all, for a slander being once crept into ones mind, will very hardly
be rooted out. But Thersander hearing that the maid which he loved was my wife,
was wonderfully troubled in mind, and conceived more hatred against me, saying
that he would enquire if the matter were so as he had heard. Being thus
disquieted, he went to bed alone, Melite ^ow being sore grieved, because she
could not perform that which she had promised to me: but Sosthenes having
dismissed Thersander, requesting him to be absent a while, he came again to
Leucippe, promising her many things, and pretending some happiness to her by
his countenance, he had her be of good courage, saying; All things Lacaena
will fall out prosporously: Thersander is so far in love with you that he is
ready to go mad; perhaps he will marry you: and I would you should
know it is by my help alone, which did commend the rareness of your
excellent beauty unto him above all measure. I fastened this conceyt in his
very marrowe: wherefore leave off this weeping and be of good cheer, and
sacrifice to Venus for this felicity: besides have care you remember me: then
said Leucippe, God grant that such happiness ever come to thee, as thou have
reported unto me.

But Sosthenes little suspecting that she mocked him, thinking she spoke from
her heart, said: I will recount to thee the estate and wealth of Thersander,
that thou may know thou have greater cause to rejoice. Therefore know this
for certainty, that he is Melites husband, which you saw here in the
Country, and the cheifest in birth amongst the Ionians: whose stock
surpasses his wealth, but his gentleness excels all his riches. Moreover,
what should I talk of his age? Thou see that he is a young man and
bewtifull: which two things women chiefly desire.

Here Leucippe could not endure Sosthenes to prate any longer, saying: How
long, thou most infamous tempter, will thou proceed to defile my ears, with
this thy unclean talk? What care I for Thersander? let him be fair for
Melite; rich for his Country; courteous and courageous to them which have need
of his help; it belongs nothing to me, whether he be nobler then Codrus,
or richer then Craesus. Why do thou repeat to me a heap of another man's
commendations? Then commend your master Thersander, when as he will cease to
offer injury to other men's wives.

Then Sosthenes looking upon her very earnestly, said: What do you jest? Then
she answered, why should I jest? let me alone with my fortune, and follow
whither the Destinies will have me: for I know I am amongst Pirates: You seem
said he, to have an incurable madness: does this seem to be a place for
Pirates: where you may get you a husband, riches, and delights? And moreover
that man whom the gods have delivered from the pit of death.

And here taking an occasion to speak, he recounted his shipwreck, saying:
It was the gods will and providence, that he escaped so many and infinite
dangers: and not unlike to that which the Poets do feign of Arion, to be
carried through the Seas upon a Dolphins back. To which, when Leucippe
answered nothing, Sosthenes began saying: Look about you, and see what is fit
for your own profit, and beware you do^ not answer Thersander after this
manner: take heed you do not stir up a gentle, meek, and kind man to
choler: which when he is angry will not endure it: for he, in whom there is
meekness, and courtesy, if he do find out one of a gentle disposition, he
does show himself more kind: but if he do meet with an uncivil one, he
will rage in cruel burning wrath: for it is so ordained by nature, that in
whom there is kindness to deserve well, in the same man there is cruelty to
revenge. And thus much for Leucippe at this time.

Clinias and Satyrus, as soon as they heard that I was cast into prison (for
Melite declared to them what had happened to me) by night they came to me in
prison, desirous to live with me there, but the Iayler would not suffer them,
constraining them to go forth against their wills. But I requested them,
that as soon as Leucippe was returned, they should bring me word: cogitating
in my mind of Melites promise, I was troubled between hope and fear: for
hope was joined with fear, and fear with hope.

Afterward the next morning by break of day, Sosthenes returned to
Thersander, and Satyrus came to me. Thersander demanded of Sosthenes whether he
had prevailed with Leucippe, and by persuasion had woonne her to obey. But he
smothering the truth, began to feign a lie, saying: she does deny after a
sort, but that comes not from the heart, for she seems only to me to fear
the reproach, least that when you have once enjoyed your desire, you would then
cast her of. Then said he, what belongs to this matter let her fear no more,
for yt I may truly confess, that the desire of her has taken such root in my
heart, yt it cannot eas^ly be plucked out, but I do fear greatly this one
thing, whether she be the young ma^s wife as Melite reported, and do earnestly
desire to know the certainty thereof. Thus talking together, they came to
Leucippes chamber, where when they had stood, they heard a great groaning of one
lamenting, wherefore they sat down at the door, yt they might hear all that
she said, for she being alone, began thus to co^plain. Alas O Clitiphon (that
name she often repeated) thou do not know where I am, neither in what place I
am kept, neither do I know what is become of thee, but both of us ignorant of
one another estate, do live a miserable life. What did Thersander take thee at
his house? what have thou also suffered injury? it was once in my mind to ask
Sosthenes thy fortune, but I could not find how I might do it safely, for if I
had asked for my husband, I was in fear least I should purchase thee some
harm, by provoking Sosthenes against thee: or if I should have enquired of a
stranger, here also suspicion might have risen: being thus in doubt, I ceast to
enquire for thee. But why do I speak thus? I have often gone about to ask
for thee, never yet could I bring my tongue to ask the question, but yet I did
often complain thus to my self: O my husband Clitiphon, the only hope of
Leucippe, and my constant husband, whom no other woman yet could allure to lie
withal: although that I did verily think thou had forgotten al thy love to
me, when I did behold thee in the country. But what shall I answer if
Thersander peradventure come again? what shall I unfold all the matter to him,
and certify the very truth? That thou may not think me ( Thersander) a base
bondslaue, I am the daughter of ye general of ye army of Byzantia^s, and the
wife of a yongman chief amongst the Tyrians, I am neither a Thessalian woman,
neither is my name Lacaena, this is the reproach of the pirates, by whom my name
was taken away: my husbands name is Clitiphon, my country is Byzantium, my
father Sostratus, my mother Panthia: I do not think that thou will believe
me when I have spoken thus, and if thou do believe it, I fear least that
thou will deprive my dear husband of his liberty. Well, I will put on my
counterfeit personage again, and call my self Lacaena. Thersander hearing her
speak thus, turning him to Sosthenes said; Have not thou heard her speech,
full of grief, heaviness, and sorrow, how she has spoken of many things?
how grievously she has complained? how she has accused her self? an
adulterer is preferred before me. This thief I think he be a sorcerer, he
loves both Melite and Leucippe, I would O Jupiter that I could be Clitiphon.
The^ said Sosthenes, you must not master leave off to labor, but rather go
unto her, neither will she tell you that she loves this adulterer, but so
long she cares for him, as long as she wants another company: but if you
can succeed into his place (for you far excel him in beauty) she will quickly
forget him: for a new fire does extinguish the old, and such is the nature of
women, that they rather love the present, then the absent, except perchance
they remember them when they want another: wherefore as soon as another comes,
the first is immediately forgotten. Then Thersander began to pluck up his mind:
for those words which do bring any hope to obtain the wished thing, are easily
believed, because it comes so to pass, that the desiring part of the mind,
having ye wished thing his companion, compels a man to hope: Thersander,
after that Leucippe had thus spoken to her self alone, stayed a little, that
he might not seem to have heard any thing, and setting his countenance that
he might seem more tractable, at length he w^nt in to her, upon whom he had
scarce cast his eyes, when as he burned with a hot desire, for she seemed to
him to be more beautiful then before: his fire was sostered all the night he
was from her, her sight now ministering more matter for the fire, he could not
withholde himself, but casting himself down, he embraced her, yet he
refrained himself as well as he could. Thus sitting by her he began to find
some idle talk, and scant hanging well together (a thing it is which often
happens to lovers, if by chance it so fall out they have some conference with
their loves, neither do they speak from their heart, but having their mind
fixed on her, they do talk smoothing with their mouth) and as he was talking
he laid his arm over her neck about to kiss her: which she foreseeing, cast
down her head and hid it in her bosom, yet he was very desirous to embrace
her, and by her resistance was more eager, but she holding down her head more
and more, denied his favor: when he had spent a good while in talking thus,
being incensed with an amorous desire with his left hand he held her by the
chinne, with the other he fastened on her hair, by force assaying to view her
countenance, yt she might look him in the face. At length, whether being
weary, or whether having obtained, he left off to force her, but Leucippe
said (...) him: you do neither behave your self like a freeman, nor like a
Gentleman, but do imitate Sosthenes, who truly is a worthy servant for such a
master, wherefore leave off, neither hope to get any thing except you can
change your self from Thersander into Clitipho^: which when she had said, she
could scant refrain, love and anger did so burn^ within her. For love and
anger are two firebrands of the mind, anger has his fire contrary in nature to
the heat of love, but like in power, for the one does constrain one to
prosecute with heat. the other with good will: the mansion places of both
these fires is near to one another, for when a man is possessed with both of
them, his mind is like a balance wherein both the fires are weighed, and the
one does seem to expel the other, but most commonly love does overcome, when
as he obtains that first which he did desire. But if he find himself to be
neglected, he prays in aid of anger, as by reason of vicinage, who presently
is at hand, and they both do kindle their fires: but if that anger do once
beat down love, and as it were drive him out of his house, then he is so
far from helping him to enjoy his beloved thing, that he does strive to
bind him like a slave in bonds, neither will he ever come in favor again,
although he greatly desire it. Whereby it comes to pass, that love overcome
must needs yield, and desirous to return to his accustomed place is not able:
but when anger has exercised his forces sufficiently, with very sacietie being
loathed, is at length remitted, and then love takes his force again, and
brings forth desire into the field, casts anger now quite out of his
seat.

Thersander at the beginning doubted not to be frustrated of his desire, but
when he perceived all his hope to be lost, forgetting his pleasure conceived in
his mind, struck her a blow upon the cheek, saying: thou vile bondslaue, puffed
up with fill this lust, for I know all thy affairs very well. Do not thou
think thy self happy that I would talk with thee? Do not thou think it a
great felicity to kiss thy master? wherefore do thou dissemble that which
thou do most desire, counterfetling thy self to be dispayred? but do not I
know that thou have lived an harlots life, which hitherto have followed this
adulterer: but since thou will not receive me into thy familiarity, I will
teach you minion what it is to deny me. Then said Leucippe, if you have a
delight to play the tyrant, I will endure it as well as I can, so that you
shall not take from me my virginity: and turning her to Sosthenes, she said,
and bear thou witness also with what a mind I endure these injuries, thou
know thou have offered me greater wrong then this.

Then Sosthenes whose guilty conscience accused him of this crime, blushed for
shame, and turning to his master said: you must beat her sir with rods,
until her tormented body ask forgiveness for her trespass, conf^ssing it to
be a just reward that she may learn and know what it is to displease her
master.

Then answered Leucippe: Thersander obey your Servant Sosthenes (for he
counseled you well) and command what torments you please to be provided,
whether it be to be torn in pieces upon a Wheel, to be whipped with
scourges, to be burnt with fire, it will seem to you to be a new kind of
sight: for one woman alone, will strive against so many punishments and depart
the conqueror. But thou call Clitiphon adulterer, when thou art the
adulterer thy self. But hear you sir, do you reverence Diana here; and go
about to ravish a virgin in a virgins City? O goddess why do thy arrows
rest now? What thou a virgin, said Thersander: O ridiculous impudent? what thou
a virgins? which have lain so many nights with pirates? What I pray you were ye
thieves eunuchs? or whether did these thieves go into the Philosophers
school, that none were found, which had eyes? Then said Leucippe, I pray you
ask your man Sosthenes whether after so long and great violence offered to me
by him, I am a virgin or no: for he indeed played the thief with me. The
Pirates were more modest then you: for not one of them would once offer such a
thing, but since you dare do such villainy, why should not I rather call this
your seat a den of theenes, which are not ashamed to commit those things which
they have abhorred to do? you perhaps know not what commendation this your
impudency will bring you. But if you kill me what then, there will not be some
wanting which will say, that Leucippe after she had been amongst the thieves,
after the rape of Chaerea, after the violence of Sosthenes, yet was found a
virgin: these are the least of all: but this is the most famous commendation
and to be preferred before all, that Leucippe keep her mayde^head against the
force of Thersander, more sauadge then all the pirates: which suffered her self
rather to be slain then to be violated. Wherefore, provide you whippes, a
wheel, fire, iron, and take your fellow counselor Sosthenes with you, I am
both naked, alone, and a woman: and have no defense, except my liberty, which
can neither be whipped with rods, nor cut with iron, nor burnt with fire: that
will I never leese, and if you cast me into the middle of the flame: there will
not be force enough therein to take it from me.

The seventh Book.
The Contents.
In this Book is declared, how Thersander cunningly deuiseth means to brute
abroad the death of Leucippe, whom he had shut up close in the Country: he
accuses Clitiphon of the murder: Leucippe escapes out of hold, and comes
into the temple of Diana: Sostratus coming to sacrifice to Diana, finds his
Nephew Clitiphon and his daughter Leucippe.

THersander when as he perceived how obstinately Leucippe persisted in her
opinion, began to be distraught in mind, for he did grieve to see how he was
deceived of his hope; and angry to think how he was neglected; being wounded
with love, he devised with himself what he should do: amongst these wavering
motions of ye mind speaking no word to Leucippe he went forth, being provoked,
with anger to run, then gathering his mind together, to discuss the
ambignities thereof, taking counsel first of Sosthenes, he went unto the
Iayler, and purposed in his mind to poison me, requesting him to consent
thereto: to which villainy, when he could not induce him, (for he feared the
cruelty of the people, which punished another in the same office before him,
because he offered the attempt in such a matter) yet he obtained this of him,
to keep in ward a certain man which he brought, as though he were an offender,
in the same place where I was bound: of whom he fained that he would know all
my estate: the man being brought, was bound not far from me, who before was
diligently instructed of Thersander, that he should raise some talk of
Leucippe, and that he should tell me, that by Melites commandment she was put
to death; which was therefore devised by Thersander, because that although I
could clear my self of the crime, yet I should not go about to enquire for
her, whom I thought was already dead. But Melite therefore was chiefly
appointed the Author thereof, because that Leucippe being slain, I should have
espoused, which before was beloved of me, by shaking this fear frem
Thersander, in putting him in hope safely to enjoy Leucippe: or else because I
should hate her, who caused her to be taken away, when was more dear to me then
my own life: and so for very anguish of mind and discontent, I should depart
out of the city. This fellow as soon as he was come in to me, began to tell me
a tale, and of purpose he sighed and groned: what life said he, shall we lead
in the world to come? what way to salvation may we looks for, if to live
uprightly be not sufficient? Imminent dangers do hang over our head, it did
behoue me to have coniectured with my self, what he was, and what he had
committed, before I had taken my iourny with him. These and such like did he
talk to him self of set purpose, assaying to make the beginning of his talk
by me, that I might ask him the cause of this his lamenting: but my own cares
troubled me more: wherefore when he had shed a shower of tears, one of them
which was bold with us; (for unhappy men desire to hear of other men's
misfortunes, because that the communication of grief, is as it were an easement
of a sorrowful heart) said, what misfortune is this which has happened to thee?
what is it credible yt thou have fallen guiltless into these mishaps? then he
rehearsed the cause, why he himself was cast into bands, but I listened not to
his tale: when he had made an end of his speech, now also said he, I pray thee
let us hear ye cause of thy misfortune? Then said he, yesterday as I took my
journey out of the city toward Smyrna, there came a certain man to me, and
enquired of me whither I wit: to whom I answered, that I was going to Smyrna:
and I also said he, Godwilling do determine to go thither: we went on our
iourny together, and as the manner of travelers is, we eased our iourny with
some talk: about dinner time, we went to an Inn by the way to bayt: being set
down, there came in some men, which also sat by us, seeming as though they
would dine with us. The one did look upon us, beckning and winking upon one
another: wherefore we began to think with our selves yt they had some suspision
of us, although we could not perceive what their beckningsment. He which was
with me began to wax pal^ and to tremble, and in the end he quaked for fear:
which they marking, presently laid hold upon us and bound us: but one of them
struck yt man upon the cheek: he as it were tormented with innumerable
punishments, none asking him any question, cried out; I have slain a maid,
being hired by Melite, Thersanders wife: for a hundred pieces of gold, she
provoked me to do this vilany: behold the money, which I will distribute between
you, I pray you do not go about to cast me away, nor deceive your selves of
this booty. Then I hearing Melite and Thersander named, was suddenly stricken
with his words, as if I had been wounded with a sword: and turning my self to
him, What Melite is ye said I? Then answered he, the cheifest woman of this
city: which (as it is reported) is in love with a Tyrian young man, which
having lost a maid whom he loved, and understood that she was sold into Melites
house, did make enquiry for her, who fearing lest by her means, this maid
would be alienated from her, privily caused her to be slain by this murderer:
into whose company it was my ill fortune to hap: he committed the fact, but I
(poor wretch) neither seeing it, nor guilty of word or deed, was taken
together with him, as accessory to this detestable murder. But this is the
least, a more grievous thing fell out: for we had not gone a furlong from the
Inn, but they took his money and let him go: and brought me in examination
before the officers. After I had heard this tragic discourse, I could neither
speak a word, nor shead a tear, for my voice failed me in my mouth, and the
moisture was fled from my eyes, all my members quaked for fear, and my very
heart was broken: neither had I any life left in my body. A little after, when
I had driven away this concept, I began to be of good courage: How said I,
did this Uarlet wickedly slay her? or into what place did they fling the
carcass? But as soon as he had given me this bone to gnawe on, and had brought
that to pass, for which he came, began to be so mute, that I could not writhe
one word out of him, except that which I had demanded of him before: you seem
to me, said he, to be partaker also of her death, for this one thing did I
hear certainly of the murderer, that ^he was slain: but when, where, and
how, it is to me unknown: then did the tears fall from my eyes, which made
an apparent sign of my inward grief. For as in a body which is beaten with
whippes, the printes of the strokes do not appear immediately, but after a
little space: or else as the wound does not presently show it self in him,
which is strooken with the tuske of a Boore, because it will penetrate the
deeper: and not long after, there will be seen a white line which is the
index of the wound, from which being touched, does flow whole streams of
blood: so the mind, being wounded with the sharp point of some ill n^wes,
does not instantly gape, neither do the tears immediately come forth, which
is as it were the blood of the wounded heart: but after that the tooth of
sorrow has somewhat touched it, then is the mind rent asunder, and the tears
having made passage for their stream, through the eyes do flow abundantly:
for my mind, so soon as it was strooken with the speech of him that reported
the death of Leucippe, as it were with a dart, began after a little space to
breathe from grief, and make passage for the tears: Then said I: what fear
was this which allured me with so short joy? who showed Leucippe to me, that
she might be the cause of new calamities unto me? what, because I could not
satisfy my eyes with beholding, by which alone I was happy: or if I did
behold, I was not filled with sight, all my pleasure being like unto a
dream: O wretched man that I am! for whom, how often haste thou died
Leucippe? shall I never cease from weeping? I think not: for I see a new
death comes upon one another back, but fortune before this time has mocked
me with her calamities: but this I see is no spo^^ng matter: After what means
was Leucippe taken away before in those other suppposed deaths I had ever
some comfort left, first thy whole body, thy head being taken away, which I
buried: but now thou have died a double death, both of body and soul
together? wha^ has it auailed thee to have escaped the danger of thieves
twice, if that this receiving of Melites, be the taking of thee away from me?
Why did I so often kiss the author of of thy death? Why did I so sweetly
embrace her, and bestow upon her my first fruits of Venus, before I gave
them to thee? As I was thus complaining with my self: Clinias came in, whom I
certified of the whole matter.

But said he, be of good courage: who knows, whither ^he be alive again?
has not she been often dead, and yet revived? Why then do thou thus
rashly disquiet and vex thy self? you may meditate of it at your leisure,
when you know certainly that she is dead indeed. You seem to ieste with
me, said I, for how can you know it more apparantlye? surely I do think
I have found a happy way to death, and it is such a one, that Melite also
shall not escape free: For I had deereede (as you know) if so the destenies
would suffer me, to wash away this objected crime of adultery by judgment:
But new I purpose to take a quite contrary course. I will acknowledge the
crime, saying that I and Melite, burning in love together, did hire this
miscreant privily to murder Leucippe, so she shall suffer worthy punishment,
and I will leave my loathsome life: the gods will grant al things I hope to fall
out more happily. What said Clinias dare you undertake so filthy a fact
committed: and confess her death which was your only love? then said I: There
is nothing dishonest which brings shame, and confusion to the enemy. I
being in this case, not long after there came one to deliver this man accused
of the false murder, who said he was appointed by the Archontes, and that he
should be brought to answer those things which should be objected against
him: In the mean time Clinias and Satyrus comforted me, and persuaded me also
not to confess any thing in judgment as I had decreed.

But they the next day hired a house, and there dwelt in that, that they might
not be seen in company with Melite: the next day I was brought into the
Court, and where Thersander was present with a great appearance, having brought
no less then ten lawyers to plead his cause, neither I, being ready: to die,
would go about to sue for Melites defense.

After that they had made an end of their argument, and license was granted
to me to speak: all these said I, which have pleaded for Thersander and
Melite, have declared nothing but mere toys, you shall hear me faithfully
and dilligently declare the whole matter as it is. I had a friend sometimes,
borne at Byzantium, her name was Leucippe, which I did think to have perished
(for she was violently taken from me by the Egyptian pirates) after it so
chanced I fell in company with Melite at Alexandria, with whom growing into
better acquaintance, I came from thence hither, where I found Leucippe serving
Sosthenes chief steward of Thersanders lands: but how Sosthenes could
receive a free woman into bondage, or what familiarity he had with the
Pirates, I leave to your gentle consideration. Melite after she perceived that
I had recovered my old love again, fearing least I should settle my mind
upon her, took counsel to make her away, which I also allowed, for why
should I deny it? and when she had promised to make me Lord of all her
wealth, I hired a damned pesant to murder her, promising him a hundredth pieces
of Gold: so he having committed the fact, fled away, neither since that time
did I ever hear of him. But love seeing himself thus troubled, suffered me
not to go long unrevenged, for knowing the maid was murdered, being charged
with an evil conscience, I never ceased to weep since that time, but now
being burned with the desire of her, I do love her dead, neither do I accuse my
self for any other cause, but that I would have you send me thither where my
lover is, since that in your presence I am a murderer, and desire to die, I
cannot endure to live any longer: which when they had heard me apparently
confess, were amazed at the unlooked for issue of the matter, but especially
Melite. The lawyers which defended Thersanders cause, when they heard that,
cried out for joy, but they of Melites side did examine her, if the cause were
thus certain. But she being wonderfully distempered, denied utterly some
things, other things she granted and of purpose very closely she seemed to
confess: but what I had told of Leucippe she verily affirmed, that all was
most true except her death: wherefore when her speech agreed with my
confession, they which defended Melite came so into suspicion of her, as that
they were uncertain what speech they should use to defend her. But Clinias when
there was a great cry and tumult risen, stood up in the middle: give me leave
(said he) to speak a little, since the judgment is now to be given of his
life: which when he had obtained he wept, saying: O you men of Ephesus, do not
rashly condemn this young man to death, which you see is desirous to die,
which is the only easing of mischiefs to miserable men, he has taken upon
him the impious fact of wicked men, that suffering punishment he might find
some refuge for his adversities. I will declare to you in few words as brief
as I can, what his misfortune is. This young man (as he said) had a lover,
neither did he feign any thing which he spoke of her concerning the Pirates and
Sosthenes, for whatsoever he said which did happen before her death were true:
she was suddenly taken away cut of all men's sightes, but how that was done,
whether she be yet dead or alive I cannot tell: this one thing I did learn,
that she was beloved of one Sosthenes an acquaintance of the pirates, and
because she would not yield to his filthy desires, he executed his villainy
upon her: now since he thought that she was dead, he denies also to live any
longer, finding himself the author of her death: he himself confessed to me
that he did desire to die, and cheefely for the grief which he conceived for
her death. Think you with your selves again and again, whether it seem any
thing likely to you, that he which has killed another would be willing to die
with him whom he has slain? or whether any one can be found exercising his
enemities so familiarly, as that moved with pity of him whom he has
slain, he would desire to end his life and to accompany him. What hatred I
pray you can be cast away so soon: by the immortal gods do not believe this,
neither cast away one which is rather worthy of pity then punishment: but if
he be the author of this murder, as he says he is, let him bring forth that
hired varlet: showing the maid slain, with the time and place where it was
done: but if he can neither name the murderer nor show the body murdered,
wherefore should any man accuse him of the murder? I loved (said he) Melite,
therefore I took away Leucippe: but why does he thus often repeat her name
whom he has slain, and not once name her whom he loves so earnestly? Do you
think any man so inconstant to himself, as yt he hates that which he loves,
and loves that which he hates? Do not you rather think that a lover,
although convicted, yet to save his love, will deny the fact? but you must
consider why he did accuse Melite if she did never commit such a heinous crime.
I request you again to consider, not that you might think me to use this
speech to bring Melite into controversy, but that I may repeat the whole
matter in order. Melite was in love with this young man, with whom she has had
often conference concerning their marriages before this seafaring man came
home. Moreover, his lover whom he thought had been slain by the pirates, was
found (as he said) with Sosthenes, not knowing that she was his love,
delivered her from bonds wherewith Sosthenes had bound her: she received her
into her house, and being now freed from his bondage, she had her in great
estimation: then perceiving the truth, she sent her into the country, that
she might apply her self to husbandry, and after that time she was never
seen of any: Melite her self and both her maids will witness that I speak
the truth. But this brought him into suspicion, fearing least she being
overcome with the heat of rage or slander, should privily kill her. Moreover,
another thing increased this misd^^ming humor: while I was in prison a
certain man was committed thither (for what fault I know not) who reported
that he fell in company with a villain which murdered Leucippe, which openly
confessed it, that for a sum of money h^e was hired by Melite to d^^ it: but
he said (I will not avouch the certeintie thereof: it is meet therefore the
she truth be sought forth, which for to do is no very hard matter, when you
have him here which made mention in prison of the murder, of which matter
first I would have him to be examined. Moreover, let Sosthenes be sent for,
and the two maids, whereby of him you may learn by what means he took her
into servitude of the others* and by what manner she is thus gone out of all
men's sights. And before that these things be sifted out thoroughly, there is
neither law nor right why he should be deprived of his life, believing his
own mad sayings, for grief and sorrow compel him to this madness.

Melite brought forth the maids, and requested that Sosthenes also might be
brought into the Court, supposing that he had Leucippe. But Thersander fearing
least by him the matter would come to light, sent one privily to Sosthenes, to
bid him fly away with as much speed as might be, before that they came
thither who were sent to fetch him: wherefore taking a horse he rode inpost
have, being certified that if he were once taken the whole matter would be
detected. Sosthenes was then with Leucippe, about to salve her wounds:
wherefore being called on with a great clamor, he went forth, and
understanding the matter, full of fear, thinking that the Sergeants were at
hand to attach him, taking a horse he rode in all haste toward Smyrna. The
messenger returned back to Thersander, and that is most true as it seems to
me, that the memory is often overwhelmed with fear.

During the time that Sosthenes was in this fright, forgetting all things which
he had to do, he had forgotten also to lock the doors of the house
wherein Leucippe was enclosed (for servants are oftentimes most fearful when
any danger is at hand.) In the mean season Thersander roling into ^ilence
Melites matters, said: this fellow here whatsoever he is, has prated
sufficiently, I cannot choose but marvel at your bluntness, which when you
find an apparent murderer, taken manifestly in the fact though it be more
heinous, he does accuse himself, yet you will not give him to the executioner,
but let this co^sener be here to fill your ears with admonishing and
lamenting, whom I do fear to be partaker also of the murder: wherefore I do
not see what need there is of further inquisition in a matter so apparent.
Moreover, I am brought into that belief that I think he has committed some
other murder, for Sosthenes whom they do so much call for, has been away
from me this three days, neither does this seem to abhor from the truth, to
be done with their general counsel. Wherefore I do verily think that they
also have slain him, knowing that I had no other man to bring for my witness.
But I would to God Sosthenes lived, and that it were possible that I could
bring him forth to you: but let us imagine that he were here, what would
you demand of him whether he bought a maid? and whether Melite redeemed her
from him? Go to, let it be so, he bought her, Melite redeemed her, he
confesses this by me, what else have you to demand? nothing truly, those
things are confessed, Sosthenes is quiet. But now let my speech turn to Melite
and Clitiphon, what have you to do with my maid? for she is my servant
indeed: neither did this crafty Thersander speak for any other intent, but
that he might bring Leucippe back again into servitude, if perhaps she
were alive. Moreover he added this, Clitiphon has confessed that he has
murdered her, and makes himself guilty of the fact, but Melite denies it,
but the proofs of the maids do gainsay that, for it is known that they
received Leucippe of Melite, who as yet is not returned, what may we think to
become of her? what will you have more? she is sent away? to whom? they are
silent: wherefore it is manifest enough, that some one which has murdered her
was hired by them? which the maids do know very well, but would not declare
it to any more, least the matter should come to light. They left her perhaps
amongst a number of thieves, that by them she might be carried away.

I know not what they have devised of one which was in prison, of whom this
matter was first reported, when therefore will you leave off to lend your
ears to such foolish tales, and dispatch this weighty matter? What say you?
do you think that this man would accuse himself except it were Gods
providence it should be so?

Here Thersander had made an end of all his speeches, and had approved it with
an oath, that he could not tell what was become of Sosthenes, it seemed to the
Prince to give judgment, (he was of the kings stock, in whose power it was to
examine all matters of life and death, and to give judgment thereof, although
it was decreed by the ancient laws, that he should have councellers which
should direct him what to do) wherefore (said he) it seems to me, the
matter being communicated also to my fellows in this office, according to the
order of the law to punish him with death, which says that he which accuses
himself should be condemned without any further inquissition: but for Melites
judgment, it shall be deferred until the two maids be examined. Thersander
caused his oath to be registered down, that he was altogether ignorant what was
become of Sosthenes, and it was decreed that I should be tormented upon some
engine, to confess whether Melite were guilty or no: my clothes being plucked
from my back, I was hoised up aloft, some bringing fire, some whips, some a
wheel, but Clinias wept bitterly, when behold a Priest of Diana crowned with a
garland of bays, began to come into the market place, for that was a sign
that strangers came to offer sacrifices unto the goddess, which when it came
to pass, they ought to stay so long from the execution until the sacrifice of
the goddess was ended, wherefore I was let down again. The author of this
sacrifice was Sostratus, Leucippes father: for when the Byzantians had gotten
the victory in the battle against the Thracians before the goddess Diana,
they thought it meet to offer sacrifice to her, as it were giving her thanks
for her aid which she did send them. The Goddess appeared in the night
privately to Sostratus, and foretold him that he should find a daughter and a
son in law at Ephesus. By this time Leucippe having opened the doors of the
house, fearing least Sosthenes which went forth a little before, had stood
at the door, looked round about to see if she could epsy him; but when she
saw that he was not there, she began to be of good courage: seeing then that
unlooked for she was delivered out of these dangers, she began to pluck up
her heart, and decreed to use the benefit of fortune: for when as Diana her
Temple was not far off from those fields, going out of the house, she went
thither. This temple in ancient times was not opened, without some great
occasion, wherein it was lawful for men and virgins to enter, especially when
any matter of life was in question. It was counted a heinous matter for we men
to enter therein, except servants which were called into questions of law by
their masters, for then it was lawful for them to fly to the Goddess for
succor* While Sostratus lead the Priest into the market place to defer the
execution, Leucippe was going into the Temple, and it so happened that she had
almost met her father: but I, the company being dismissed, was let loose,
a great number of people following me, some pitied my case, some prayed to the
gods for me, some asked me diverse questions, amongst whom was Sostratus, who
as soon as he saw me forthwith knew me, for as I spoke in the beginning
he was at Tyrus, when Hercules sacrifices were solemnized, and there he
stayde until the accustomed rights were solemnized: wherefore since that time
he carried me in remembrance, especially when he was admonished in a dream
that he should find us here. Wherefore coming near unto me, he said: This
truly is Clitiphon: but where is Leucippe* Then I, as soon as I knew him, cast
my eyes upon the ground: they which were present, began to repeat unto me,
that which I had confessed: but he grievously fighing and shaking his head,
cast his eyes upon me, in such sort, as if he would have looked through me:
neither durst I resist him, for he struck me upon the face: but Clinias
coming between us, staid his hand, and sharply rebuked him, saying: What do
you now? why do you so rashly offer violence unto him, which does love
Leucippe better then your self? which of his own accord offered himself to
death, because he had heard Leucippe was dead: speaking many more things to
him, that he might pacify his fury. But he calling upon the goddess, began
thus to complain; O goddess is this the cause wherefore thou did bring me
hither? Is this that which thou did foretell me in my dream? I truly did
believe it, thinking I should find my daughter also: and surely I have
received a goodly reward, I have found her murderer. Then Clinias hearing
mention of the dream was wonderful glad, saying: Father be of good cheer,
for the goddess will not be a liar, (believe my prophecies) thy daughter
Leucippe is alive, do not you see how she has escaped from the hands of her
torturers? in the mean season, one of the Sextens came running to the Priest,
and told him, that there was a strange maid which came to Diana for succor:
which when I heard, I began to pluck up my spirits: and lifting up my eyes
again, I I seemed to be alive. But Clinias turning to Sostratus, said: Believe
me father, my Oracles are true: and he asked the Sexten whether she was fair,
to whom the Sexten answered: I never saw one more bewtiful, except she were
Diana. Then I leaping for joy, what said I, do thou say it is Leucippe? He
answered, yea: for so she says she is called, her Ceuntrey is Bizantium, her
father is So^tratus: Clinias for very joy, shouted and clapped his hands.
Sostratus for the great gladness which he conceived, fell down in a maze. I
leaped in my fetters as it were to the sky, and presently went into ye temple:
the keepers thinking that I would have run away, spoke to every man that met
me, to take hold of me, and stay me: but I ran as if I had wings at my feet.
At length as I was thus running, there came one to me, I know not what he
was, which took me by the hand, and would have brought me back: but being
now more bold, I withstood them, wherefore they would have carried me to the
prison. In the mean while the priest and Clinias were at hand, but Clinias
speaking first, said; whither lead you the man? he never did the murder
whereof he is condemned. Sostratus spoke unto them to the same effect, seeing
that he was her father, whom they thought to be slain. They which were there
present understanding the matter, rejoiced greatly, and extolled with praises
the Godhead of Diana, and standing about me, they forbade me to be carried to
prison. The keepers, when as the law would not quit me to go free, would not
let me loose, until a priest, at the request of Sostratus promised to be my
surety: wherefore being loosed of my setters, I ran with as much speed as
I could to the temple, Sostratus following me, but I know not whether with like
joy, being certainly assured, that there is no courser so swift whom fame
cannot ouerrunne: for ^he flying before us, hastening and running apace,
certified Leucippe of the coming of her father: wherefore running forth of the
temple as fast as she could, she embraced her father, casting her eyes upon me:
which although I was constrained by reason of Sostratus presence not to embrace
her, yet I never cast mine eyes from her countenance, so with looks we did
salute one another.

The eight Book.
The Contents.
In the last Book is to be seen the false accusations of Thersander, who for
a just reward was banished his country. Clitiphon was freed, and afterward
happily married to his beloved Leucippe, with many other descriptions happening
in the same, as the description of the Pipe of Pan, and the fountain of Styx.

BUt Thersander whilst that we were talking together in the Temple, bringing
his witnesses with him, followed after with great speed: and turning himself
to the Priest, cried out with a loud voice, saying: Thou have done unjustly,
before these which are here present I speak it, which have delivered one from
bonds which is condemned by the law. Moreover, thou have hidden this my
bondslaue a^ impudent and unchaste thing, and almost out of her wits for the
company of men: thou have kept her close in thy Cell, which I would very
willingly know with what right thou can maintain it. Then I hearing him
call Leucippe immodest and unchaste, was woonderfully moved in my mind, and
not bearing these contumelions words, he scant having ended his speech: thou
said I, art thrice more servile; mad and immodest, Leucippe is a free woman,
a virgin, and worthy of a Goddess. What, said he, dare you prate, Sir,
being bound and condemned? And with as great force as he could, he stro^ke me
twice upon the face, that streame^ of blood gushed out of my nose, and striking
me the third time, his hand dashed against my teeth: and having hurt his
fingers, with a great groan he plucked back his hand: so that my teeth seemed
to revenge the injury which was offered to my nose. But he for the grief of
the hurt, effeminately like a woman wept: then he ceased to strike me again.
But I seeing his finger hurt, complaining of violence offered to me there. I
filled the temple with a great clamor: whither shall we fly the violence of
th^se gross heads? what gods shall we worship after Diana? for we are beaten
in the temples, and we are strooken before the sacred altars of the goddess:
In desert places where no witnesses are, such facts are committed: but thou
before the gods themselves, do exercise thy authority: and when as the
stately temples of the goddess are a refuge for the innocent, I being
guilflesse, have received a wound before her presence: who can deny therefore
but that these blows were given to Diana? and when he could not be content
with words, he gave me wounds, such as are given in wars, and has defiled
the flore with men's blood. Who ever sacrificed so unto Diana of Ephesus? That
is the law among the Barbarians, the Scythians, and them which inhabit the
mountain Taurus, to sacrifice to Diana with men's blood. Thou have done as if
Ionia were Scythia: and Ephesus Taurica: but why do not thou draw thy sword
upon me? neither have thou need to draw it, since thy hands supply the use
thereof. While I did thus lament with my self, a great concourse was made, and
all the people came round about me; and many began to blame the man, others
exclaimed of his impuritie: then said the Priest, are not you ashamed thus
publicly in the temple to behave your self? Wherefore said I, with a good
courage, thus you see O men of Ephesus, how I am used, which am a free man, and
a Denizen of no base City. I had almost perished, being brought into hazard of
my life, except the slanders of this wicked man being land open, Diana by her
holy godhed had now delivered me out of his hands: now have I need to go out of
the temple, and wash my face: neither is it lawful we do it here, lest the
holy water should be defiled with polluted blood. In the mean season
Thersander, when as he was thrust out of the temple by many as he was going,
he spoke thus to himself: Thou art now condemned in thine own cause, neither
long after shall thou be unpunished, the pipe shall make trial of this harlot
which counterfeiteth her virginity. After he was gone I went for^h and washed
my face, but when supper time was come, one of the priests invited us to his
house, but I being guilty of those things which Sostratus had reported, durst
not look him in the face: Leucippe also for shame looked upon the ground, so
that the supper seemed to be sorrowful: at length Bacchus did remove away our
shame, for he is the author of liberty: and then the priest turning to
Sostratus said: Why I pray you do not you show unto us the order of your
war, wherein I delight to hear of your worthy stratagems, for pleasant
discourses well agree with wine. Then Sostratus taking the occasion to speak,
said: what I did was of no great valor, and therefore not worthy the rehearsal:
my name is Sostratus, my country Byzantium, I am uncle to this youth, father
to this maid, the rest O Clitiphon declare now, what soever they be, for if any
adversity has happened to me, it is not to be given to thee but to fortune:
then I repeated all things in order which had happened to me after I fled from
Tyrus: First my scaping shipwreck, our landing at Egypt, the thieves, the
rape of Leucippe, the counterfeit cutting of her belly at the altar, the
craftines of Menelaus, the love of Charmides, the medicine of Chaerea, the
rapine of the Pirates, the wound in my thigh, whose skarre I showed there: but
after I came to Melite I declared whatsoever had happened to me, with as much
modesty as I could, admitting n^ falsehood to the truth, and first I described
my love, her continency, then how long she sued unto me, and how I fed her
with hope. Moreover, I declared whatsoever she spoke, whatsoever she
complained, whatsoever also were done in the ship while we came from Alexandria
to Ephesus, how we lay together, and how abstinently I behaved my self, as
if I had been an eunuch. Then I showed all my behavior toward her, the
supper, and her false accusation of me, and continued all things until
Sostratus coming, omitting only this indictment of mine: and thus much I
spoke concerning my own accidents which had happened to me, I repeated also
the calamities of Leucippe, which were far greater then mine, showing first
how she served, how she dug the earth, and lost the grace of her head, which
shauing the hair can witness: but when I came to make mention of Thersander and
Sosthenes, I did set down every thing so easily as they were committed, that
they seemed to be but newly done. But ever I noted this, that in telling my
tale I sought to grace Leucippe as much as I could* She, said I, has suffered
all these adversities, and untouched as she came from Byzantium so does she
remain yet, neither do I account this for a commendation to my self that I
have ended none of these things, for which cheefely I proposed my journey: we
truly father, did take upon us our journey advisedly, but we were compelled to
it by the extreme heat of love, that worthily it might be called the flight
of lovers. Moreover, both our brethren went together with us, and I do keep
my virginity (if men have any as yet untouched, as Leucippe does hers) since
that I had learned long before to consecrate it to the honor of Diana But
you O Lady Venus, be not displeased with us, though you may seem as yet
neglected, we would not celebrate our marriages our father being away, he is
now here present, wherefore be thou favorable unto us: which when they had
heard, the priest was astonished with the very admiration of them. Sostratus wept
when I repeated the misfortunes of Leucippe. After I had made an end of my
speech, I have (said I) rehearsed all our mischances, but yet, O divine priest,
I would very willingly know one thing of you, what that was which Thersander
when he went out of the temple, determined to do to Leucippe. Then said he,
your question I like very well, and it is meet also that I should declare this
unto you. See you yonder wood (said he) behind the temple, therein is a cave,
into which it is not lawful for any to enter but virgins, a little within the
door there is a pipe hanging up, which kind of instrument is much used
amongst the Byzantians: now you do understand what I say, but if any of you
have any skill in music, I will declare unto him the whole use of it, with
all the history of God Pan, and to what end it belongs. This pipe is
compacted of many little pipes, all made of Reeds, all which joined together
do yield a sound as if they were but one pipe, they are so placed one by
another, that they do seem to join in order together, the foreside and the
hinder be all alike, but yet one reed is higher then another, which are so
placed for the better consort, for as much as the first is higher then the
second, and the second higher then the third, continuing the like equal
portion unto the end, their sound is very pleasant, at the top very shrill and
loud, but at the bottom low and base, and both these are in the outermost
side of the pipe. This pipe is like to that of Pallas, but here the fingers do
distinguish the sound, there the mouth: it was upon a time when this pipe was
no pipe, neither a reed, but a most beautiful damsel, which when she did
fly from God Pan who then pursued her, she got her self into a most thick
wood, but Pan pursuing her with fresh suit, laid hands on her, and when he
thought he had her fast by the hair, he saw he had his hand full of reeds,
which they say did rise out of that place where the virgin did sink down: but
the god being overcome with wrath, cut down these reeds, under which he thought
she had hid her self, but not having found her, he was moved with the wicked
fact, thinking that he had put his love to death wherefore he sighed, groned,
and gathering ye reeds, cut as though they were her members, placing them in
order, and began to kiss them, and while he thus amorously lamented, and
breathing into the hollownes of them, as it were into the wounds of the virgin,
the breath being enclosed therein, through ye narrow passage thereof there came a
sound, and this was the first beginning of the pipe, which afterward Pan
himself did hang in his cave and there to this day it is kept, and the report
went that this god would often resort thither, and play according to his
accustomed manner, but in latter times the inhabitants of the country thinking
to obtain favor of ye goddess Diana, consecrated unto her such a pipe, upon
this condition, that she should suffer none to play thereon except they were
virgins: wherefore if any maid come in suspicion of her maidenhead lost, the
people does bring her to the gates of this cave, that they may be tried by this
pipe, for she which is suspected of whoredom, adorned in a long garment
appointed for that purpose, does descend into the cave, where taking the pipe
and putting it to her mouth, if she be a virgin a most sweet and a most
heavenly sound is heard, whether it be because that place has a shrill sound
hidden in reeds, or whether because Pan himself does play upon it, the gates
she open of their own accord, and the virgin returns crowned with a garland
of pine tree, but if she fame her self a virgin, in steed of playing on the
pipe, the cave sends weeping and mourning, wherefore the people leaving the
woman there, depart away. But the third day the virgin which is governor of
the place, goes into the cave, where she finds the pipe thrown down, but
the woman is not to be found: this trial must you abide, wherefore be think
your self before you go down, if Leucippe be a virgin (as I truly would have
her) she shall find the pipe favorable unto her, whose trial never deceived
any. Leucippe before the priest had ended his tale, Do not you (said she)
take care for me, for I will very willingly descend therein, wishing to be
locked fast without any companion. I am very glad (quoth the priest) that you
are so well resolved, rejoicing at this your felicity. But when it began to
wax late, every one went to his lodging where the priest had appointed:
Clinias did not sup with us because he would not seem to trouble our host, but
he returned thither where he lodged before. But Sostratus having heard that
which was reported of the pipe, seened unto us to fear, least that for
modesties sake to him we would belie our own virginity: wherefore I beckened
to her privily that she should rid her father of that fear, for she had learned
before how to persuade him to believe it, seeming also to suspect the like
matter, because she perceived so soon what I meant by my beckening, for she
going to bed having done her duty to her father, bad him be of good comfort,
saying, father believe my words, for never a one of us here (so Diana preserve
me) has dissembled in any thing. The next day when the sacrifices were ready,
Sostratus and the priest went about their offerings, and the multitude of
people assembled together, to be partakers of their oblations: and they cried
out with great applause to the goddess. But Thersander (for he also was then
present) went unto the Governor, saying: Let us defer the appearance until
to morrow: for whom you yesterday condemned, many have let go free, but
Sosthenes is not to be found, wherefore in the mean time, I will provide that
my witnesses be ready. But when the day came, Thersande^ made a speech in
this form, what words shall I use? what beginning of speaking should I make?
or whom should I accuse first or last? I do not know, for many things are done
boldly by many, which offer themselves to me to be spoken of, alike and in
greatness, and more manifest in that it is superfluous to be spoken of in this
accusation, for I fear least that I shall not express in my speech, that
which my mind does conceive, since my tongue does strive to draw them to my
remembrance. For while that I hasten to speak, of those things which hitherto
have not been spoken, all my license seems to be taken away from me, so that
I cannot finish my causes which I begun: for when adulterers kill other men's
servants, murderers ravish other men's wives, and bawdes do deliver men
condemned from their punishment, when harlots do profane the holy Temples of
the gods, we had need of diverse accusers. Recite the decree of the
governor, and his counsel: you hear what his sentence is, I being the
accuser: you have decreed once that Clitiphon sho^^d die, where is the headsman
to hang him up? why do not you give him poison? Now according to the law he
is (...), and the day of his punishment is passed, what say you (^^s^ religious
and merciful Priest) I pray you what does the law provide for them, which go
about to set them free which are already condemned to die either sure your
authority is greater then the power of the the Prince and his counsel, or
else you have done amiss, wherefore O most noble prince you must come down,
and give this man your place and authority to judge weighty matters, you have
no more power to punish wicked men, for this fellow absolueth whom he list: why
do you stand like a private person amongst us? Why do not you get up, and fit
in your throne, and declare the law unto us: or if you please cast all laws
aside, and govern like a tyrant? Do not think your self, O man, but to be
honored a like with Diana her self, whose honor thou have filthily arrogated
to thy self: who ever saw her temple made a prison, as it plainly appears,
when a murderer, and an adulterer shall stand before the Goddess, O most
unworthy fact! an adulterer to lodge with Diana, and an unchaste and immodest
woman to defile her Temples. O most mighty prince, it behooves you now to
look about you, and to suppress these manifold vices, which lately are
grown up in this common wealth.

Then stood up the priest, a man most ready to reply, and one which was well
read in Aristophanes, began to inueigh very coldly and merrily against
Thersander his youth. It is (said he) an argument of an impure mouth, so
reprochfully to inueigh against honest and upright men: for he not only here,
but also every where else, has had his tongue ready to speak reprochfullie
of any man: being a youth, he was conversant with all immodest persons, with
them he^ spent his life: when he is farthest from all modesty, he most of
all pretends continency, feigning himself studious of the liberal
sciences, yet subject to all sin and iniquity, he abuses them to his own
lust: for leaving his fathers house, he hired a Cottage, where he dwelt,
flying the company of honest men, and selling those of whom he might have
any gain: when he did exercise his mind with these lewd vices, yet he
counterfeited priuatenesse. I my self have seen him annoint his body in the
schools, run races, and how young men (for he did ever strive with his
superiors) did abuse his body: and this he did when he was a youth: but
when he came to man's estate, whatsoever was privately done by him, he made it
known: but being now waxen elder in years, he exercised all things
whatsoever did please him, evermore sharpening a lewd and dissolute tongue,
which he used to all dishonestie, that he would spitte his reproaches in
every man's face, carrying that malapert stoutnesse in his countenance, which
he conceived in his mind: insomuch that whom you have thought worthy of the
Priesthood, he does not fear in most scurrile words to revile. If I had
lived any where else then in all your sightes, I know he would have spoken
more liberally of me, and of those whose company I use: But when you your
selves do knew, how far from them I have led my life, which he does
accuse me off: I will refute those things as well as I can, which he has
objected against me. Thou have (says he) loosed one condemned ^o die: and
at this he does repine, calling me Tyrant and casting many more vile tauntes
upon me: spuing up the ran^orous poison from his heart, as though it were more
likely that he were a Tyrant, which delivers the guiltless, and not
condemned: then he which delivers the slanderers. But first, what law had you
to cast a stranger and a freeman into prison? Which of the governors
appointed it? by what judgment was he commanded to be bound? But let us
confess that he is guilty of all these things which thou have laid to his
charge: is it not the duty of the law to enquire, and to convince by
sufficient proof? is it not the fruition of the law which has authority over
thee and all, to command him to be bound? neither is it in every man's power
to command it without the judgment of the law. If that thou do arrogate
this to thy self, why do not thou shut the doors, adiourne the court, and
cast out the officers? But what thou have objected to me before the prince, may
be more justly and truly spoken of thy self. O prince it is you which must
rise up to Thersander, for you have authority but only in words: this one man
alone indeed, does all which becomes you to do, and that moreover which you
never would dare to do, you have counselors without which you will decree
nothing, neither is there any thing which by your authority you dare set down,
before that you sit down in your throne: nor did you ever at your house command
any man to be bound. But this Gentleman, he is both people, governor,
prince: and to conclude, he one, is made all. He punishes at home, he gives
sentence, he commands to be bound, and the evening is judgment time with
him. O night Judge, and worthy of the dark, which now exclaimest again,
thou have unloosed a guilty person, and one whose sentence is to die: but what
guilty person I pray you? to what death? I bid thee speak the cause of his
damnation, thou will say he is condemned of murder: then he has killed one?
But what is she? Can thou show her? No truly, thou can not. Her whom
thou say was murdered, stands here before thy face, and yet art not thou
ashamed to accuse one of murder. This is not the Image of the Maid: neither
has Pluto sent her hither dead to reprove thee: but thou art rather to be
condemned of murder, and that of a double one too, which did kill the Maid by
report, and would have slain the man in deeed: thou would have slain her
in deed, we know all that that theu did to her in the country. But the
great Godhead of Diana, was the preservation of them both, by taking the one
out of Sosthenes hands, and delivering the other out of thy fingers. But why
did thou send away Sosthenes? Art not thou ashamed not only to accuse
strangers, but also to belie and slander them. Thus much I have to say, to
clear my self from those crimes which thou did object against me: but
that which belongs to these strangers, I leave the defense of them to your
owen consciences. But when as another patron, a man of no obscure house, was
about to speak for me and Melite: another of Thersanders advocates, whose
name was Sop^ter, prevented him. Now said he, good M. Nicostratus (for so our
patron was called) it is my turn to speak against these adulterers, for
Thersander his speech was only occupied in accusing the Priest, neither did
he touch any thing which belonged to this guilty person, wherefore I will
prove him worthy of this and another death, then shall you have time to quit
him if you can: when he had said so, stroking up his hair, and making ready
his forehead to lie, he began thus: You have heard the unseemly and dishonest
talk of the priest, whrein he has showed nothing but only d^uised falls crimes
against Thersander, taking cheeyfl the beginning of his speech, from those
things which Thersander had spoken of him: but that which Thersander did speak
of him he is able to defend and justify for true, for he delivered a guilty
person from bonds, entertained a harlot, and has lodged an adulterer: he
whilst that he did go about to bring Thersander into envy by reproouing of
his life, did deal altogether by slaundering: if there be any thing which
becomes a priest to do, it is this cheefely, to keep his tongue from
slaundering. But leaving these, let us come to the matter indeed which he
spoke of openly, complaining that the adulterer manifestly taken was by us cast
into prison: I cannot choose but marvel wherefore the priest would labor so
greatly in defending these old matters, although I coniectue at the cause,
surely he beheld their faces, whereof ye one is beautiful and of tender years,
the other is not only well favored, but also fair and personable stature, and
judged fit for his own pleasures. But which of these does most delight thee?
you supt altogether, and you lay altogether, neither was there any beholder of
your nightly revels: wherefore I fear least that that which was Dianas temple,
you have made it the sanctuary of Venus, but afterward it shall be decreed
whether you be fit for your priesthood or no: but that which belongs to
Thersander his manners, there is no man here but knows how modestly,
moderately, and temperately he has lived ever from his infancy, which
as soon as he came to his ripe years, according to the law married a wife, at
length he deceived himself in his choice, for he has found her otherwise since
then he first took her to have been: for it is most likely that she also
before that time had accompanied with others whom she kept close from her
husband, at length her chastity came in common, and she gave her self to al
licentiousness, for her husband being gone abroad into a far country,
thinking that time to be most fit for to fulfill her desires, the wretched
woman took this impudent youth unto her (for what misery can be greater, then
to have such a lover, which amongst women can supply the duty of a man, and
amongst men serve in steed of a woman) neither was it sufficient to entise him
to naughtiness in a strange city: but she must bring him hither with her
over the huge sea, in ye mean time lying always with him, and solacing
themselves with their pleasure together in the ship where all men did behold. O
filthy lust common to sea and land! O adultery defiling both Egypt and Ionia!
This woman did not only filthily behave her self with him, but she must have
a crier: O you men of Ephesus behold this adulterer! neither is she ashamed
yet: this honest woman bought him these ornaments which he has about him,
least he should return with her unseemly to any: these precious merchandise
has she bestowed on her lover, but (says she) I thought my husband had bin
dead, then this name of adultery had bin clean taken away, but now he is
returned: I pray you what will you call it? Then Thersander interpreting
Sopater said: there is no need of more question about this matter, for what
belongs to Melite, and to her which is said to be the daughter of this
stranger, which made this sacrifice, which truly is my servant, I accept these
conditions. Recite those conditions: Thersander proposes these conditions of
Melite and Leucippe, that she, since she says that she never committed any
dishoneslie with this stranger in my absence, shall confirm it with an oath
and shall go into the fountain of holy Stix, there if that she be found not to
have forsworn her self, she shall be set fee, but this other, if she have
lost her virginity, shall serve bon^age to her master: neither is it lawful
for any woman to enter into the temple of Diana except she be a servant, but
if she do affirm she is a virgin, she shall be shut in the cave where the
pipe hangs: we presently accepted the conditions, not doubting but that
Leucippe was a virgin: Melite liked it well, affirming that she never had any
thing to do with me in Thersanders absence, except talking together. And I also
said I do not refuse the conditions, adding this which is more, that there is
neither citizen nor stranger, which having such familiarity with her as I had,
could al f^ain: and if that you prove this false that I speak I will endure
what punishment you shall lay upon me: wherefore these things being finished, ye
company was dismissed, and it was furthermore decreed, that the next day we
should be tried upon these conditions. But ye history of the fountain of Stix,
was in this manner: there was a certain beautiful virgin whose name was
Rhodope, which did delight much in bunting, being very swift in running, and
skillful in casting of a dart, she was girt with a girdle, with a miter upon
her head, her clothes tucked up to her knee, her hair long and hanging upon
her shoulder. Diana meeting with this maid by chance on a day, and liking her
very well, lead her a hunting with her, their pray which they took, saying
should be divided amongst them, wherefore she did swear that as yet she had kept
her virginity, and that she fled the company of men, and would not suffer the
shames of Venus: which when Venus heard, being moved with anger, she
determined with her self to revenge the pride of this maid: it so fell forth
there was a young youth of Ephesus, equally as fair amongst men as Rhodope was
accounted amongst women: this youth was called Euthinicus, he was wonderfully
delighted in hunting as Rhodope was, he also did abhor from Venus sports,
wherefore on a time they went both a hunting. Venus got her thither also, and
drove both their wild beasts together into one place, Diana then was absent:
wherefore Venus thus spoke unto her boy: my son, do thou not see this couple,
how they are expert of our secrets, and enemies also? and that bold girl very
bravely swore a great oath against me, thou see them yonder following the
hearts, wherefore go thou and hunt, and first take revenge of this malapert
girl, for thy dart will now fly more certainly, wherefore both dr^w their
bows together, the virgin upon the heart, and Cupid upon her, neither were
their strokes in vain, for the huntresse her self was the pray, she gave a
mortal wound to the heart, but received a deeper wound in her own heart, whose
fear was such yt immediately she fell in love with Euthinicus, who not long
after felt ye same sore. Then did they begin to behold one another, and cast
their eyes upon each other, insomuch yt they never would withdraw their sights.
But not long after ^o^ir wounds began to grow up, and love brought them
together into a cave where now this spring is, where the faith of their oaths
was utterly abrogated. Afterward Diana met Venus, who laughed and smiled upon
her, but she when she understood the matter, she transformed the maid even
there where she lost her virginity into a fountain, so that it comes to
pass, that if any be accused of their virginity lost, they go down to this
spring, whose water scant comes up to the mid-leg. The trial is made after
this manner: she which is suspected is brought forth, and first she solemnly
takes her oath which is written down in paper, and hanged about her neck, and
thus discendeth into the spring: if her oath be true, the water never moves at
al, but if she be forsworn, it rises to her neck, and covers the paper:
while we were talking thus, it drew toward night, and every man after supper
went to his chamber where they lodged before. The next day the people came
together again, before whom Thersander went with a merry countenance: but
Leucippe being adorned in a long white garment coming down to her feet, which
was wouen of fine threedes, having a girdle about her middle, her head adorned
with purple tire, her feet naked, she went into the cave, which when as I did
behold, I was astonished with asodaine fear, and began thus to speak to my
self: I do not doubt but that Leucippe is as yet a virgin, but when I do
remember what this God was, I was in a great fear least be the^ would be the
pipe: she flied from this god into the woods, but we have included within thy
gates our pledge, that if thou would pursue her, she would not fly away.
But O thou God Pan, be merciful unto us, neither break the laws of this
place which we keep holy, but restore Leucippe untouched: this league was made
between Diana and thee, do not therefore violate it and deceive a virgin.
Whilst I did talk thus to my self, I heard a sweet sound, and they which
stood by rejoiced, saying: that they never heard a more pleasant sound: the
leaves of the door did open of their own accord, and Leucippe came forth, all
the multitude shouting for joy, begen to rail upon Thersander: but I could
not declare in any speech the joy which I conceived in my mind.

Having gotten this famous victory, we went to the fountain of Stix, that we
might make trial of the other condition: the people came together to behold,
all the other things were in a readiness, wherefore they tied the writing
about Melites neck, and with a merry countenance she went down into the
spring, the Water as it was remained low, neither exceeded his accustomed
bound, wherefore when the time was come that she should come frooth of the
spring, the Prince took her by the hand, and lead her forth of the water,
Tersander being appara^tly convicted in two things, fearing also the third, ran
home as fast he could, fearing least the people would oppress him with stones:
for behold two young men cosins to Melite, brought Sos^henes, for she had sent
two servants before to seek him, which when Thersander saw, seeing now his
fact would be known if ye Sosthenes were examined, by night fled out of the
city. In the mean season, the Judges commanded Sosthenes to be kept in hold:
we being absolved of all these crimes and accusations, with all men's
co^mendations were let free. The next day Sosthenes was brought into ye court,
who when^ he saw that punishment was provided for him, incontinently confessed
all what Thersander meant to do, and also what himself suggested to him,
together with all the other things which they talked together of before
Leucippes door. But Thersander (who now was abse^t) was banished: we being
invited again to supper to ye priests house, what calamities of ours I remitted
there the night before to rehearse, I now went forward withal, Leucippe now
fearing her father no more, because she was found a maid, rehearsed her own
mishap, not without great pleasure. To whom, said I, I have declared our
mishaps until I come to Pharus, where ye pirates did violently take you away:
wherefore tell you the fine device of the thieves, and what was meant by the
head which was cut off from the body, yt your father also may know it: for this
alone is wanting. Then said she: The woman which you saw was slain, was one of
them which sell apples and pears by the sea shore, whom they got into their
ship, promis^ng her that they would marry her unto one of the mariners: but
after that they had gotten me, hoysing up their sails, and plying their cares,
when they saw how near they were pursued, they plucked off my apparel, and
put it on her back, apparelling me likewise in hers. And having thus attired
her, they placed her upon the top of the hinder end of the ship, that she might
be seen of them which pursued her, and there they cut off her head, the body
as you saw they floong into the sea, but the head they kept a little space in
the ship. But when they perceived that no body pursued them, they cast it out
also. I do not certainly know for what intent they took in that woman, except
that as it happened to me afterward, that they would sell her, but she was
slain in my stead, that the pursuers might be deceived, thinking that they
could gain the more by the sale of me, then of her. There did I behold
Chaerea, which was the author and counselor of her death, to suffer worthy
punishment. For when as the other pirates denied that he should enjoy me
alone, because that he had taken that other woman, and slain her, which
perhaps might* have been again to them, said that I should be sold, and the
money equally distributed amongst them: but he defending his own cause,
denied, saying that he agreed with them before that he should take her for his
private profit alone, and not to the common utility: but one of them which
stood behind him, hearing him thus wrongfully chalenging me alone, took his
sword and stroke off his head: and so suffering just punishment for his rape,
was cast into the sea. Two days after being carried I know not whither, the
pirates sold me to a merchant, who receiving his money again sold me to
Sosthenes. Then said Sostratus, since that you my children have reported your
mishaps, hear of me, what happened to Calligone, Clitiphon his sister at home,
that I may not go free alone without declaring something: but I hearing my
sisters name did listen more attentively: speak, said I, father when you
please, so that you say she lives. Then he rehearsed all, as I had showed
before the Oracle, as well the sacrifice, as the ship, and the manner of her
rape, adding moreover, that when Callisthenes perceived she was not his
daughter, although he knew that the matter went forth otherwise then he
thought, yet he ceased not to love her, but casting himself down at her
feet, he spoke to her in this sort. O mistress do not think me to be a
pyrate, or such a wicked person; I am borne of a noble house in Byzantium, and
will give place to none in birth: love constrained me to lay after the manner of
thieves, these ambushes for you, but think me henceforward your servant. And
first, I give to you my self, and willingly also bestow on you all my wealth
and substance, which never your father would have imparted to you: I will
abstain as long as you will from violating of your virginity. With these
words and many other, more apter to persuade (for he was of comely personage,
and in talk very pleasant and earnest to move) he woonne the maid to his own
desire. And after he returned to Byzantium, he endowed her with most of his
living, he atired her richly with goold and precious stones, and many other
jewels which are requisite to the adorning of a woman. And as she was a virgin
when he took her away: so he suffered her to continue before he had promised:
but he himself in handling many matters, he haued himself very gently,
courteously and ciuilly, and upon a sudden there was a new reformation of
the man, for be did give place to his elders, and ready he was to salute whom
soever he met, when before he was a great spender of his good, his former
riot was turned into liberty. To conclude, he dealt so wisely in all his
affairs, that all men marvelled, that of a sudden, from so lavish, he was
become so thriftie: he always loved me, and I likewise had a good opinion of
him, thinking that this excessive prodigality, did father show a
bountifulness of nature then any intemperaunce in the man, remembering what was
said once of Themistocles, that when he was very dissolute in his youth, yet
in the end he excelled all the Athenians, in wisdom and forti^ude:
wherefore it repented me that I had denied him my daughter when he would have
had her into marryage, for he did give me great honor, calling me father,
and being armed he accompanied me through the Market place: neither did his
mind abhor from martial affairs: for when he was a horseman, he behaved
himself courageously: so that in those intemperate young years, in valor and
chivalry he seemed to excel: But c^mming to man's estate, when his strength
increased in his body, his chiefest desire was to follow millitarie affairs,
to profit the common wealth with his su^staunce: wherefore he was created
general of the a^mie with me, whereby he wan great honor, willing to obey
me in all things.

After we had gotten the vic^orie ^uer ^ur enemies, the Gods assisting us, we
returned to Byzant^um, I came hither to give thanks to the Gods, he went to
sacrifice to Hercules at Tyrus. But first Callisthenes took me by the hand,
and told me all what he had done for Calligones sake, wherefore my father
said, the cause of these things which (...) he in ^ur youth, is the fiery
heat of those years, but what (...) afterward are done with discretion and
judgment: wh(...) said Callisthenes to me, I have kept her a Uirgin yet,
especially in time of war, when no man then by his good wi^^ will let slip
such occasions to his pleasure, wherefore now I determine to carry her to
Tyrus to her father, and there according to the laws, to marry her: if that I
can get his good will, it will be well: but if he be froward and will not,
let him take his daughter again, a virgin as ^he was when I took her, which
when I have married, I will endew her with a large patrimony: wherefore since
al things have fallen out so well, contrary to Thersanders expectations, I
have determined first to go to Bizantium, and from thence to fail^ to Tyrus.
When he h^^ made an end of his tale, we went every man to bed, as we did
before. The next day Clinias returned unto ^s, and certified us, now that
Thersander was fled away. We stayed there three days (for our app^rance did
last so long) then we went again to the prince, and h^uing recited the laws,
whereby he found that Thersander had no cause of just accusation against us, we
departed: and taking ship, with a gentle gale of wind we came to Byzaantium,
where we finished our long desired marriages. Then we sailed to Tyrus, ^^ither
when Calisthenes was come two days before, we found ^y father offering
sacrifice the next day for my sisters marriage: ^^^^fore we also were present,
that we might be partakers of the same, requesting the gods to grant our
marriages to be happy and fortunate: where we agreed to stay, upon this
condition, that winter being past, we should return again to Byzantium.

FINIS.

