The Summarie of certain reasons, which have moved the Queen's Majesty to
proceed in reformations of her base and course moneys, and to reduce them to
their values, in sort as they may be turned to fine moneys, appointed to be
declared by her Majesty, by order of her Proclamacion, in her City of London.

FIrst of all it is known that the honor and reputacion of the singular
wealth that this Realm was wont to have above at other Realms, was partly in
that it had no current moneys but gold and silver, whereas contrary all other
countries, as Almayn, France, Spain, Flaunders, Scotland, and the rest of
Christendom have had, and still have certain base moneys, now of late
days, by turnyng of fine moneys into base, much decayed and daily grown into
infamy and reproach, and therefore is thought necessary to be recovered. Wherein
like as her Majesty for her part means to be at great charges, so every good
English subject ought to be content, though it seem some small loss at the
first.

Also by continuing of the base moneys, diverse persons both in foreign parts,
and within the Realm, have counterfayted from time to time no small quantity,
and brought to port towns, and uttered the same at the first after the rate
of xii. pence a Teston, and after that, for.vi. pence: where the same was not
in deed worth much above two pence: And carried out of the Realm for those base
moneys, the rich commodities of the same, as Wolle, Cloth, Lead, Tin,
Leather, Tallowe, yea and all kind of victual, as Corn, Malt, Beer, Butter,
Cheese, and such like, so as counterfaicters and such like have for small
sum of moneys counterfaicted, carried out six times the value in commodities
of the Realm.

By the means also that these base moneys were current, diverse subtle people
have changed the same for the gold and fine silver moneys of this Realne, and
have transported and carried out the same gold and silver, so as although there
has been coined both in the later end of the reign of king Edward, and in the
time of Queen Mary, and now also sense the Queen's Majesty's reign, great
quantities of gold and silver, yet to part thereof is seen commonly current:
but as it may be thought, some part thereof is carried hence, and some percase by
the wyser sort of people, kept in store, as it were to be wyshed that the
whole were.

Also by continuance of this sort of base moneys, although almyghtie God has
given now of late years plentyfull increase by the earth, for the which he is
to be thanked, without any uche plages of scarcity as in our forefathers time
has been read, when many hundrethes and thousands of people have dyed for
famine, yet the prices of all things growyng or coming from the earth, has
inmeasurably and daily risen, as all manner of grain, fruit, cattle,
bestiall, victtuell, wolle, leather, and such like, and no remedy could be
devised to amend the same, but to cause that the same base moneys should be
current for no more then they were in just value. For every man of the least
understanding, by one means or other knew that a Testo^ was not worth six
pence, nor the piece of two pence was worth so much, and therefore no man
would give gladly that thing which was and ever had been worth six pence, for
a Teston, but would rather require two Testons: and so a thing being worth six
pence, was bought and sold either for two Testons, or one and a half, which
was in reckenyng.xii. pence, or.ix. pence, and now every Teston being brought
to the just value, it must needs follow that one shall bye of another hereafter
that for.iiii. pence halfpeny, which was wont to cost.vi. pence. And when the
Teston shall be brought into fine silver. then shall all men be as desirous to
sell any ware for such fine moneys, as they have of late ben loath and
vnwyllynge to sell any thing for the base moneys, except they might have had
twyce as much of the base moneys, as they were wont to have of the fine, or
else that for necessity they were driven to sell the same.

By this means also now that the base moneys are brought to the just value,
and that every man shall have fine moneys for them, all poor people that lived
of their hand labor, as well artificers in cities or towns, as laborers in
husbandrye, or men that took dayetall wages, either by land, by sea, or by
fresh waters, and all mean gentlemen that lived but upon pensions and
stipendes, and all soldiers and seruyng men, that lived upon sold and wages,
shall have their pencions, stipendes, soldes, and wages, now paid in good and
fine moneys, and therewith shall bye more necessaries for their sustentacion,
then could before be bought: who surely having heretofore after the rate
of.xx.s. xxvi.s. viii.d..v. nobles.xl.s. iiii. marks.v. marks.iiii.
pounds.v. pounds.xx. nobles, and so upward by the year paid to them in these
base moneys, could not have so much victual, apparel, weapon, armure, horses,
or such like, with the said stipend, by more then a fourth part, as they shall
now have, because indede the said base moneys were of themselves no more worth.

By this reformacion also of base moneys, shall necessarely follow a more
profitable accoumpte betwixt the moneys of this Realm, and of other countries,
and thereby the accoumpte which by merchants is called the eschaunge, shall
also arise in estimation of the moneys of England in such sort as in former
times has been, and the foreign commodities thereby also be bought for easyer
pryses, to the benefit of all such as shall use the same.

So as the matter well considered, the greatest number, and specially the
poorest shall have most commodity hereby, yea and such others as have most
gained by excessive prices, shall have also, (if they will consider them
selves) no small profit and help. And finally, no manner of person in the
whole Realm shall have after one to two months hurt hereby, except only the
traitor which has lived by counterfaictyng. And therefore it is to be allowed
and embraced of al people, and every man to think, that although at the first
he may suppose that he has less money in his purse, yet shall he have for
the same metal, as much as that was worth, either in ware, or at her Majesty's
mint in fine moneys. And when soever he shall utter that base moneys, which at
the time of the Proclamation he had, the next that he shall get, either be
his hand labor, or for his wages, shall be either fine moneys, or such as he
may have as much fine moneys in the mint for it. And consequently every man
ought to thank almyghtye God, that he may live to se the honor of his
country thus partly recovered: Syiuer to come in place of copper, pryces of
things amend, all people to be more hable to live of their wages, every man's
purse of coffer made free from the privy thief, which was the counterfaytour.
And finally, the treasure of this Realm to be of silver and gold, as was
wont in our forefathers time, and not of brass and copper, besides many
other great commodities that hereof must needs ensue, which but for length
might be declared, and for all the same, no loss to any, otherwise but in
opinion at the beginning, not much unlike to them, that being sick receive a
medicine, and in the taking feel some bytternes, but yet thereby recover
health and strength, and save their lives.

And because it is seen by experience, that many times when good things be
devised and attempted, the Devil sleapeth not, to hinder the same, but causes
them either to be defeated, or to be defamyd and mistaken: Therefore it is
meet that no manner of person give any credit to such as shall cast abroad
any mistrust of amendment of the money, or shall pretend this decree to be
greater or more burdenous then it is. For truly this amendment is so fully
purposed by her Majesty, as beside that, experience shall try it within one
month or.vi. weeks, within which times necessary things for the mint must
be provided. It is seen, that her Majesty may refourme these monyes, according
to her proclamation, without any such great loss as might move her to
forbear it: and on the other side, the monyes be so justly valued, as in deed
the base Testons being set at.ii.d. farthyng, and her Majesty geuyng at her
minte, for every pound of them.xx.s. and.iii.d. in reward, shall thereby give
rather more than they shall be worth being melted, than less.

So that her Majesty, who since she came to this Croune, never gained any
thing by any coynage, nor yet ever coined any manner of base moneys for this
Realm, will not now determine to lease the honor and fame that she shall with
small loss or gain recover by this noble act, to benefit her Realm and
people.

And as to the opinion of the burden of the loss, where ye base Testons be
valued but at.ii.d farthing, whereby such as have them shall seem to have the
greatest loss, it is to be well and reasonably construed and taken of all men,
for that there has not by good account which has been made and well proved,
been above a sixth part compared to the other base moneys of the same sort of
Testons coined in ye mints of this Realm. And at the coynage of ye same base
Testons now valued at two pence farthing, which was done in the time of the
wars heretofore, there were set thereto certain marks, as a Lion, a rose, a
flower deluce, or a harp, called the privy marks of such as wear then
masters of the mint, which also be specified in the Proclamation. For the
better understanding whereof, here be in the end of this declaration set
certain stampes or printes, of every kind of the same base Testons with their
said several marks, to the intent that every person loking and beholding the
same printes, may the better judge and discern the same from the other, that
be valued at.iiii. pence halfpenye, although if the same be well considered,
the color of the said base Teston will show the baseness thereof: And because
her Majesty means to ease her Subjects as much as possible may be, she is
pleased to command her officers in her mint, that where there be many
counterfaict Testons, which were made by cou^terfaictours, when the Testons
were at the value of.xii. pence a piece, and since also that they were decreed
to.vi. pence, and by estimation were so made, as they did contain about two
pence farthinge or there aboutes in silver: they shall do their endeavor to
receive and try such counterfaites, and shall give to the Subjects either for
every such counterfaict two pence farthing, or so much good fine moneys, as
the same counterfaictes shall contain in silver, whereby the people shall be
releued of such loss in some part for counterfaictes, as in no Realm any
Prince either has or ought to do. And for this and for all the rest of the
commodities hereof likely to ensue: her Majesty trusts her most honorable
good meaning shall be imbrased of all her good louinge Subjects, and every
person with good will, will yield to bear a small burden for a time, to avoid a
perpetual and endless oppressyon, not only of them selves and their
posterity, but also of the whole common weal.

Yeuen under the Queen's Majesty's Signet at her honor of Hampton court the
xxix. of September the second year of her Majesty's reign, M.D.LX*

The Teston marked with the Lion.

The Teston marked with the Rose.

The Teston marked with the Flower deluce.

The Teston marked with the Harp.



Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
