I R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
KNow all Men by these present, That we Thomas Walsingham, William Wythines,
and Henry Snelgar Knights, William Style, Lambert Cook, and John Vaighan
Esquires, Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, within the
County of Kent, have admitted, Licensed and Allowed, (...) of (...) within the
said County (...) to keep a Common-Ale-house or Tipling-house in his now
dwelling House, situate in (...) aforesaid, and not elsewhere. He the said
(...) observing and keeping the Articles prescribed in the Condition of his
Recognisance, and also here under written, for the maintenance of good Order
and Rule to be had and used in his said House. And for using such admittance
and allowance accordingly, we have Bound the said (...) in the Sum of ten
Pounds, with two sufficient Suerties in the Sum of five Pounds a piece to his
Majesty's use, according to the Tenure of the Statute in that case made and
provided. And this our Admittance and Allowance, to continue for the space of
one whole year and no longer, from the day of the date of these presents.

In witness whereof, We the above named Justices of Peace, have hereunto
subscribed our names.

Yeuen the (...) Day of May, in the year of our Lord God (...) and in the
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, JAMES by the Grace of God of
England France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. And of Scotland
the (...)
INPRIMIS, You shall not (during the time abouesaid) permit or suffer, or have
any Playing at the Cards, Dice, Tables, Quoits, Logets, Bowls, or any other
unlawful Game or Games, in your House, Yard, Garden, or Backside.

ITEM, You shall not suffer to be or remain in your House, any Person or
Persons (not being your ordinary Household Servants) upon any Sabboth-day or
Holy Day: during the time of Divine Service or Sermon.

ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person to Lodge or stay in your House, above
one Day and one Night, but such whose true Name and Surname you shall deliver
to some one of the Constables, or in his absence to some of the Officers of the
said Parish the next day following; (unless they be such Person or Persons as
you well know, and will answer for his or their forth-comming.)

ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person to remain in your House, Tippling or
Drinking contrary to the Law.

ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person to be in your House Tippling or Drinking,
after nine of the Clock in the Night time.

ITEM, You shall not Buy nor take to Pawn, any Stolen Goods of any Person or
Persons that shall bring the same to sell.

ITEM, You shall not Harbor in your in your House, Barnes, Stables, or other
where willingly: any Rogues, Vagabonds, Sturdy-beggers, Masterlesse-men, or
other notorious Offenders whatsoever.

ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person or Persons, to Sell or utter any Beer,
Ale, or other Victually by Deputation, or by color of your License.

ITEM, You shall keep the true Assise and Measure in your Pots, Bread, and
otherwise in uttering of your Beer, Ale and Bread. And the same Beer and Ale
to sell by the Sealed measure, and according to the Assise and not otherwise.

ITEM, You shall not Utter or Sell any strong Beer or strong Ale, above a
Penny the Quart, and small Beer or small Ale, not above a Halfe-pennie the
Quart, and so after the same Rates.

ITEM, You shall not Dress or suffer to be Dressed, or Eaten in your House,
any Flesh during the time of Lent, nor upon any Day forbidden by the Laws and
Constitutions of this Realm, except by Persons lawfully Licensed thereto.

ITEM, You shall not Utter, nor willingly suffer to be Uttered, Drunk or
Taken, any Tobacco within your House, Celler, or other place thereunto
belonging.


