The renewing of certain Orders devised by the special commandment of the
Queens Majesty, for the relief and stay of the present dearth of Grain
within the Realm: in the year of our Lord 1586.

Now to be again executed this present year 1594. upon like occasions as
were seen the former year. With an addition of some other particular orders
for Reformation of the great abuses in Alehouses and such like.

Jmprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1594.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

The renewing of certain Orders devised by the special commandment of the
Queens Majesty, for the relief and stay of the present dearth of Grain
within the Realm.
THat the Shiriffe and Justices of the Peace shall immediately upon the receipt
of these orders, That the Justices shall divide themselves into sundry parts
to execute these orders.
assemble them selves together with as much speed as they possible may: And
having conferred amongst themselves upon the contents hereof, shall first for
the better execution of the same, divide themselves into sundry companies, and
take amongst them into their charge by several divisions all the Hundreds,
Rapes, or Wapentakes of the said County.

Item, every company so allotted out, To appoint sundry Iuries to inquire of
things hereafter following.
shall forthwith direct their Precepts unto the Shiriffe to warn the high
Constables, under Constables, and other the most honest and substantial
inhabitants within the same Hundred, Rape, or Wapentake, to the number of
xxxvi. persons, more or fewer, as the quantity of the Hundred, Rape, or
Wapentake shall require, to appear before them at a certain place, and within
as short time after the receipt hereof as they conveniently may, and upon the
appearance of the said persons, they shall divide them into so many Iuries, as
they shall think meet, giving instruction to the said Shiriffe to return as
few of such as be known great Farmours for Corn, or that have store of
grain to sell, as he can. And such of the persons so warned as shall not
appear, but make default being sommoned, and not having any just or reasonable
excuse alowable by the Justices, to be punished therefore at the good
discretions of the Justices, both by Imprisonment and Fine, before whom they
are to appear.

Item, they shall first declare to the parties appearing, the cause why they
are sent for, and therewith earnestly charge them in the fear of God, to apply
themselves to the service whereunto they shall be now called, with all
duetifulnesse and diligence, and without any partiality to any person, and
then they shall give them the oath following.

The Iuries Oath.
The Oath of the Jurors, with charge to enquire what number of persons be in
the houses of them that have store of Coin.
YOu shall swear etc. that you shall enquire, and make true and due search and
trial, what number of persons every householder that has Corn in their
Barnes, Stackes or other where, as well Justices of the Peace as others
whatsoever, within the Parish of (...) have in their houses feeding, lying, and
vprising, or otherwise to be fed: what number of Acres they have certainly to
be sown this year with any manner of Grain: what bargains they have made
with any person for any kind of Grain to be sold, by, or to them: to whom
and by whom, and upon what prices they have made the same, and what quantity
of any manner of Grain, they, or any other have in their Barnes, Grainers,
Loftes, Cellors, or Floores, or otherwise to be delivered unto them upon any
Bargain.

Item, what number of Badgers, Kidders, For Badgers, Broggers, and Cariers of
Corn.
Broggers or Carriers of Corn inhabit within the said Parish, and whither
they do use to carry their Corn which they do buy, and where they do
usually buy the same, and what their names be, and how long they have used
that trade, and by whose License, and to see the same Licenses of what tenor
they are of.

Item, what number of Malt makers, Malt makers, Bakers, and Brewers.
Bakers, common Brewers or Ciplers dwell within the said Parish, and who they
are by name, and how long they have used that trade, and how much they bake
or brewe in the week, and what other trade they have whereby otherwise to live.

Item, Buyers of Corn to sell again.
who within the said Parish be the great buyers of Corn, or do use to buy,
or have bought any Corn or Grain to sell again, or have sold it again
since Midsommer last.

Item, Buyers of Corn upon the ground.
who within the same Parish buyeth or have bought or sold any Grain upon the
ground, of whom, and to whom has the same been bought or sold, and at what
price, and to certify unto us of the Premises, and of every part thereof, on
the (...) day of (...) now next coming: And to every part of these Articles
you shall bring answer from point to point.

Against such as shall refuse, to declare the truth of the matters inquirable.
And if any shall refuse to declare the truth, of, or, concerning the
premises, or of any part thereof, to any the Jurors aforesaid, requiring the
same for their better information: the Jurors shall be informed that such
person upon the information of the said Iurour, shall be conuented before the
Justices of the Peace of the said Division, or any two of them, and sharply
rebuked, or if need be, punished for his contempt. And if the party so called
in question, shall not declare the full truth thereof to the said Justices,
he shall be committed by the said Justices to the common Gaile as a person
bound for his good behavior, and so to be continued without Bail, until he
shall conform himself therein, or otherwise at the discretions of the said
Justices, he shall be bound in a good sum of money to make appearance before
the Lords of her Majesty's privy Counsel to answer unto his contempt in that
behalf, Parties offending to appear before the Counsel.
for further punishment and fine, for ensample of al such disobedient persons.

A consideration of all persons that have Corn, to determine how they shall
serve the markets with such portions as they may spare.
That the said Justices of the Peace having received into their hands the
verdict of the said Iuries answering to every point of their charge, shall call
at certain days by them to be assigned, such persons before them of every
Parish, as upon the presentment so made shall appear to have Corn to spare,
and upon due consideration of the number of persons, which every person has in
his house, according to their qualities, and of the quantity of Grain, that
the party has toward the finding of the same, or otherwise to be spent in
his house and sowing of his grounds, allowing to every Householder for his
expenses in his house, for every person thereof according to their quality,
sufficient Corn for bread and drink between this and the next Harvest, and
for their seed after the rate of the sowing of that Country upon an Acre. And
then they shall bind all such as shall appear to have more of any kind of
Grain, then shall serve to the uses above mentioned, as well Justices of the
Peace as others, by Recognizance, in some good reasonable some of money, to
observe the orders ensuing, viz.

Ye do knowledge your self to owe unto our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty, The form of the Recognizance to be freely taken.
etc. the sum of etc.
THe condition thereof shall be, that if ye shall well and truly without fraud,
couine, or collusion, and without any manner deceit or craft fulfill, observe
and keep, all and every such orders, appointments and directions, as shall at
this present be by us on her Majesty's behalf prescribed and enjoined unto
you to be by you done and fulfilled: Then this Recognizance to be void, or else
to stand in force.

The orders to be observed, are these, viz.
Orders to be observed by such as shall be appointed to serve the Markets with
Corn for the relief of the poor people first.
YOU shall bring, or cause to be brought weekly so many quarters or bushels of
corn, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Malt, Peazon, Beans, or other Grain, or so
much thereof as shall not be directly sold to the poor Artificers or day
Laborers of the Parish within which you dwell, by order of the Justices of the
Peace of the Division within which you dwell, or two of them to the Market of
(...) there to be by you, or at your assignement sold unto the Queens
subjects in open Market by half Quarters, two Bushels, one Bushel or less,
as the buyer shall require of you, and not in greater quantity, except it be to
a Badger or Carrier of Corn admitted according to the statute, To whom Corn
shall be sold after that the poor are served.
or to a common known Brewer or Baker, having testimony under the hand and
seal of such two Justices of the Peace at the least of the division, or of a
Mayor or other head Officer of the City, Town, or Borough corporate where he
dwells, that he is common Brewer or Baker within the same: or to such other
person as shall make provision for any Lord Spiritual or Temporal, Knight, or
any other Gentleman that has no provision of Corn, so as the same person have
and show unto such person as shall have the oversight of the Market in that
behalf, testimony under the hand and seal of the party for whom he comes
to the Market to make that provision, declaring that it is for the provision of
his house, and containing the quantities and kind of Grain to be provided:
And you shall not willingly leave any part of your Corn so brought to that
Market unsold, if money be offered to you for the same, by any that are
permitted to buy the same, after the usual price of the Market there that day,
as long as the Market shall last.

Neither shall you from the beginning of the Market, to the full end thereof,
No Corn brought to the Market unsold, to be carried out of the town.
keep or cause to be kept any of your said Corn out of the open sight of the
Market: neither shall you carry away from the Market Town any kind of Grain
that was brought thither which you have not there sold, but shall leave the
same there in the Market Town in some place known, so as it may be brought
into the open Market the next Market day at the first opening of the Market,
there to be sold as before was limited. And yet nevertheless, you shall
bring to the Market such other quantity of Grain as shall be limited, and so
continue at every Market day the bringing into the open Market, the quantity
of Corn that shall be limited.

Also you shall not buy any manner of such Grain as we shall appoint you to sell,
None to buy such kind of Corn as they shall bring to sell, but by warrant upon
reasonable cause.
from this day forwards, but upon very especial and necessary cause to be
allowed by us, until such time as all and every such manner Grains as we at
this time shall appoint you to sell, be according to our appointment and order
by you sold. And if you shall not sow so much this year as the Jury has
presented that ye intend to sow, or if you now have, or shall have
knowledge, or shall guess hereafter at any time, either by threshing of the
Mow or Shocks or otherwise, that ye have more store of any manner of Grain,
then the Jury has presented unto us: that then ye shall forth with upon such
knowledge thereof had, make true relation thereof unto us, or unto two of us
both what portion of your seed Corn shall be left vnsowen, o^ what further
quantity you shall perceive you have, then was at the first presented.

That so soon as you perceive you spend not after the rate of so much Corn as
we have limited unto you for the finding of your house, ye shall make true
report unto us or two of us, how much less ye spend.

No corn to be bought for to sell again.
Ye shall buy no Corn to sell it again, neither shall you by any color
directly or indirectly, appoint any your servants, or any other person to be a
Badger of your Corn, other then to carry your Corn to the Market there to be
sold as your own, without changing of any property.

No Corn to be bought but in open Market.
Ye shall neither buy nor sell any manner of corn, but in the open Market,
unless the same be to some poor handicraftes men, or day laborers within
the Parish wherein you do dwell, that cannot conveniently come to the market
Towns, by reason of distance of place, according to such direction as shall be
given unto you in that behalf by us the Justices of the Peace of that
Division, within which you do dwell, or two of us, and to none of these above
one bushel at a time, and thereof you shall keep or cause to be kept a
particular note in writing to whom you shall so sell weekly, and at what
prices, so as the same may appear to the Justices to be done without fraud or
abuse.

That the Justices of the Peace within their several Divisions have special
regard that Ingrossers of Corn be carefully seen unto, Inquiry to be made
against Engrossers.
and inquisitions to be made for knowledge of them, so as they may be severely
punished according to the law: And where such are found, to make Certificates
of their names and dwellings, and of the proofs to the Queens Majesty's
Attorney general for the time being, who is directed speedily to inform
against them for the same, and to see that none be permitted to buy any Corn
to sell again, but by special license, and that of all manner of licenses by
Justices of the Peace or by any other authority, the parties that shall have
such licenses, shall cause an entry to be made in the books of the Peace
remaining with the Custos Rotulorum, or the Clerk of the Peace, An order for
all licenses from the Justices of the Peace, to be kept in a record.
for entry whereof the party shall not pay above two pence, and thereof the
Custos Rotulorum, or the Clerk shall keep a good Register to be showed to the
Justices, whenever they shall require the sight thereof.

That they take order with the common Bakers for the baking of Rye, Barley,
Pease, Regard to the Bakers for keeping of the sise of bread.
and Beans for the use of the poor, and that they appoint special and fit
persons diligently to see the people well dealt withal by the common Bakers
and Brewers in all Towns and places in their Weights and Assizes, having also
regard, that the Deputies of the Clerk of the Market do not abuse themselves
in unlawful exactions for Weight and Measure, and effectually to inquire for
and search out the default therein, and thereupon to give order for punishment
of the offender severely, Bread faulty in any excess to be sold toward the
relief of the poor.
according to the Law: and where any notable excessive offense shall be in the
Bakers, to cause the bread to be sold to ye poorer sort under the ordinary
prices, as in part of punishment of the Baker.

No Badger to buy Corn but in open Market, and with sufficient license in
writing.
That no Badgers of corn, Bakers or Brewers buy any Grain, or commune or
bargain for the same, but in the time of open Markets, and that but by License
under the hands of the Justices of the Division where they do dwell, or three
of them, and that they weekly bring their License with them to the Market
where they do either buy or sell, or else not to be suffered to buy any: And that
the License contain how much Grain, of what kind, and for what place they
are licenced to buy and carry, that there be set down upon the License in
writing, the day, place, quantity, and price at which the Corn is bought,
that they take but measurably for the carriage, baking, and brewing thereof,
that they show their books weekly to such as the Justices of the Division
wherein they dwell, The Badgers to show weekly their books of buying.
shall appoint for that purpose being no Bakers or Badgers of Corn, and that
those within every xiiii. days make report to the Justices of the Division
wherein they dwell, how the people are dealt withal by the Badgers, Bakers,
and Brewers, and that such as have sufficient to live on, or that are known to
be of any common evil behauiur, be not permitted to be Badgers of Corn, of
which sort commonly the report is that there are too many, and therefore the
same would be remedied and foreseen: Also that no Badgers be permitted but
such as the Statute does limite, No Justices servant to be a Badger, nor none
other, but such as shall be licensed in open Sessions.
and that no servant of any be licenced to be a Badger, except six of the
Justices at the least shall in open Sessions for some necessary cause allow any
such, and that none at all be allowed a Badger, except he be allowed in open
sessions, and not to be, as it is in many places, abused for gain of the
Clerk of the Peace, or a Justices Clerk granted without allowance of the
rest of the Justices in their open Sessions. No Badger, Baker, Brewer, or
Purueyour to buy Grain, until an hour after the full Market begin.
And furthermore, that none be permitted to buy or provide Corn in the Market
in gross, as a Badger or Baker, Brewer, or Purueyour and such like, upon pain
of imprisonment, until one hour or more after the full Market be begun,
that the poor may be first served.

That the said Justices, or two, Some Justices to be present in the Market, to
see the poor relieved upon reasonable prices.
or one of them at the least in every Division, shall be personally present at
every market within their several Divisions, during the whole time of the
Market, to see the orders to be taken by the authority hereof to be well
observed, and the poor people provided of necessary Corn, and that with as
much favor in the prices, as by their earnest persuasion of the Justices can
be obtained. By this it is not meant to charge any Lord of Parliament being a
Justice of Peace, to attend upon any such service in any Market, otherwise
then it shall be with his own good will: but in all other causes tending to
the execution of these orders, it is hoped that every person of any estate,
will readily give advise and assistance.

Where Justices are wanting in any Hundred, for to appoint some rich persons to
supply the want.
If there shall be any Hundred, Rape, or Wapentake within the said County,
within the which or nere thereunto no sufficient number of the said Justices of
the Peace do dwell or inhabit, the said Shirife and four Justices of the Peace
of that County, shall in that case appoint some other honest Gentleman, or the
high Constables under Constables, or such other, grave, honest, and
substantial persons, not being Corn masters, dwelling within the said
Hundred, Rape or Wapentake, as they shall by their discretions think
convenient, to have the charge, doing the execution of these orders there: whom
they shall also instruct how to execute the same diligently and uprightly.

That ministers and preachers exhort the richer sort to be liberal to help
the poor with money or victual needful.
That all good means and persuasions be used by the Justices in their several
divisions, and by admonitions and exhortations in Sermons in the Churches, by
the Preachers and Ministers of the Word, that the poor may be served of Corn
at convenient and charitable prices. And to the furtherance thereof, that the
richer sort be earnestly moved by Christian charity, to cause their Grain to
be sold under the common prices of the Market to the poorer sort: A deed of
mercy, that will doubtless be rewarded of Almighty God.

That there be no buying or bargeining of any kind of Corn but in open
Market, and that the Justices in their several Divisions, restrain common
Maulsters of making Barlie Malt, To make Malt of otes in countries where
there has been use thereof.
in those countries and places where there be Oats sufficient to make Malt
of for the use of the people, and to restrain as well the brewing of Barley
Malt, by or for Alehouses or common Tiplers in those Countries and places, as
also the excess use of any kind of Malt, by all common Brewers, Maulsters,
and common Tiplers, according to the true meaning of this Article: And that the
unnecessary number of Alehouses and common Tiplers be forth with suppressed in
all places, and that direction be given to all Tippling houses, Tauernes and
Alehouses, not to suffer any persons to repair thither to eat and drink at
unseasonable times, or to continue in such houses longer, then to satisfy
their necessity of eating and drinking.

That the Justices use al other good means possible that are not mentioned in
these orders, No wast of bread Corn superfluously, nor any expense thereof but
for seeding of people.
that the Markets may be well served, and the poor relieved in their
provisions during this time of dearth. And that no expense of any Grain meet
for bread to feed men, be wasted upon feeding of dogs or other beasts,
neither that any be spent in making stuff called Starche, None suffered to
make Starch of any Grain.
as of late there has been discovered great quantity expended in that vain
matter, being in no sort to be suffered to continue, the rather also for that
there are other things not hurtful to the food of man, that may serve for
such purposes, if such purposes at least were requisite.

be sold either in Corn or meal, but to charge them to continue the orderly
use of grinding of all manner of Corn that shall be brought to them, in
reasonable good sort, and upon reasonable Toll. And for better performance
hereof some of the Justices not affectionated to the Millers, shall some time
personally themselu^s resort to the milles to ouersee the doings of the said
Millers, and compel them to do their duties. And where none of the Justices
can as need shall be, weekly look thereto personally, they shall appoint
certain honest persons weekly to attend thereto, and to inform themselves of
the poorer sort, how they are used in this time of dearth, for their grinding
and their Toll, and present the defaults to the Justices, to be speedily
reformed with all due severity.

Conferences to be had betwixt the Justices of Peace in the Shires, and the
principal officers of Cities and towns corporate for provisions of Grain,
for the inhabitants in Cities and corporate Towns.
Item, where there are within the circuit of any Shire, or thereto adjoining
any Cities that are incorporated as Towns within themselves, or any other
Towns incorporate, that have by good authority Justices of Peace of their
own inhabitants, for that commonly such Cities and Towns have their greatest
number of householders that are no owners of grain, but have common Bakers, and
Brewers, must of necessity buy and provide their Corn or Meal at the Markets
near thereto, to serve all other the inhabitants and resiants within the said
Cities and Towns: For the provision of all such Cities and Towns, it shall be
necessary that the Justices of the Peace of the Shires next to the same Cities
and Towns shall have a meeting and conference with the head Officers of the
said Cities and Towns, how and in what good manner the Bakers and Brewers,
and other householders that shall also have need to provide Corn or Meal for
the necessary use of the private housholdes, may be provided at the Markets
near to the same. And after due conference had hereof, there shall be by the
Justices of Peace, and the foresaid head Officers some good orders set down,
such as both may serve for the needful use of the same Towns and Cities, and
also may not by abuse give cause of raising of prices in the Markets and
Countries adjoining. And where there shall be adjoining to the same Cities and
Towns, or not far distant, diverse Shires, (as in many places such is the
situation of them) there some of the Justices of every Shire so adjoining, or
not far distant, shall use such conference and take such orders with the
said Officers, as before is mentioned. And in such cases the Justices of every
such Shire shall be informed mutually from the one Shire unto the other, of the
needful provisions to be made from time to time for the said Cities and
Towns, so as every Shire may proportionably yield reasonable succor and
relief out of their Markets to the Purueyors or to the Bakers, and Brewers as
shall be requisite without burthening of the one, more then the other may
reasonably bear. And if need shall require, the aforesaid principal
Officers shall not refuse to acquaint the Justices, from whence the provision
shall be bought and provided, how such provisions so had and bought in
Markets are spent, that by color of such provisions no abuse be committed to
increase the prices, and so to leave the poor unable to be relieved.

O^^er for places exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Justices of peace in
the bodies of the Shires.
If there be any special part within any Shire, that has as a liberty by
special Commissions any Justices of the Peace within the same, the Shirife of
the Shire shall send unto the principal owner or Officer of such Liberty,
notice of these orders, and shall charge them that the Justices of the Peace
within such Liberty do their duties for execution of al these orders, as
far forth as shall be requisite, and therein also to use by conference the advice of some other Justices next adjoining.

Regard to stay all transportation of Grain out of the realm.
That in all Counties maritimme where Ports or Creeks are, by which any Corn
may be carried out of the Realm, though also there are Commissioners appointed
under the great Seal of England, to take care that no Corn be shipped or
laden in any vessel to pass out of the Realm: Yet nevertheless, the
Justices of the Peace that are not placed in that Commission, if they be no
owners of Corn to sell, shall also use their diligence to stay such lading of
Corn, either in Ports or Creekes, or upon any Rivers leading to the same. And
if the foresaid Commisioners shall not do their duties therein by authority
of their commission, then any other Justice by authority of these orders shall
make stay of all such transportation, and in his so doing, shall be allowed and
maintained. And this is thought meet to be in this sort directed, for that it
may be doubted, that amongst so many as are appointed in the foresaid
Commission against transportation, some may be mistaken, being themselves
either transporters, or friends or favorers to transporters, or negligent in
the execution of the charge committed to them.

That the Justices of the Peace do once every month certify their doings and
proceedings by force of these instructions unto the Sheriff of the said
County, Certificate to be made of the Execution of these Orders monthly to
the Sheriff, and he to certify the same to the privy Counsel within every
forty days.
in which certificate they shall also make certificate of such Justices as
shall be absent from any of these services, and the true cause of their
absence, and shall also certify the usual prices of all kinds of Grain in
their markets for that month past: Of all which the same Sheriff shall
certify to the Privy counsel without any delay, so as he do certify once
in every forty days at the furthest, and so as also the default in any
Justice that shall be absent without necessary cause, To certify what Justices
be absent from the service, that such as witho^t just excuse shall not attend,
may be displaced, and their roumes, if there be need, supplied.
may be duly considered, and reformed by authority of her Majesty's Counsel,
as reason shall require: whereby such persons as are placed as Justices for
their credit, may not continue in those rooms wherein they shall be found
not disposed to attend such necessary and godly services as this is, but that
others of better disposition may supply those rooms, if there shall be need
of any such number, as in most places it is thought not very needful, the
number of late years being in common opinion more hurtful then profitable to
Justice.

And if any shall offend against the true meaning of these instructions, or of
any part thereof, or shall use any sinister mean to the defrauding thereof,
that such be severely punished according to the Laws: and for such obstinate
persons as shall not conform themselves, the Justices shall at their pleasure
bind them to appear before the Queens Majesty's privy Counsel by a day
certain, there to be further dealt with by severe punishment, for the better
ensample of all others.

Articles annexed to the former Orders, to be executed by the Justices of
Peace, in places where they shall think convenient. 1594.
FIrst, to take view of the number of Alehouses, vitailing houses, and
tippling houses in every Town, Parish, Village, and Hamlet within their
Jurisdictions: and upon view had, to consider what number of them are necessary
and fit for every Town, Parish, Village, and Hamlet to continue: And
thereupon to discharge the superfluous number, and such as are unmeet to keep
the same, and to allow a convenient number, and no more.

2. They which shall be allowed, to be of honest conversation, and that have no
other means to live by, and to give new bands to her Majesty's use, to
perform the orders following, and such of them as refuse to be bound, not to
be permitted to continue to keep any Alehouse, Vitailing, or Tippling house.

3. To take strait order with the Brewers, that they serve no Beer, or Ale to
any Alehous-keeper, Victualler, or Tipler, but at such Rate, and price, as by
the Justices of Peace shall be set down, and appointed by authority of the
statute of 23. H. 8. Cap. 4. And yet the same to be well sodden, and well
brewed of wholesome Grain, as it ought to be, upon pain, etc. to be imposed
by the Justices.

4. That no Vitailers, Tiplers, and Alehouse-keepers have in their houses, or
do permit to be brought into their houses any Cards, Dice, or Tables, nor to
suffer any to play in their houses, yardes, or backsides at any Cards, Tables,
Dice, or other unlawful games.

5. That no Vitailer, Tipler, or Ale-house-keeper shall dress, or suffer to be
dressed and eaten within his house, any flesh upon any forbidden day, saving
for himself and his servant, in cases of necessity, according to the
Statute in that behalf provided, and this to be parcel of the Condition of
their Bond.

6. That no Vitailer, Tipler, or Ale-house-keeper shall permit, and suffer any
person, or persons to lodge in his house above a day and a night, but such as
he will answer for, as the Statutes yet in force do require.

7. To give straight order and charge to every Constable, or other superior
Officer, to whom it may appertain, that every of them shall every fifteen
days search, and enquire of the said and other like disorders, as by the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, they are commanded and required. And if it shall
seem to the Justices, that the petie Constable be either a Vitailer, or one
that shall favor the Vitailers in their faults, some other meeter person to
be appointed to make the said Inquisition and Certificate.

8 That Inquisition be made in what places Malt is commonly made to be
sold, by such as are called Maulsters, and who they be, and to take order,
that by buying and Engrossing of barley to make Malt, they do not thereby
store up greater quantity of Malt, then they usually bring to Markets,
thereby toward the end of the year to increase the price thereof excessiuely,
of which abuse the Justices are to take care to reform the same.


