A DECLARATION OF THE CAUSES, WHICH MOVED THE chief Commanders of the Navy
of her most excellent Majesty the Queen of England, in their voyage and
expedition for Portingal, to take and arrest in the mouth of the River of
Lisbone, certain Ships of corn and other provisions of war bound for the
said City: Prepared for the services of the King of Spain, in the Ports and
Provinces within and about the Sownde, the 30. day of June, in the year of our
Lord 1589. and of her Majesty's reign the one and thirty.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1589.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



A DECLARATION OF THE CAUSES, WHICH Moved the chief Commanders of the Navy
of her most excellent Majesty the Queen of England, in their voyage and
expedition for Portingall, to take and arrest in the mouth of the river of
Lisbone, certain ships of Corn, and other provisions of war bound for
the said City, prepared for the services of the King of Spain, in the ports
and Provinces within and about the Sownde, the 30. day of June, in the year of
our Lord 1589. and of her Majesty's reign the 31.
WHereas it is a thing out of controversy, that certain Marchaunts resiant
and inhabiting within and near unto the Sownde in the kingdom of Denmark,
commonly called the Merchants of the Hanse towns, will grievously exclaim
among foreign Nations, against the chief Commanders of the Fleet of the most
excellent Queen of England, as infringers of the law of Nations, and of the
ancient contracts made betwixt the Kings of England, and the Hanse merchants,
and as contemners of the Newtralitie which the said Hanse merchants do
challenge to themselves, whereby they think and hold it lawful for them to
exercise the trafique of all marchandises whatsoever, with all people
whosoever, even in the times of greatest hostility between whatsoever kings
and Princes, by reason of the intercepting and arresting of certain of their
ships, passing to the aid and furnishing of the king of Spain with corn, and
provisions of war: it seemed good unto her foresaid excellent Majesty, in
respect of her good will, together with singular affection and love to the
sacred Empire, the Emperors Majesty himself, the noble Princes of Germany,
and to all and singular the Estates of the Empire, in this public sort to make
it manifest for what causes the aforesaid Hanse ships were stayed by the
officers of her Fleet, and as lawful prises taken and confiscated. Which is
done to no other end or purpose, but to make it evident that the same action
does stand and agree with equity and justice, and to be a thing most probable,
that other Princes whosoever, their servants and Officers in the like case, and
upon the like occasion, would not have failed to take the like course.

For it is a thing notorious and sufficiently known, not only to the few
Hanse towns, but also to all Christendom, that the king of Spain is
transported with a mortal hatred against the Queens Majesty of England: a
witness whereof is the intended but not performed invasion of the kingdom, and
Dominions of England by the said king the year last past, furthered by him
with all his force, but by the mercy of God utterly disappointed.

Which exulcerate malice of the Kings mind, not lately sprung up, but of long
time lurking in the closet of his heart, yet foreseen and still prevented by
the Queens Majesty, she often by her messengers sent to him for that purpose,
as with most gentle medicines endeavored to assuage, to reduce him to a new
mind meeter for a Prince, and so great a king as himself: to the end that
removing out of both their minds not only the stain, but also the suspicion
of the stain of discontentments, they might dispose themselves to enter and
conclude a firm peace and durable friendship, according to the ancient leagues
between their progenitors and fathers, and their kingdoms, for the space of
many years happily continued.

The king as a man bewitched by the bishop of Rome, the very firebrand and
bellows of all the civil wars in Christendom, neglects the remedies and
conditions of peace that have been offered, and perseuereth according to his
beginning, in his hostile inte^dement against her Majesty, not otherwise
contentable or satisfiable then with her destruction, the slaughter and
bloodshed of her people most obedient unto her, and to be short, with the
conquest of the whole kingdom.

And for the better effecting hereof, he has oftentimes sent his messengers
(you would rather say his fireflingers) into England, and of latest years,
two special persons, of all the rest most eger and furious, Gyrald Despes, and
Bernardine Mendoza, who ceased not to sound and persuade the minds of all
those whom they could grow in acquaintance with, and were men given over to
al mischiefs and diabolical practices: promising them, and bestowing upon them
extraordinary rewards, of purpose to stir them up to move domestical
conspiracies against her Majesty.

And how much they prevailed in their attempts, it is not material in this
place particularly to discuss, for so this work would grow large. The 3.
principal conspiracies, the one of the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, and of their partisans, the second of the Duke of Norfolk, the
third of the two Pagets brethren, as also of the two Throckmortons and of their
confederats, whereof some were condemned and executed, for their intended
overthrow of the Queens Majesty, and of the state of the Common wealth, and
the rest that are fled, and wander up and down in uncertain places, and are
to this day maintained at the charge and by the purse of the Spanish King, are
in this matter very sufficient witnesses.

But the Patrons and complotters of these rebellious, being subtle and
cautelous in their actions, howsoever apparent the factes of their seditious
ministers seem to be, yet peradventure the Spaniard himself will deny them to
be his precepts, and directions. Did he then chastise those his ministers being
returned into Spain, as transgressers of his pleasures? Did he detain from
them all rewards and preferments, as having ill deserved them? has he blamed
the auctours of such facts, and excused himself to the Queen? I would to God
it were so.

But go to, let these witnesses pass. May he be taken for a man of a good
spirit, and of no poisoned mind against her Majesty? Let then Guilielmus
Cataneus, the Popes Secretary that now is be produced: let his work of the
life of Pius Quintus sometime bishop of Rome be read. The said Cataneus in
that book of his reports, that Philip the king of Spain complained bitterly
and with great grief to the Cardinal of Alexandria, sent unto him into Spain
in the year 1572. because the conspired The conspiracy of the King of Spain
against the kingdoms of England and Ireland 1570.
practice, as well against England as Ireland, not long before entered upon by
his authority and advise, had not that success that he looked for.

Add hereunto the ships and forces sent twice Ships and forces twice sent into
Ireland by the King of Spain.
out of Spain into Ireland under the pretext of the Popes name. As for the
late treaty of peace with the Duke of Parma in Flanders, entered into upon the
mediation, and request of the good prince the King of Denmark, how smoothe and
how sly a tuche was that? for her Majesty, being wholly bent to that treaty,
with a sincere mind and unfeigned desire, behold as then at her doors, that
huge and mighty Fleet of Spain, behold a sort of Armies brought out of
Italy, and Germany into Flanders, laboring and providing for nothing else but
the desolation of the kingdom of England, and the destruction of the Queen:
for the Conspiratours had as it were with their fingers, appointed every one of
us to the slaughter: they had distributed our houses and lands, and a new
Prince, a forrener was already ordained and created to enjoy the kingdom.

If the Spaniards seem to object against these so grievous, so deadly, and so
strange devises, the succors which her Majesty has yielded to the low
Countries, let them consider well, and they shall find, that most of these
practices have in time preceded the transporting of any aid to them: let them
deny (if they can) that they solicited many English Subjects to rebel,
before her Majesty, so much as thought, of the relieuing of her ancient
confederats, by her honest and just means.

She appealeth to the King him self, and to his Vice Royes in Flanders, how
often, and what messengers she sent before that into Spain, and Flanders, for
breeding a concord and agreement betwixt the King, and the Nether-landers, not
with hard, but with honorable and equal conditions: against which aduisoes
and requests, when the King began to be obdurate, and the ancient contracts
of amity betwixt the Nether-landers, and the Kings of England could not suffer
them to be deprived of their laws and liberty, and be exposed as a pray to
Strangers, she at the last received them, being too much oppressed into her
protection, only of a desire to relieve the poor afflicted people, and not to
offer the smallest injury to the King.

For if she had been disposed to regard her own commodity, she might have
taken another course, but she did not so: seeking rather as yet, earnestly, and
diligently with any conditions, if not too unreasonable, and such as may stand
with her honor, and the profit of the state of Christianity, how a
commodious and secure pacification may be made betwixt the King, and the States
of the low Countries.

In vain, and contrary to reason, has she maintained with great charge, that
honorable Embassage to the Duke of Parma the last year: in vain was she
advertised of the monstrous Navy of Spain, and the miraculous swarms
offorces with Parma in Flanders, destinated and prepared for her ruin, and the
spoil of her kingdom: she remained still without all intention or disposition
to send any further forces into Flanders, and was after a sort negligent, both
of defending herself, and of extending the limits of her government beyond
the Seas, with purpose to live in quietness without fear, and in peace
without ambitious desire of rule.

And howsoever she may be thought greedy of Her Majesty's Ambassadors sent
into Flanders to entreat of a peace.
other men's Dominions, she sent to Parma very noble and excellent Ambassadors,
who being delayed from day to day, from month to month, without any thing
accomplished, she notwithstanding took it patiently, and suffered so far
these dangerous delays, that the Spanish Soldiers panting with haste and
greediness for the blood and butcherie of her Majesty, and people most dear
unto her, were come upon her coasts, and before her doors. In this sort was
her hope deluded, and her opinion frustrated by him, contrary to the royal
dignity of both the Kingdoms of England and of Denmark.

And if the victorious hand of God had not herein derided the cunning devises
and purposes of the Spaniards, if it had not scattered so great a terror to
all Christendom, and drenched their carkases in the Sea, what should the state
of the said Hanse merchants have been, so busily and so contrary to al equity
and justice, hastening to furnish him with corn and provision for the wars?
whither should the long and sacred quiet of the Roman Empire have gone to hide
it self? where should all other Nations that profess the truth of
Christianity, think that they might have shrouded themselves to be free from
his tyranny, and safe from his murderers and cruel executioners? If they saw
not that their own destruction was joined with the ruin of the Queen of
England, either it must be said that they would deny Christ, or that they
were blinded to their own misery by the vengeance of God, for their secret
sins. For where the cause of hostility is all one, the like effect and issue
is to be looked for at the hands of a cruel and raging enemy of the truth:
for in a manner, all the inhabitants of the Hanse Towns are very good favorers
of the reformed Religion, and mortal enemies to the Romish errors. And would
any man then believe, that men so well instructed, could more respect their
private gain, I will not say their filthy lucre, then their own security,
the preservation of their Country, and the propagation of true Religion?

But what? will the inhabitants of the Hanse Towns pretend that they knew not
the Queen of Englands pleasure? The City of Hamborough by their letters
written unto the Queens Majesty, The City of Hamboroughs letters to the
Queens Majesty.
the 21. of September, in the year 1585. having besought her, that their ships
might pass quietly unto Spain and Portugal, without stop or hindrance either
in their passage or repassage, by her Majesty's Captains at Sea, received not
they answer to this effect?

We doubt not, but you have heard what occasions of discord are lately fallen
out between us and the king of The Queens Majesty's letters to the Hamburgers.
Spain, whereof we cannot thoroughly conjecture what troubles are like to
ensue. If peace arise, we mean to deny you nothing, being our ancient
confederates: but if it grow to a war, we wish you advisedly to consider,
that it stands not with the safety of our kingdom, to suffer our enemies to
be aided with corn, and provisions for war, thereby to be armed against us.
Which things, according to your accustomed wisdoms you calling to mind, we
hope you will demand nothing at our hands, which may be hurtful to our
state: as for the transporting of other sorts of merchandise into those
parts, whereby our enemies may neither be aided with victuals, nor
necessaries of war, we will not hinder you, but will permit your ships to
ride on our coasts, and to pass along with all favor for the performance of
their intended nauigatio^: with which our answer, we hope you will be fully
satisfied and contented; the present state of things considered.

Secondly, whereas two years after that, to wit, The Hamburgers petitorie
message to the Queens Majesty.
the last year the said Burgomasters of Hamburrough sent Sebastian Berghen
their Secretary and Agent with letters unto the Queen of England, desiring
that under the color and title of Newtralitie, they might freely pass into
Spain and Portingal, and repasse again with all kind of merchandise
whatsoever, was not the said Sebastian answered in this wise by the Lords of
her Majesty's Counsel?

Whereas the King of Spain, having sent out his Navy to invade this Realm,
to root out the Christian Religion, The answer to the petition of yt Hamburge
messenger.
and to work the ruin and destruction of the Queens Majesty, has declared
more clearly then the light it self, what he would have the Queen of England
to think of him, she deemeth it not reasonable upon any color to grant
either to the Hambourgers, or to any other the Haunse Towns whosoever, to
carry corn, gunnepowder, and other appurtenances for the war to so obstinate
and manifest enemy of the true Christian Religion. That such as presumptuously
durst attempt the contrary, should suffer the punishment of their unbridled
licensiousnesse, if they fell into the hands of the Captains, or other
Subjects of the Queen of England, their goods and marchandises whatsoever
thus transported against her Majesty's will to be made good prises to any man
that can take them, no excuse of Newtralitie prevailing to the contrary.

Moreover it is not to be omitted, that the Lords of her Majesty's Counsel
aforesaid, having called for Maurice Tymberman resident in London, and The
Alderman of the Stilliard in London, commanded to advise the Hanse Towns.
Alderman (as they call him) of the Stilliard, commanded him to give warning to
all the Haunse Towns that her Majesty willed, and according to her Sovereign
authority in her Dominions, commanded that they should forbear from
thenceforth, from the beginning of the month of January last past from
carrying of corn, and generally of all provision of war, cables, mastes, and
like merchandise into Spain and Portingall, whereby the enemy of her Kingdom
might be the better furnished, under the pain of loss both of ships and
goods, to be inflicted upon such, as should violate this her princely
commandment.

That the Haunse Towns were not ignorant of this inhibition, appears by the
letters of the Cities of Lubecke, and Hamborough, written afterward The
letters of the Lubeckers, Hamburgers, and Dantiskers.
to the Queens Majesty, the 26. of March, and from Dantiske, the 13. of the
said month, before those ships set out from home, which are now taken. The
same in like manner is apparent, by many bills of the hiring, and freyghting of
their ships, wherein among others, this one thing is worth the noting, which
was there found, that they couenanted in plain words, with the shipmasters,
that they should not pass into Spain and Portingall through the English
Chanel and usual way, but on the back side of the Kingdoms of Scotland, and
Ireland, a new and strange, and without doubt, a dangerous course: by which
their intention and deed, they declared how little they cared for good
meaning, and how careful they were to arm and furnish the common and known
enemy of the Queen of England. But as always for the most part it falls
out, deceit does never thrive with any man, and when men think most to
deceive, they are deceived, and suffer the penalty of their guile: for falling
into the hands of her Majesty's army upon the coast of Portugal, and even in
the entrance of the haven of Lisbone, they were brought back into England, and
by the law of Nations, are become prises to him which took them.

Here now they cry out, that the Commanders of our Fleet have dealt
injuriously with them, they exclaim that the leagues are broken, that their
old privileges in England are violated, which they challenge to belong to their
Cities, and ought to be kept and maintained. As though that any man were so
mad, so far from the truth of things, so careless of his own safety, so
great an enemy to public security, that with all his might and endeavor,
would not prevent the mischief and destruction hanging over the Commonwealth.
He that withstandeth not wrong when he is able, is in as great fault, as if he
destroyed the Common wealth. The preservation of the people has been ever
accounted among all nations, for the very supreme Law. Are not the Hanse
towns ashamed to maintain and pretend a privilege, that is to say, a private
law against a public and sovereign law? Did ever any king or Prince witting
and waring, suffer such a kind of trafike which should make his enemy over
mighty, and though he did not disfurnish himself, yet should leave himself
more open unto his fury, which otherwise were like to be unarmed and unable to
wage war against him?

In the year 1545. at which time the wars grew hot betwixt the kingdoms
of England and The English and French enemies: Charles the fifth a confederate.
France, when the subjects of Charles the Emperor the fifth of that name of
noble memory, would needs have had free liberty of passage with all
commodities into France, under pretext of their Newtralitie, What was the
Emperors answer being a Prince of great equity? Did he not openly pronounce
that course of theirs altogether unlawful? let the Contract it self concluded
the 6. day of April be looked into.

When the Kings of Denmark, and of Swethlande were at difference one with
another, was it The Danes and Swethens enemies: the Hanse men confederats.
permitted to these Hansemen to convey freely any thing into one of their
kingdoms, which was not in deed ceased upon and confiscated, if it fell into
the laps of the other, not having first obtained special liberty for the
same? Was this stately, and so much privileged name of Newtralitie at that
time, of such force, that without using of any mediator, it could recover
again their goods out of the hands of the Danes and Swethens, and countenance
the same in safety, and security? Let them acknowledge that, whereof they are
not ignorant, that although the Emperor Ferdinande and other Princes of the
Empire dealt in their behalf by way of entreaty and mediation, and that from
the solemn assembly of the said Empire, yet they in this case prevailed
nothing at all with Ericke, the king of Swethland.

And further in the time of hostility between the Empire, wherewith as then
the king of Poland joined against the great Duke of Muscouie, went The Emperor
and the King of Poland enemies to the Moscouite: the English and Hanse men
friends.
these matters otherwise then? Could either the English merchants, or any
other frequent the Narue in Liuonia, or any other parts of the Dukes dominions
freely, and without danger? Did the Hanse men which then were for their king
and Emperor, deliver and restore again the ships which they had intercepted
and taken, from those which made such attempts? Many men's goods surprised by
the Hanse men and others, as then entertained against the Moscouite, and by
them still detained, without any precedent prohibitio^ of passing to the said
Moscouite, are hereof very good witnesses.

It is also a thing well known, that the noble Prince of Orange, and the
States, exercised the like justice, as well against the Hanse men, as others in
times past.

And verily the foresaid Princes in these arrestes did that which was according
to the tenor, and prescription of the laws of the equity of nations. For
that same privilege of Newtralitie, is in such sort to be used and inioyed,
that in helping one of our confederates, we hurt not another: so that he which
helps one, and thereby damnifieth another, falls from his privilege and
contract: not because he helps one of his confederates, but because he does
prejudice another, and by that fact of his, makes himself an enemy, as
offering the first injury, and therefore in so doing, he is to be taken and
reputed for an Adherent, and Assistant to the enemy, and a very enemy himself.

This then being the state of these things, what law, what reason, or
example may be objected to the contrary, but that it is lawful for the Queen
of England, whose scepter, diadem, kingdom, living, and life, are greedily
thirsted after by the Spaniard, so potent and so malicious an enemy, to do
that against his fautors and favorers so often premonished, which was lawful
for the Emperor, for the Empire, for the king of Swethen, for the king of
Denmark, for the Prince of Orange, for the States of Netherland, yea for the
Hanse men themselves to do in the like cause, but not in the like danger, and
extremity as this is.

Nay, if we thought it requisite to allege any thing out of the privileges
themselves, whereof they have so often, and so much complained, as being many
years withheld from them by injustice, we might offer the charter of Edward
the first king Anno Do. 1302.
of England, to be perused, granted in the third year of his reign: in which
charter we read these express words.

That all the aforesaid Merchants may at any time carry, or cause to be
carried into or out of the kingdom of An exception in the privilege.
England, their marchandizes, which they shall bring with them, or buy here or
otherwise come by, excepting to the countries of the manifest and notorious
enemies of this kingdom.

So that either they must deny, that the king of Spain having practiced such
cruel and horrible things (I would to God we might not say still practicing the
same) is an enemy to the Queen of England, or else by the words of the
aforesaid charter, they must confess that they are included within those
bounds and limits, which they may not pass, if they desire to be called and
accounted friends.

We may add to all this, that it is a thing able to be showed and proved in
the Courts of Records of the kings of England, that heretofore the wars
arising, and continuing betwixt the kings of England and of France, the goods
of these Hanse men were so subject here in England to arrestes, as now they
are, until they grew more wary, and had put in sufficient Sureties, that they
would not from that time transport any part of their goods into the provinces
and dominions of the French king.

By these reasons we take it plainly, and fully demonstrated, that her
Majesty's Captains by Sea, in the present arrest of the Hanse men's goods, have
committed no injustice against their pretended privileges, but rather that
they have utterly lost them for this pranke of theirs, in causing victualles
and martial furnitures to be conuayed to the countries of her manifest and
notorious enemies, directly contrary to the words specified in the
privileges. Although her Majesty is not purposed, notwithstanding all present
extremities, and this most vile and most barbarous part of the Hanse merchants,
to proceed in dealing with them, according to that severity of law which
justly she might execute, but is now thus far only resolved, to confiscate
all the corn and provisions of war: and as for the ships themselves, and
other sorts of merchandise in them, she is content to dismiss them for the
present.

But now touching the matter of their privileges, for which they keep such a
stir, in complaining to the Emperor, the states of the Empire, and al other
princes else, which nevertheless are clearly found to have been broken, and
forfeited in the time of Edward the sixth, that most noble and famous prince.
The Queen of England can sufficiently prove, that these Hanse men have
deserved no benefit or favor at her hands, even by the laws of the Empire it
self, if her Majesty thought the argument necessary to stand upon. It is a
very apparent thing, that her Majesty neglecting and not regarding the unjust
pretenses and forged suggestions, wherewith these Hanse men have charged her
among strangers, has yielded to them no less a benefit of free negotiation,
then to her own subjects, without any other restraint but this, that in liewe
The favor and liberality of the Queen of England, no less to the Haunse
men, then to the English themselves.
and memory of so singular a favor, they also on their parts should grant
the like freedom in their ports, and cities to her subjects, and marchantes:
and yet like unkind people, and without respect to this favor, they return
to their old byas, and cease not to attempt things dangerous to her Majesty,
and by the opinions of all princes in no case to be suffered.

These Hanse men were at the like controversy sometimes with the kings of
Denmark and Swethen, by reason of certain like privileges in the kingdoms of
Norway and Swethland, and the matter grew so hot that it brake out to an open
war: but with what fruit or gain to the state of the Haunse men? This was
the issue: they were forced to accept such conditions of privileges, not as
they challenged but as the foresaid kings thought just, and equal. By which
president they might learn if they were wise, not to accept only, but most
gladly and thankefully to accept the conditions offered by her Majesty, as
proceeding from such a kind of liberality, that may make them in this case
superiouts to all other Strangers, equal and alike with her own Subjects. But
if they continue in this their stubbernesse and ingratitude, let them take
heed least they pluck upon themselves that most just reward of their most
perverse behauiours, whereof they have felt the smart before this, both in
Swethlande, Norway and Liuonia also.

Seeing then these Hanse men have received from her Majesty many great
benefits, but no ill deserts at any time, she desires the Emperors Majesty,
and the rest of the Princes and States of the Empire, to give no credit to the
rumors spread abroad by them, or by the friends of the Romish Church, or by
such as are corrupted with Spanish pensions, men suborned of purpose to scatter
these false surmises, to the end that we being drawn to a mutual dislike and
hatred, they in the mean time may the sooner and the more easily bring us, and
the Religion which we profess (if it were possible) underfoot.

And further her Majesty entreats, that this heavy war entered into with
the Spaniard, for the mainteinance whereof no small but huge sums are of
necessity required, and wherein the quarrel is not in her own behalf only,
but for the safety of all the Kings, Kingdoms, and Dominions of Europe that
profess the sincerity of true Religion, and for that cause are as much hated
of this Spanish enemy and his Romish Confederats, as her Majesty is, may at
the least in this one thing seem more tolerable, and less difficult and
labourious to be continued, in not suffering the foresaid Hanse men, to
transport to the forenamed common enemy, out of their Kingdoms, Dukedomes,
Ports and Straights, any victuals or instruments of war, by ordeyning severe
corrections upon the rebellious and disobedient, and such as shall dare to
attempt the contrary, and to think of her Majesty and her actions, as of a
Prince most careful, both of the universal peace of Religion, and of the
safety of all and singular Princes her Confederats, and that they would by
joining their Counsels and forces in one, use all their power and ability to
extinguish the practices of the Romish priesthod, that so a sincere, The desire
of the Queens Majesty for a peace through Christendom.
holy, and largely extending peace, free from treacheries, may be entered,
concluded and established throughout all Christianity, to the honor of
Almighty God, and the tranquillity of all Kings, Princes and Estates, with all
increase of happiness. In which cogitation, her Majesty most sincerely and
constantly abides, and will not cease (God blessing her) to remove all
impediments for her part, to procure this good effect according to her
honorable desire.

But now having hitherto spoken of the open violence of the Spanish King, and
the Bishop of Rome, give us leave to use a few words also of another The
Bishop of Romes invasion of England by his Jesuits.
matter not less odious then the former, consisting in the subtlety of the
little fox: which is a thing so much the more diligently to be looked unto, by
how much the more close and secret it is, and a thing that creepes far
without many men's knowledge. It is that same privy legation and sending as it
were in corners of certain falsely termed Jesuits and Seminaries into this
kingdom, to withdraw the minds of the simple and ignorant people, from their
duetifull obedience to the Queens Majesty and the Realm. But as these kind
of men do spring of certain runnagates, and fugitives naturally borne
Subjects, who at home, either for poverty grow desperate, or by reason of
their vicious lives, could not longlie hid: so being now sent home again by
the Pope, cease not under the habit of their superstitious profession to run
from house to house, from Town to Town, stirring up the people by their
whisperings to rebellion, and scattering certain popish Bulls, made and sent
for that purpose, teaching the people out of them, under the pain of
excommunication, and of a curse, that there is no hope of salvation remaining
them, except they change their affections, and cast off their due obedience to
her Majesty.

Those of her Majesty's Subjects, which being taken with these Bulls, and called
in question for the same, have revealed their practices: and being moved with a
conscience of their offense, do return to a better mind, and do forsake
that filthy sink or dunghill of the company and opinions of Jesuits and
Seminaries: are pardoned of their former transgressions, and pass without
punishment: but as for those that are rooted in their wickedness, and remain
stifnecked in their offense, they being demanded, whether if an invasion of
the kingdom should be made by the Bishop of Rome or the Spanish King, they
would (as good Subjects ought to do) stand for the Queen or no, they answer
stoutly and proudly, that they are bound whenever it should seem good to the
said Bishop of Rome, to The manifest treason of the Jesuits, against the
Queens Majesty, and the kingdom of England.
make any such innasion of the Kingdom, and Dominions of her Majesty, to
assist and further the said invasion, by all the ways and means they can.

I ask now of you, what Prince soever you be, having the authority of a
Prince, what you would do with such monsters as these are, given over after
this sort to such diuelishnes? would you suffer the cloak of popish religion
and obedience, to exempt such traitors from the severity of Justice? would
you suffer them to live, that would you should not live? surely no Prince or
Monarche ought or may tolerate such monstrous creatures, except he purposes
voluntarily to neglect good laws, his people, kingdom, and life; and sin
grievously against God himself. And these are the monsters that are in England
committed to execution; howsoever the companions of their treasons, by their
infamous libels spread amongst the people cry out, and say, they suffer for
the cause of Religion only, and for their consciences.

Many of her subjects, and they no obscure men, but some of the Nobility, and
some others of the degree of knights are witnesses, that howsoever they stand
catholikely affected, yet as long as they contain themselves within the
compass of their duty, and obedience to her Majesty and the State, are
neither committed to prison, nor in any ill sort used, only for breaking the
laws of frequenting the Churches, are peradventure rated at some pecuniarie
fine.

The end and purpose why we speak and publish these things, is to let all
good Princes and Magistrates, and others desirous to know the truth of things,
understand how and by what means, as openly, privily, by force of arms, and
practices of treachery, the state of her Majesty and of her kingdom is
assaulted by the bishop of Rome, and the Spanish King: and therefore how
conveniently and necessarily her Majesty is drawn to resist this force and to
avoid these frauds, and with what injurious allegations the execution of laws
and justice, is as it were torn and rent in pieces, not only by malicious
imprinted Libels, but also by painted tables and pictures, signifying I know
not what monstrous things, resemblances of some barbarous cruelty, as they
falsely calumniate and exclaim, to be used against the foresaid Jesuits, and
Seminary Priests, that is to say, against men guilty of high and horrible
treason.

But as for her Majesty, she desires to stand as a person void of all truth
and credit with good Princes, if she ever punished any of these men with any
strange or new kind of torment, then is appointed by the prescript of the
ancient laws of this Realm provided against such persons, as shall be found
and convicted for Rebels and Traitors.

FINIS.

