A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF OUR TIMES, UNDER THE BORROWED Names OF LISANDER
AND CALISTA.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for G. Lathum, at the Bishops head in Paul's
Churchyard.

Anno Domini ^635.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND NOBLY DISPOSED. Gentlewomen, Mistress FRANCIS FORTESCU,
wife unto Ma. JOHN FORTESCU: And Mistress ELIZABETH DUNCOMB, wife unto Master
WILLIAM DUNCOMB of Badlesden.
My most Honored,
THis French Knight and his Lady being importuned, contrary to their design,
and the fashion of this time (which is almost all French) to appear to public
view in this their English habit; and knowing how subject strangers are to
malignant humors (a disposition grown so common, that like a contagious
disease, it has infected almost the whole world) they have made humbly bold to
expose themselves abroad under your auspicious and candide names, hoping they
may be more free from censure, and more boldly tell their Loves, their Fears,
their Dangers, their Imprisonments, their Jealousies, and their Joys. They
have in their native country served under the protection of a great King, where
the gentleness of their spirits had a general approbation; and now their hope
(let it not be accounted presumption) is, that you, according to your
accustomed noble goodness, will not refuse it unto them here, where they are
poor strangers, at the least that they may (resting by you) await your
leisure, when, by their conversation, they may endeavor to rob away
tediousness though but from one hour, to which the greatest mortals are at
sometime subject. This is their highest ambition; and my only end (not capable
of greater expression) is to witness my affection to your services, from
intending whereof only death shall divide

Your most humble and most devoted servant, W.D.

A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE FIRST BOOK.
UNder the reign of our great HENRY, the valorous father of our invincible
Monarch, there lived in France a young Lord, whose Heroic Nobleness was more
recommended through the glory of his Virtue, than by the antiquity of his Race:
He was called Cleander; rich both in the goods of Fortune and Nature; being no
less beloved for his Beauty, than feared for his Valor. If he were valiant,
he was also more wise; and if he were wise, he was also more happy. But his
chiefest happiness was in his marriage: for in his first youth his merits had
gained him a wife, one of the fairest that France ever brought forth. The East
had never so many Pearls as she had Beauties, and the morning did blush to
behold any thing fairer; she was called Calista: neither was there any thing
wanting but an apt name to express her perfections. With this woman did
Cleander pass the sweetest life that ever fell into man's imagination; enjoying
a happiness which cannot be comprehended but by minds capable of the glory
of such thoughts. The Sun did never look upon the earth, but he beheld these
two Lovers embracing; Neither did night ever kindle so many fires in Heaven, as
they felt within their souls. Their desires were not like unto those which
were drowned in their pleasures; but contrariwise, their loves were sharpened by
enjoying: for the more they did possess that which they did desire, the more
they did desire that which they did possess.

But dark night followed this bright day, and this cleerenesse was clouded;
yea, even whilst Cleander made the earth envious, and the heavens jealous of
the favors he received from his Mistress: There was another Knight called
Lisander, who in courtesy and valor gave place to none of his years, who had
beheld Calista's excellent beauty; with the lightning whereof he was so
amazed, that he clean lost the remembrance of himself. He was now no more
that Lisander, whose free and warlike mind was wont to apprehend no disturbance
but ambition; for in stead of breathing forth an honorable desire of glory,
he was so possessed with the Idea of this perfection, that it was not possible
for him to receive any other thought; nay, hardly could he find a place in
all his mind for himself. This new guest thus lodged in Lisanders heart,
counseled him to see his Lady. Now this Knight was a most absolute Gentleman,
and a most acceptable companion, especially among Ladies, of a sweet and
courteous conversation, full of attraction, and recommended with so many
excellent parts, as well of body as of mind, that it seemed Love had stolen
into this man, of purpose (if it were possible) to ruin Calista's chastity:
for there was appearance, that if she could love any thing, it must needs be
him, who loved nothing but her; and that if she had not a heart of stone, she
must needs be apprehensive of his torment. But for as much as he could not
well acquaint himself with this woman without accosting the husband, he first
sought Cleanders friendship; who held it for an honor, and prevented his suit,
recompencing Lisanders feigned, with true affection. He seldom spoke but of
him, nor ever made any good relation if Lisander were not the subject thereof.
Calista her self, who saw not but by her husbands eyes, nor judged but by his
knowledge, could not choose but honor that, which she saw Cleander loved; she
being otherwise by Lisander adored with so much respect, that she should have
wanted humanity, if she had been with out discerning thereof.

Behold here a fair beginning for our Lover; but this is nothing without
perseverance: His care was now to make known unto her the great passion which
he suffered for her, and to let her know it in such a fashion, that Cleander
might not perceive it. He was clear sighted, like a Linx; and although he
were not jealous, yet he was a husband, and unto a wife, whose admirable beauty
did deserve to be preserved: If he once did discern of this love, all was
lost, there could be no more friendship nor acquaintance; and otherwise to
resolve to dye in a silent grief, so near unto his remedy, hiding his death
from her who was the cause thereof, he could never consent thereto. And indeed
it is better never to see that which one loves, than seeing it, not to dare to
express ones love; for the object stirs up the desire: Neither is there any
evil in the world like unto the presence of a forbidden good. Which the Poets
the better to express, did not represent Tantalus his thirst in a Desert void
of waters, but in the middle of waters, not being able to drink. To prevent
then the husbands distrust, and to keep suspicion from entering into his mind,
he ruled his actions, his words and his looks in such sort, that in his sight
he never came near unto the wife, he never spoke unto her, nor ever looked
upon her, but as upon a thing indifferent: neither ^oo free, nor too reserved;
fearing lest if he were too much composed, or not enough, he might discover
his design in the guiding thereof. He held therefore a mean between both*
with that dexterity, that there was no gesture nor motion of his, which did not
rather seem natural than affected. In the mean time, to make that known
unto one, which he would have invisible unto the other; he every day made
matches with Cleander, and other Knights, of Tiltings and other noble
Exercises: where the two friends were always of a side, and always
vanquishers. In the morning they were together at the Church, after dinner
together in their houses, after supper in their gardens, and always Calista is
the star which lightneth the place. Time passing in this manner, Lisander
consumes, occasion of speaking unto his love being not offered: It is true,
that every day he spoke unto her, but not of love, nor of any thing relishing
thereof; so that in every man's eye he languishingly decayed, of an unknown
passion, in the midst of all the contentments which could be imagined. And
although he intended to dissemble his evil, covering his true grief with
feigned joy, yet did the dying color of his face discover (yea, even unto
those of small knowledge) that there was some passion in him, which with much
grief lay at his heart. Cleander is the only man who does not perceive it,
believing that he should wrong his friend in thinking so. He discerned
plainly how the lively flowers of his face did daily wither, but he thinks
that it proceeded from accident, and would have imagined that it sprung from
any other than from the true cause. They were then at the Court, in the great
city of Paris, which so proudly raises her head above all the Cities, almost
of the world, when as Cleander said, that Lisanders indisposition proceeded
from the unwholesome air of the City; wherefore he was resolved to lead him
into the country. Now he had a house, a days journey from Paris, built in a
Lake, within the middle of a great Park called Beauplain: the situation
whereof being pleasant beyond expressing, would have rejoiced sorrow it self.
Thither did he invite Lisander, together with three or four friends, and
Calista also, without whom the feast was of no value, went along with them.

It was then in the Spring, when the earth, more beautiful than at any other
time of the year, renews her countenance, and decketh herself in her
richest apparel. There Cleander and Calista, continuing unto Lisander their
acustomed loving entertainment, made trial, that the country recreations which
they gave him, together with all other honest delights, were no better remedies
for his languishing, than the pleasures of the city. The exercise of Hunting,
which was ordinary with them, could not divert his fantasy: variety of
company, wherewith he was every day visited, did but increase his evil, and
gave him occasion to steal out of their companies, to entertain himself
alone with his thoughts, which he durst not communicate to any body living. One
day, they having made a match to hunt an outlying Stagge, Calista having stayed
at home with a young brother of Cleanders, called Berontus, after some time
walked out with her brother in law to see their return from the hunting: and
as she was at the side of a wood in the middle of the Park, so thick, that
solitariness perpetually resides there, in the shadow of an impenetrable
leafinesse, she heard a voice, which, in bewailing manner, proceeded from the
bottom of this wood. In the beginning she could not understand the complaint,
but going somewhat nearer with Berontus, who only conducted her, she heard
these words. Poor Lysander, must thou consume in these woods the miserable
remainder of thy youth, and unprofitably lose thy life, both in absence, and
unknown unto her who is the cause thereof? Must thou needs dye obscurely,
without having the contentment to let her see in thy death, the sacrifice which
thou offerest unto her of thy life? O fair Calista, is it possible that such a
divinity as yours, should be ignorant of those extreme affections which you
stir in me, and have no feeling of those flames which you so lively kindle in
my soul! Can it be that a cause so fair should be ignorant of so necessary an
effect as my love? O God, suffer not this want of knowledge in her, to be a
punishment unto me, for my ingratitude unto Cleander. O Lisander, thou do
violate, together with the law of Hospitality, the most perfect friendship in
the world: Neither can thou hope for pardon in any respect but only in this,
that thou art forced by a beauty which bends every thing under the violence
of its sweetness, and whose excellency not alone lesseneth thy fault, but
makes thee worthy of pardon, and also of merit. By these words they knew not
only the subject of this complaint, which was love: but also the person that
made it, who was Lisander; and her for whom it was made, who was Calista. It is
not to be spoken, who was more abashed of Calista or Berontus: for this passion
was equally unknown to them both. But Calista was most ashamed and most
grieved, although her innocence was sufficiently witnessed by this complaint.
And indeed it was enough to have troubled a very able and wise woman; for she
did not know, whether she ought to entreat her brother in law to hold his
peace, or tell her husband, or whether she were best to hide or discover that,
which might be told by his brother, and where there was no less danger to
conceal it, than scandal to declare it: Nevertheless dissembling her
thought, she went on, as if she had not heard any word of this discourse.
Berontus, who was none of Lisanders bestfriends, jealous of the overmuch love
which his brother did bear him, had a fair occasion to divide them: but he,
considering that he should wrong his sister, and not willing to imbroile his
brothers heart with so miserable a passion as Jealousy, nor to ruin the
affection which he ought unto his wife, in destroying that which he unduly bare
unto Lisander; resolved in himself to say nothing: But all these
considerations were apart, and in silence, without communicating any word one
unto the other. In the end Berontus, seeing that Calista returned without
saying a word, spoke unto her in this manner: I do not wonder, Sister, at
Lisanders languishing, but I rather wonder at your cruelty, who so ungratefully
suffer a Knight of his merit to dye, without taking any care or knowledge of
the wounds which your beauty gives him. Brother, said Calista, you show as
much folly in entertaining me thus with his evil, as he does in complaining,
if it be true that he has forgotten himself so much; for I am unwilling to
hear, either your discourse, or his complaint. But because we may have no more
cause of suspicion thereof, and that the house may be as well free from
suspicion as from crime, I do conjure you to remove away the cause, and to
find some means so to drive him away, that I may have no more cause to
complain of the good which (you say) he wishes unto me. Sister, said
Berontus, it is a business wherein I cannot serve you to my desire, because if
he should complain unto my Brother, and he be willing to know the occasion, I
must be constrained to utter that which were no way fit for him to know: but if
you think well to write a Letter, such as your discretion can devise, I will
cause it to fall into his hands, as it were by chance, and by this means I
believe, that honoring you as he does, he will rather willingly banish
himself from your presence, than trouble the peace both of your house and
mind. Calista approved of the advice, and in this resolution (without being
discovered by Lisander) they went to the house, whither also Cleander instantly
returned with a fat Stagge, accompanied with those who had hunted with him.
Shortly after came Lisander, who did not know that his complaints had sounded
so near unto his Mistresses ears, and less did he think that Berontus had
heard them. They supped joyfully together, Lisander and Calista discreetly
dissembling the diverse thoughts wherewith their minds were troubled; and when
bedtime came, Cleander, Berontus, and almost all the company, brought Lisander
unto his chamber, where, after some few words of courtesy, they left him alone
with his servants. He, going to the cupboord to take some of his night-cloaths,
found upon his Cap a Letter to this purpose.

CALISTA'S Letter to LISANDER.
HEaven, which many times makes small and unprofible things bring hidden
matters to light, and draws light from darkness, has made use of the shady
wood to discover thee, and by their silence to accuse thee, and by their
solitariness to convince thee of the vilest and basest thought that ever the
heart of a Knight was capeable of: Thou have attempted Lisander (with more
ingratitude than can be imagined) against the honor of thy friend Cleander,
and against the chastity of his wife; either of which, were thy attempt come to
their knowledge, could not draw a punishment upon thee less than thy life: but
heaven more careful of thy preservation than thou thy self, has kept it from
their knowledge, that thou might have leisure to repent, and to retire thy
self from a place, where the crime which thou committedst can give thee no
assurance.


If Calista were surprised with Lisanders complaint, he was much more
astonished at Calista's Letter, which Berontus (in going last out of the
chamber) had privily let fall upon the table. He could not imagine who had
written, or who had brought it: well he knew, that the complaints which had
escaped from him in the wood, were heard, and from thence came the knowledge of
his most secret thoughts. O what news were these to bring rest unto a man
oppressed with amorous passions! All night he did nothing but muse who should
give him this advice: That it was Cleander, there was no appearance, because
he had been all day a hunting, and after his return he did not leave his
company; neither was it likely that he would have proceeded in this manner. He
could not also imagine that it was Calista, because that he did not know that
she had walked abroad with Berontus. Besides, the Letter expressly said, that
neither she nor Cleander knew of it: And that it should be Berontus, he had
already found that he did not love him; neither did he think, if this young
man had had such an occasion against him, that he would have used it so
discreetly. To be short, he knew not to whom to return answer: nevertheless
he resolved upon his departure, and upon the means whereby he might make
Cleander like well of it, as also to speak particularly to Calista. The day
appearing, he quickly dispatched one of his Footmen to Fountain Bleau (where
the King then was) commanding him to carry some Letters, which he had written
unto his friends, and with all speed to bring him answer. The footman departed
with all diligence, and returned the next day with Letters from his friends;
who sent him word, that he must make speed unto the Court, out of some
important reasons, which they could not write. During the absence of his man,
he endeavored by all means to accost Calista; which he could not effect
possibly: for she prevented him with so much care, and with such premeditated
avoydings, that he judged she had knowledge of his design, and that from
thence came the Letter which had given him so much pain, seeing that before
nothing was more easy than his access unto her. When his man was returned
from the Court, he went unto Cleander, who was then alone in his chamber with
his wife; and having communicated his letters unto him, he entreated him not to
take it amiss, if he did deprive himself of the happiness which he enjoyed
in his company, for a small time, which he did assure him, should be as little
a while as he could, yet would it nevertheless seem long unto him, in regard
of the contentment and honor which he received in his so dear conversation.
Cleander was very sorry that he must lose the presence of his friend, and
said unto him; Yet shall it not be so hastily, but that I will importune you to
give this day unto me; for I have some business at the Court, which I will
communicate unto you, if you be not pressed with your own. Now, as we said
Cleander had many other friends with him, whom (according to his courtesy)
willing to entertain, he left Calista alone in the chamber with Lisander, as if
he had contributed unto his desires. Lisander seeing himself alone with her,
said, that he had communicated news unto Cleander, which he had received from
the Court; but he had others from the dearest person in the world, which he
could not utter but unto her alone, entreating her to see them in this little
Letter, whose shortness was such, that she could not have the leisure to be
troubled with the reading. And in saying this he presented her the Letter,
which she her self had written. Calista knowing it, and not being able to keep
her countenance (inflamed with indignation and shame) from confessing that she
had done it, answered him in this manner: Silence or flight were much
profitabler for you Lisander, than either your discourse or stay here. Content
your self that I have not acquainted Cleander with the wrong which you procure
both unto him and unto me, and that such a one knows it, as does only
forbear to tell him, because he would not hazard my honor, with the loss
of your life. Madam, answered Lisander, then he cannot but say, that I love
Cleander with as perfect an affection as he does me, and that I do adore you
with as much respect and devotion as can be yielded unto Divinity it self;
which is far from endeavoring to wrong either the one or the other. It is
true Madam, that if the advantage which the affections of love have over those
of friendship, and the privilege of your beauty (which is as impossible to be
beheld without being beloved, as it is to come near the fire without feeling
the heat thereof) have made me dare to discover it unto trees in the depth of
the Forest; the violence of my love must be accused, which has constrained
me, and your excellent beauty from whence it has sprung: And let the worst be,
Madam, I cannot be accused for any thing, but for loving the most lovely
creature in the world. And if this be the crime which you speak of, I confess
not alone that I have committed it, but, which is more, that I cannot repent me
of it. As for my life, Madam, with the loss whereof you threaten me; as I
will not keep it but for your service, so I cannot better lose it than for
your love. I would (if it pleased God) that I had many, and that nothing let
but their loss, to witness my affection: But seeing that you are interest,
and that I cannot hazard it, but with your reputation, and in depriving you of
the most faithful slave that ever you captivated; I had rather bar my self
from the Sovereign bliss of my soul, than take from you the least
contentment. And for this cause, Madam, I am resolved not to depart from your
service for ever, but for some time from your presence, to the end, that
adoring you without offending you, I may witness no less affection than
obedience, and that both of them may one day invite your pity, to call back a
poor Exile, who has banished himself from the dearest abode that ever he
had, to obey you.

These words, spoken with no less love than grace, together with the
inevitable charms of Lisanders conversation, which would have enchanted even
rocks, touched the secret places of Calista's affection, which were not
marble, nor of any insensible matter, yet such, as with a chaste resolution
she beatbacke all those shafts, which Love, hid in Lisanders eyes, did
continually shoot at her heart: wherefore she thus answered. Lisander, you
must know Calista, and believe, that if she could give her self unto any one,
it should be unto you; but she cannot do but what she ought: and if you do
love her truly, as you do profess, you ought not to hope nor desire any
thing, but the will with which she does acknowledge always the affection
which you bear her; and were not her honor interest, she would hold your
presence as dear as your merit does oblige her: But for this time I counsel
you to follow the resolution of departing, which you have already taken,
because that Berontus, walking with me when we heard your complaint, and having
learned more than I would that he knew, may do you some evil offices to
Cleander. And although he should say nothing, yet we know not what he may
think: he is jealous enough of the love which his brother bears you, and may
grow as jealous of me, although I do not think I shall give him cause.
Hereafter be more discreet in your complaints, and think, that though woods
cannot speak, yet they are not without their Echoes, which reside in their
centers, and do always report (at the least the last word) what they hear.
Upon the uttering of these last words, Cleander and Berontus came into the
chamber, which not only interrupted their discourse, but also put both of them
in great doubt that Berontus had conferred with his brother about that whereof
they were speaking: but this disquiet lasted not long, because that Cleander
taking Lisander apart, and discoursing to him his business at Court, let him
presently know, that he knew nothing of theirs; and Berontus (in the mean
time) speaking with Calista, she told him what operation the scroule had, which
was let fall into Lisanders hands, which occasioned the leave he had taken of
Cleander and of her self, although under a pretext of Letters which were come
unto him from Fountain Bleau: concealing nevertheless from Berontus that
Lisander had spoken unto her of it, or made any demonstration that he knew or
doubted that she had written it.

This done, they went to dinner, and afterward Lisander got to Horse; having
first kindly embraced Cleander and Berontus, and more lovingly kissed the fair
Calista, who could not see him depart without sorrow, although small in respect
of that which he carried with him. All the company remained sad for his
departure, except Berontus, who was not otherwise an enemy of his virtue, but
envious: for he being a brave Gentleman, and hardy as the sword, thought he
lost of his luster, when he was compared to Lisanders incomparable valor; who
riding as fast as he could spur, without staying all the rest of the day,
came upon the beginning of the evening into the entrance of the Forest of
Fountain Bleau. The knowledge which (especially in France) is so frequent of
this royal house (the proudest I think, in the world) shall keep me from
beautifying this my Story with the description thereof, although it were one of
the most glorious ornaments wherewith I could enrich it. It shall suffice only
to say, that our Kings have heretofore built it for the pleasure of hunting, in
the middle of the Launds and Forests, from whence it was called the Deserts of
Fountain Bleau. Lisander then entering into this Forest, only with one man on
horseback, who waited upon him in his chamber, and two Footmen which ran by
him, had not ridden a hundred paces, when he was told by the repor^ of seven or
eight Harquebushes, and Pistoll-shot, and the cries of many persons, that there
was fighting near him. He presently spurred his lusty Horse that he had under
him, which carried him suddenly into the middle of ten or twelve Thieves, who
were murdering of a brave Gentleman, having laid two of his men upon the
ground, and scattered three or four others, who had accompanied him: He
nevertheless defended himself valiantly with his Sword, having already
discharged his Pistol upon one of the Thieves, wherewith he lay biting the
ground with the Gentleman's two men. Lisander seeing how bravely this Gentleman
acquitted himself, moved with his own natural courage, let fly his Pistol,
and almost in an instant thrust himself amongst the rout with his sword and
his Horse, every one of which had his effect; the Pistol laid one along, with
his Horse he overthrew a second, and with his sword he killed a third, and all
in so short a space, that one must have had a quick discerning, who had not
judged it to be one action: His Sword he had not long used, before the ground
was strawed with blood, and dismembered parts of the Robbers, who were sooner
killed and vanquished than they could almost think that any succor was comn
unto the Gentleman; who also saw himself delivered, before he could think of
help. Lisander after this bloody execution coming near unto him, saw that
he was a reverent old man, having his head and beard all white; of whom he
demanded how he did after his combat? Well, answered he, I thank God, and your
good help, unto whom I am redueable for my life: but I am grieved for my men,
who are either all lost or dead. For those which are dead (answered Lisander)
there is no calling of them again, but for the rest, they cannot be lost so
near the Court, whither I think you are going. It is true, said the old
Gentleman, that I am going thither, but not to make any stay; for it is long
since my age and the contentment of a free life, which I have accustomed my
self unto at home, have exempted me from that honorable servitude. But
leaving this discourse unto another time, I would feign see if among those
which lie for dead, there is none of mine yet alive: Saying this, he alighted,
and Lisander also, whose men by this time were comn unto them, and eased them
of this labor. They looking amongst them who lay upon the ground, found two of
the old man's servants still breathing, although wounded in many parts of their
bodies, as well with shot as with swords: They called the other with loud
cries, which sounding through the Forest, helped by the silence of the night,
and solitariness of the place, came unto their ears; who hearing themselves
called by their names, and by their Master whom they thought dead, returned to
the place where they had left him. Lisander no less content with the good
service which he had done unto this Knight, than he himself was joyful for
the recovery of his servants; the two first which were found wounded among the
dead, were Gentlemen (as such had rather dye at their Masters feet, than save
their lives by shameful flying) whom he caused to be lifted upon their horses,
setting the others behind to hold them up, and so they proceeded in their
journey toward Fountain Bleau. By the way, which was a good league and more,
Lisander entreated this Knight to pardon his curiosity, if it did stretch so
far, as to desire to know the cause of this accident; at least, if this his
request might not seem too much importunity. The old man, looking Lisander
steadfastly in the face, as much as the darkness of the night would give him
leave, and thinking him the bravest and best fashioned Gentleman that ever be
beheld, answered him in this manner: Not alone of this accident, whereof I
cannot tell you the cause, but also of all my life (which you have saved,
obliging me thereby to hold it, next after God, of your Sword) I will give you
such an account, that although I cannot satisfy my obligation, I will satisfy
(at least) your curiosity.

My country is Normandy, my house called Bellayre, I am named Dorilas, I have
spent the most part of my life in the war^es, and few memorable actions have
been in my time in Christendom, wherein I have not had the honor to be. I
followed the fortune of Monsier du Main, in that famous battle of Lepantho,
where Don John of Austrige, and the Venetians made the Eastern Sea look red with the Turkish blood. A long time after I was with old Monsier de Guise, in
that fearful battle of Anneau, when with a handful of Volentiers he
defeated many thousands of Reisters, which were come from Roane unto the banks
of Loiere. Afterward I was with the late Monsier de Mercure, when he made
that great and never-enough celebrated retraict of Cavise, where he retired
many leagues in Hungary before a hundred thousand horse, with an army of
fifteen thousand men. Finally, willing to retire my self, I married a wife in
mine own country, whole name is Otranta, who has borne unto me a son, whos^
name is Liddian, and a daughter who is called Calista, and not long since
married to a Knight of this country called Cleander. It is now eight days
since I departed from my house and my wife, out of a desire which I had to see
my children; one of whom I have seen but once since his coming out of Italy:
Now he follows the King; and the other lives about a days journey hence, with
the Knight her husband, whom even now I named. This afternoon I departed from
Paris, where I have stayed these three days, and as I came from thence on this
side of Aussone, the thieves set upon me, they having followed me until I came
into this wood, where I had met with my grave, if you had not happily succored
me. Thus briefly you have what I can say of my fortune, and my life. But gentle
Knight (if it please you) I pray tell me your name, that I may know unto whom
I may give thanks for my preservation; for it is unreasonable that I should
not know him, unto whom of all men in the world I am most obliged; nor that you
should refuse this courtesy unto him, unto whom you have not refused to expose
your life for the safety of his. Sir, answered Lisander, I am a poor Soldier,
so little known in the world, that though I should tell you my name, you would
never the better know my person: yet thus much I will say, that I am come out
of those parts, whither you are going, and do know by good intelligence, that
those whom you go to see, are in good health: And I have heard so much good of
their merits and virtues, that I account the small service which I have done
you, exceeding well employed, although the only consideration and fame which I
have heard published of your valor (whereof you have made large proof in this
encounter) does oblige me to render you more signal offices, which, with
time, I hope to perform: And then, Sir, I will not only declare unto you my
being, but I will let you see that I am in no less degree of love unto you,
than one of your children.

By this means Lisander did think that he should have avoided the telling of
his name unto good Dorilas, who did entreat him with a passion so great, as the
refusal of so just a demand did augment his desire. But one of his footmen (in
the mean time) holding speech with one of Dorilasses, and not knowing that his
Master had a design to hide his name, did nakedly tell, without thinking,
whatsoever his Master did endeavor to dissemble: yet because they did not
understand what their Masters said, nor their Masters what they said, it came
not at this time to the old man's knowledge. Shortly after they came unto
Fountain Bleau; but it was late, and the Court being very great, they could
get but two chambers in one house, which Lisander left unto Dorilas and unto
his people, going himself with his servants unto a friends lodging of his, to
Dorilas his great grief, who did much desire that they might accommodate
themselves in one lodging. Let us leave him among his wounded servants, whom he
causes to be dressed with great diligence, and no less danger of their
lives: and return we unto Lisander, who retiring of himself (as we have
said) to one of his friends called Clarangeus, he was received with all loving
entertainment. At supper he told the adventure which had happened to him in the
wood, the encounter which Dorilas had with the thieves, the succor which he
gave him; in brief, the relation which Dorilas had made of his fortune. And
when he named Lidian, Clarangeus demanded if he knew him. I have never seen
him, said Lisander, but I have heard that he is one of the bravest Gentlemen in
the world. One of the bravest you shall see, said Clarangeus, and one of the
gentlest: we have both done our exercise in Benjamins School, whom you know
to be one of the vertuousest Gentlemen living of his condition. After that, we
traveled together into Italy, and there have always lived familiarly
together: And since our return, I never met with any man who has more obliged
me to make account of his friendship; but I think when things are come to
their perfection, they cannot continue, returning unto the estate wherein they
were at first. I speak this, because of late we have not lived as we were
wont, and all for the love of a person, who in my opinion gives neither of us
thanks; and I do believe, that if one of us do not shortly alter his course,
we shall not seek one another long. I should be sorry it should so happen,
said Lisander, for the good which I wish unto you, and in respect of what I
have heard of him; and it were better that you should yield your difference to
your first friendship, rather than let it pass any further. This cannot be,
said Clarangeus, because we both look upon one object; neither are we men to
yield that whereunto we have a desire. If he had been embarked before me,
my love should have given place unto his friendship; but being first in time,
and not less in merit, I cannot do it in affection. I told him yesterday what
I thought, before my Mistress: neither do I know what he thought, but I have
seen the time when he would have understood me. Now this Clarangeus was one
of the most accomplished Gentlemen of the Court, and Lidian and he were both
suitors unto one Lady, whose fair perfections we will hide under the name of
Olinda, and about this occasion had some little quarrel that very day; whereat
Lisander was much grieved, seeing himself comn just upon the debate of two
friends, the bloody laws whereof, in the French honor, obliged him to serve
the one or the other of them. And indeed the next morning early, hardly were
they awaked, when a Gentleman, knocking at their lodging door, asked to speak
with Clarangeus, who (being called up into an outer chamber, and seeing him
making of himself ready) told him that he was come from Lidian, who desired to
see him in the fields with his sword; which well he could not tell him
yesterday, because he was not willing to offend the respect of a person, whom
he adored above all creatures* And that having taken upon him this charge, he
had obliged him to receive him into his company, to serve him to some other
purpose than as a messenger; wherefore he would entreat that he would make
choice of such a friend, who might serve him in the quality wherein he served
Lidian. Clarangeus, without stay* trouble, or alteration, answered in this
manner; You cannot be more welcome: I am ready to content your friend in the
field, as I would have done in his house, if he had sent me word. For a
Second, I have none, neither will I have any (if it please you) for I know you
to be so brave and so honest a Gentleman, that I will go among all my enemies
upon your word. Sir, said Alcidon, who was the bringer of to challenge, and a
very valiant Gentleman, you answer as well becomes you, and as I my self
should do if I were in your place; but you know that sometimes custom is of
more force than duty, and that I should be blamed to bring you two to fight,
and in the mean time I my self have mine arms in a scarf. I know that
Seconds are (...) their friends equally set together, and not to fight
themselves; but use carries it against reason, we being neither Marshals of
France, nor old enough to establish new laws: the disease must have its
course, and particular reason must give place to general fashion; wherefore I
once again entreat you to find a friend, or else suffer me to say, you do
not embrace all the means you have to satisfy me. Lisander, who having heard
one ask to speak with Clarangeus so rarely, quickly made himself ready,
thinking, by the discourse which he held of Lidian over night at supper, that
this messenger came from him; and having heard the dispute between Alcidon and
Clarangeus about a Second, entered into the chamber unto them, and bidding them
good morrow, asked them what difference there was between them, and of he
might not end it. Sir, answered Clarangeus, this Gentlemen (...) upon a
promise, which I made unto him the other day, that I should show him a fair
Lady, and I fear she is not yet stirring. That may very well be, answered
Lisander; but may not I also see her? No sir, said Clarangeus* Kings and Lovers
will have no companions. Sir, said Alcidon unto Lisander, you are not a man to
be refused, if Clarangeus will believe me, and if you are willing, it shall
be your fault if she be not showed you. There shall be no fault in me,
answered Lisander, and to witness unto you that I have a desire thereunto, I
do now tell you I do already know your message, and that if Clarangeus
refuses the offer which you make in the behalf of your friend, I will accept
of it between you and me. Alcidon answered, then are we as I would desire;
and now I hope Clarangeus cannot refuse to give Lidian contentment, seeing that
with his will or without it, we shall try it together. Well, answered
Clarangeus, let me then see Lidian, and do you accommodate your self (to
your desire) with Lisander, although there is no reason, that having no
quarrel one with another, you should so rashly precipitate your selves upon
your own arms. Lisander did never undertake a quarrel with more grief; not
that he did doubt Alcidon, or that he was not willing to serve Clarangeus; but
he did consider the displeasure which he should do unto Dorilas, whom he had
so freshly obliged; unto Cleander, who loved him so dearly, and, which was more
than the rest, unto Calista, in assisting a man against her brother: but the
French passion (which in this respect is beastly, and constrains those who
do detest this pernicious custom, to observe it, and to embrace a false
honor in stead of a true) made him pass over all those considerations. Thus
went they toward their combat: Alcidon brings them into a meadow, where Lidian
stayed for them upon a good horse, with a sword by his side: there, having all
alighted, and put themselves into their shirts, Alcidon and Lisander left
Lidian with Clarangeus, and went apart about a hundred paces, where being ready
prepared, they ran one at the other, and at the first encounter were both
wounded; Lisander gave him a very great wound in his thigh, which he ran
through, and he himself was wounded in the left arm, so that the one lost the
use of his thigh, and the other of his arm: But Alcidon fell down, unto whom
Lisander said, We fight but for our friends, and for our honor, without any
particular occasion of hatred to each other, wherefore you having some of my
blood, suffer me, I pray, though unwillingly, to carry away this of yours, and
that remaining your friend, I may go separate those whom a small occasion has
made enemies. This being said, without staying for answer, he ran unto Lidian
and Clarangeus, whose combat had proceeded in this manner; Lidian had made a
thrust unto Clarangeus, which lighted upon his Rapier, and going between the
bars of the hilts, wounded him in his right hand, but he himself was wounded
in the left hand, and his Sword, engaged in the hilts of his adversaris, broke
in the middle: Then seeing Lisander coming toward him with his sword naked
and bloody, and not seeing Alcidon, he did verily think that he had killed
him, and came now to help his friend; wherefore seeing two such enemies upon
his hands at once, and himself without a sword (for whom two had been too
little) that he was in extremity, it may easily be imagined: yet dissembling
his thought, and willing to cover his pressing and manifest danger, as one who
had rather lose a thousand lives, than one title of honor; he cast which way
he might revenge his death, which he did believe to be inevitable, when
Lisander threw himself between their weapons, and before Clarangeus could
have liberty to speak one word, he cried unto them, Sirs, you are both noble,
both bloody, and both friends, without having any advantage one of the other,
or if there be any, it is rather due unto fortune than valor, which is equal
between you; I conjure you to give your difference (which is but small) unto
your ancient friendship which was so great, and unto this blood, which Alcidon
and I have shed for your pleasure. How, said Clarangeus? and shall not Lidian
confess himself vanquished, being alone, and without a sword, against us two?
Never vanquished though killed, answered Lidian; for although you kill me, yet
I will never want courage to dye, though I want arms to defend my self. Live
then invincible, said Clarangeus, for it shall never be said that I triumph
over you rather by fortune than virtue. Ah, said Lidian, now thou have
vanquished me, in saying I should remain invincible, my life being in thy hand,
which thou have generously spared, when I would not have begged it to have
redeemed it from death. In saying this, he flung away the rest of his sword,
and ran to embrace sometimes Clarangeus, and sometimes Lisander (having tears
in their eyes out of tender joy, principally Clarangeus, who was more
particularly touched with his former affection) equally thanking them for their
courtesy. In the mean time Lisander lost much blood, and Alcidon more,
whereby he was not able to rise; wherefore all three went unto the place where
he fell, and found him more afflicted with grief that he could not follow
Lisander, than with his wound; but when he knew the happy success of their
combat, his contentment made him forget the greater part of his grief.

Now this challenge could not be carried so secretly, but Olinda, who was the
cause of it, knew also the effect; by whose fearful, yet loving mind, it was
quickly divulged through the Court, and many of the chief Courtiers were on
horseback to hinder the combat between such noble Gentlemen: but inasmuch
as no man knew the place which was chosen, they so long rode up and down the
fields to seek them, that the blows were all past, and they had called their
people, who were binding of their wounds to stay the blood, when they came in
unto them: The first who found them were of Alcidons friends, who caused him to
be laid upon a hand-litter, and carried unto Fountain Bleau. Lidian having
taken his leave of him, and left in charge with them, he accompanied Lisander
and Clarangeus to the outermost part of the Launds, and there again renewing
the oath of his former friendship, and contracting a new affection with
Lisander, he took leave of them, who rid toward Paris, he himself
directing his course to Beauplaine, to see his brother Cleander, and his fair
sister Calista.

The End of the first Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF OUR TIMES. THE SECOND BOOK.
WHilst Lidian endeavored by hard riding to reach Beauplaine, the news of his
combat spread through all the Court, so that Dorilas his father waking in the
morning, and sending one of his men to the Castle to enquire for his son,
about eight of the clock he understood by him, that his son was gone very
early to fight, that there were three more in the company, and that all the
Court was on horseback to part them: which news did so much trouble him,
that he was likely to strike him who told it; yet speedily resolving, he got
to his horse, and galloping after those which were gone before, it was not long
ere he met with those who carried Alcidon, from whom he learnt the success of
the combat, and the retreat of the Combatants. Whereupon the good old man
returning to Fountain Bleau, recommended the care of his wounded Servants to
the Surgeon, and instantly setting his foot in the stirrup, in great haste rode
unto Beauplaine; and as there is no better spur, or rather no better wings than
those of love, so the affection which he bare his son, carried him so
nimbly, that Lidian was in Cleanders arms embracing, when Dorilas came, so
that it seemed they came together. It is not to be told whether Calista were
more glad, or Lidian more surprised at the unexpected coming of their father.

After that Dorilas had embraced Cleander and Calista, Lidian did him
reverence, whom Dorilas embraced as the others, and dissembled for the present
any knowledge of his affairs, although he saw his arm in a scarf: but a
small time after sitting at Supper, and Lidian not using his left hand* the
fair Calista sitting near him, invited him to be merry, saying, I thought at
the first, brother, that you wore this fair scarf for fashion sake, but now
seeing you do not use your hand, I think it is out of necessity. It is true
sister, answered Lidian, neither do I know how it happens, I have such a flux
fallen into my arm within these few days, that I have lost the use thereof. I
know well, answered Dorilas, from whence it proceeds; but to ease me of the
labor of telling, relate it your self, and lie not, otherwise I shall make
another quarrel between you and Alcidon, if you contrary the truth which he
told me. Lidian finding himself convinced by such a testimony, and that he
could no longer disguise a thing so visible, related from point to point the
quarrel which he had with Clarangeus (as you have heard) beginning with the
great friendship which had been between them, until their love unto Olinda,
for whose sake only (being jealous one of the other) they had fought, being
never provoked by any injurious words: the Challenge delivered by Alcidon to
Clarangeus, with whom Lisander casually being, offered himself to be a Second;
finally, he told them how Lisander (having wounded and overthrown Alcidon)
parted Clarangeus and him, when they were both wounded, and when his own sword
being broken, he made a full account to have had them both upon him; exalting
the valor and courtesy of his enemies, but principally Lisanders, who he said
was author both of his safety and life, with so many words of praises and
commendations, that Cleander could not express, nor Calista dissemble their
contentment.

After that Lidian had finished his discourse, Dorilas began in this manner:
You, son, for your pleasure have run a dangerous fortune, but that which
happened to me was no less, neither was there above a night between in time,
nor above a league in place: for yesterday, going from Paris to Fountain
Bleau, and coming late into the wood, I was set upon by ten or twelve
thieves, who wounded almost to death two Gentlemen, whom I have left at
Fountain Bleau, and put two or three other of my people to their heels, that
without help (in my opinion) more than humane, which came to me when I was
resolved for death, I had not now been alive. Then did he tell them how he
was succored by the valor of one man, who coming in miraculously, either
killed or put to flight all the thieves: further, said he, I never saw him but
by night, yet me thought he had the fashion and figure of an Angel; neither
in all my life did I see any thing more courteous, or more humble:
nevertheless he did me this displeasure to conceal his name, although his
refusal was accompanied with the fairest and gentlest excuses that could be;
telling further, that he came from these parts, and that he understood by good
intelligence, you were both in good health. Sir, said a servant of Dorilasses,
who stood waiting behind his chair, he who succored you in the wood, was
called Lisander, for his man told me so, and also that he came from hence: yet
when he heard his Master conceal his name, he entreated me not to speak of
it; and I do verily believe that he is the very same who this day fought with
Alcidon, for it was said this morning at Fountain Bleau (in speaking of this
quarrel) that one of them came but late last night to the town. You have
reason, said Cleander, for yesterday after dinner he went from hence, and he
might well reach the wood about the hour you speak of. By this second news
Lisanders praises were augmented, and every one spoke of his virtues, and of
those services which he had done in the persons of Calista's parents: who could
have been so ungrateful, as not to acknowledge the merit and fidelity of so
perfect a lover? Let us now confess that virtue has no prevailing enemies;
and as the beauty thereof, producing admirable affections, justified the honest
love which Calista afterward bare him, so had it justly condemned her of an
unexcusable ingratitude, if she had not loved him. Now the nature of envy
being most to fight and bite against virtues, when they are most commended, the
more Lisanders lovely qualities were commended, the more was Berontus his
courage incensed against him: for he having heard the complaint, walking with
Calista, which Lisander made in the wood, and thereby knowing that all his
services had no respect but unto her, was justly spighted to see as well his
brother, as all the rest take them to their advantage; which Calista discreetly
marked, gathering Lisanders commendations with so much modesty, that her
coldness did not discover any dissimulation, nor her liberty, affection.
Fifteen days did Dorilas and Lidian stay at Beauplaine, and fifteen Lisander
and Clarangeus at Paris, during which time both their wounds were healed; but
that which Calista had made in Lisanders heart, grew every day worse, neither
absence, nor diversion, nor company, nor business, proving apt remedies for
his healing: which made him almost resolve once again to appear before his
only remedy, if the diverse obstacles which concurred had not retained him. For
he knew that Dorilas and Lidian were both there, and Berontus also, whose
presence was more dangerous than all of them; and what hope could he have to
entertain her opportunely with any speeches, amongst so many watchful eyes?
He was not willing to lose Cleander* and above all things be feared to offend
Calista: wherefore he resolved before the remembrance of two such fresh
obligations should slip out of her memory, to write unto her, to know whether
he might ever hope for time or place, when, without disturbance, he might see
the only object for which he cherished his sight* and having called one of
his Footmen, an old servant whom he had long known to be faithful, commanded
him to go unto such a Village near Beauplaine, where he should find such a
woman, unto whom he should give this Letter, and wait for an answer in her
house, but upon his life he should take care that he were not seen; and for
that cause he should not come thither before it was night, and should go away
before day. Now Lisander had long before practiced this woman while he lay at
Beauplain, where she was as frequent as if she had been of the family, and had
given her great gifts, yet not telling her that he was in love with Calista^,
but with her woman, whose name was Clarinda, whom he had also so far gained,
that she promised to deliver his letters unto her Mistress. The Lacquey
departs after dinner from Paris, and coming in the night to this woman,
delivers his Masters commendations unto her, and together with a Letter, he
put two chains of gold into her hand, one for her self, and another for
Calista's woman, unto whom he entreats her to give it, together with the
Letter. The woman shut the Lacquey into the house, and going the next morning
unto Beauplaine, easily gave the Letter and the chain unto Clarinda, and
Clarinda only the Letter to Calista, who retiring her self into her Closet,
and opening it, found that it said as follows.

LISANDERS Letter to CALISTA.
MAdam, if you knew how my heart beats, and my hand trembles, now when my
Love commands me to send you this, you would have less apprehension at the
sight hereof, than I have fear in the writing, and more pity of my passion,
than I have courage to express it. It is a wonder, Madam, to see me suffer so
much, and that I can live so long in so rigorous an absence: but it must be
referred to your beauty, through the which the most impossible things are easy
unto me. I will not relate the torment which I suffer, the evils are
contagious, and that which I could say, may peradventure cause grief in you;
suffer only that I entreat you to save my life in preserving your honor,
which you cannot well refuse to your very enemy, and which you may yield unto
me in giving me the means to see you, without scandalizing or injuring of any
man. I do also entreat you to believe, that my life is not so dear unto me,
that I would preserve it with the least prejudice unto you; and if I should
sorrow for the loss thereof, it would be rather in respect of you than my
self, and out of the grief I should have to see my end before I had testified
the beginning of my service. To conclude, Madam, all these words are too weak
to witness so strong an affection as mine, and do rather lessen than express
it; therefore I entreat you not to judge it by their weak eloquence, but by
your own perfections, who are the fair cause; and believe that there is not
any kind of service which I could not easilier yield than offer. I shall
expect the sentence of my life or death in your answer, and will remain so
perfectly yours, that I cannot say any thing near to it, when I say I am your
most faithful, most obedient, and most affectionate servant.


Calista having read this Letter, and being no less combated with the
obligation which she had unto Lisanders love, than with the duty unto her own
honor, and Cleanders love, discoursed long in her self, whether she ought to
answer; her honor representing, that an honest, wise, virtuous woman, as she
would be accounted, and as she was, ought not to do any thing in secret ftom
her husband, much less give him any answer, and already did her heart reproach
her with the audience which she had given him, and made her alone in her
Closet blush with shame for receiving it: But Love pleading Lisanders cause,
and representing his admirable qualities, his incomparable affection, testified
with such signal and late services, accused her for suffering (with no less
cruelty than ingratitude) a life to be lost which ought to be so dear unto
her, if not for the love which she bare him, at least in that he had saved
both her fathers and her brothers; and the rather, because she might preserve
it by a word, or by a look, which would oblige Lisander, without any way
offending Cleander. Following then this last opinion, and knowing that Dorilas
was resolved to take Cleander, Berontus, and Lidian along with him the next
day, she concluded not alone to write back again unto Lisander, but to take
this occasion to see him in their absence, without any bodies privity; yet with
this resolution, not to yield him any favor but only sight and speech:
wherefore she answered thus.

CALISTA's Answer.
I Have received your letter against my will, and answer now against my duty,
which is to advertise you of yours, and to have you forbear any further suit,
in a matter which cannot choose but be dangerous unto you, and not to promise to
your self from me any more than such good will as my honor and your virtue
may make you hope. You are not now to begin to do me services, which you offer
me, for you have already performed them, and so binding, in the persons most
near unto me, that I cannot choose but be sorry at the grief which you suffer
by my means, and by your absence; but I do believe, you love me with so much
honor, and are so perfect a friend unto him, whom I only can love, that you
would not that I should remedy it to his prejudice; neither if you would, were
it availeable, seeing it is impossible: yet forasmuch as you only demand to
see me, and that those obstacles, which you your self have raised, do hinder
me from permitting it openly, I had rather run a fortune in giving way unto
your desire, than refuse you so small a mattter as my fight. To the end then
that you may know, if I do not yield all that which I owe unto your merit, it
proceeds not from ingratitude, but from a former obligation, which hinders
me from satisfying that which I am indebted unto you; I do advertise you,
that (if this letter may come to your hands this day) I hope to be here alone
to morrow: you shall find the little gate of the Garden open, and Clarinda not
far from thence, who shall attend you: Be there about eleven of the clock,
and see if I do not hazard more in this assignement, than you do in keeping
it. Farewell.


It is true Calista, you hazard more in this than he, for he could but lose
his life, and you both life and honor: neither do I think it will be long
before you repent it, although you are not guilty of any offense, either in
effect or will.

But not to digress, this letter closed, and given unto Clarinda, that she
might, as from her, give it unto the woman of the Village, to send unto
Lisander, Calista went into the Hall, where dinner was ready, and the company
only staying for her, which she excused as well as she could. After dinner
Cleander would needs give Dorilas and Lidian the sport of hunting of a Stagge,
whereupon they went all together a hunting, near unto the Village where this
woman dwelt, who was Lisanders messenger. It fortuned whilst they were going
to their sport, a most violent storm of rain fell so vehemently upon them,
that they were constrained to seek shelter; and finding none nearer than this
woman's house, (who, as I said, was ordinarily at Beauplain) they ran thither
(so fast as their horses would go) all together, and so suddenly, that
Lisanders Lacquey (who was within waiting for his dispatch) could not hide
himself from being found and known by Cleander, Berontus, and Lidian, who
asked news of his Master. The footman, who was not prepared for this surprise,
remained so astonished, that he wished himself dead: nevertheless making a
virtue of necessity, and not being able to hide his amazement, he disguised
the subject* telling them, that he was not now with his Master, who had put
him away for a slight occasion, when after so many faithful services which he
had done him, he ought to have expected a recompense; so that not knowing what
to do, and not having the heart to serve any other man, he resolved to come to
Beauplaine, to entreat their favor to write in his behalf unto Lisander to
take him again, seeing the cause for which he had put him away, was only for
giving a box on the ear unto a fellow of his, who had not served him above
three days, whereas he had served him six years; But seeing this storm
falling, he had come thither as well for shelter, as also to entreat the woman
of the house (who had well known him at Beauplaine, and had been well
acquainted with some friends of his) to write unto his Master in his behalf.
Truly, said Cleander, if it be no other matter, I will write in thy behalf so
soon as we return from hunting: come and lie at Beauplaine, and I will give
thee a Letter. Sir, said the footman, there is another who labors for my
place, who (I fear) will get it before to morrow night; therefore seeing you
are pleased to do me so much good, I humbly entreat you to write a word or two
upon this paper, while the rain stays you here, that by my too long stay I do
not find my place gone: herein you shall bind me to pray for your prosperity.
Have thou an inkehorne, said Cleander? I sir, answered the Footman (he had
found an ill-favored one by chance upon the cupboord, with which, not knowing
else how to spend his time, he had been scribbling all the day;) Give it me,
said Cleander: and taking the pen in his hand, he writ these words.

CLEANDERS Letter to LISANDER.
We have found your footman lost in sorrow for his disgrace, which he having
told us, desired also that we would give him a Letter unto you; to restore him
to your favor; if he be no more deceived in the effect which it shall have,
than in the love which he judges we bear you, his desire is effected. Sir,
Dorilas my father joineth in this entreaty, commanding me also to tell you,
that he complains of you, for that after you had saved his life, you
concealed your name* Lidian also sends you word, if he had known the
obligation wherein he was tied for that service, he would not have thanked
you for what you did afterward for him, because his life is not dearer than
his father is; and the first obligation is so great, that it could not be
augmented by a second. For my own part, I complain of nothing but that you
did not come to see us according to your promise; for I think I lose no time
but what I spend out of your company; We hope to morrow to be at Fountain
Bleau* and a few days after at Paris* where you shall not escape without
yielding us a reason for all those grievances. Farewell* I am Cleander your
best and most affectionate servant.


This was a trick of o^^ footman, which had not been amiss if our messenger
woman, returning the same hour from Beauplaine all we^ finding her house full
of such unexpected guests, had not almost marked all. If the footman were
surprised, she was more amazed; and thinking that they were there waiting for
her, and that Clarinda had deceived her, or that the Footman had discovered
all, she was ready to fall upon her knees at her entrance into the doors, and
to give Calista's Letter to Cleander, and ask forgiveness for a fault which
she did suppose had been already discovered. Behold the perils into which
those expose themselves, who, to attain their ends by any means whatsoever,
put their lives and honors into the hands of such persons: Yet she seeing
their cheerful countenances, and the Footman coming toward her before them
all, as if he had not yet seen her, she recovered the spirit and judgment,
which she had before lost, and ascribing her troublesome countenance to the
foul weather, which beat with violence in her face, she made a low reverence
unto all the company. Gentlewoman, said Cleander we have surprised your house,
which has done us good service against the rain; and having found here
Lisanders Footman, who stayed for you, we have written in his behalf unto his
Master. How (said she) Footman, have you forsaken your Master? It is he
Gentlewoman, answered the Footman, who has put me away, and Cleander here (I
thank him) has entreated him by a Letter to take me again, being also come
unto you to entreat you (in respect of your ancient knowledge of my friends,
and your acquaintance with my Master) to do the like for me. Truly, said she,
where his recommendations have no power, I am assured mine will not be
availeable: nevertheless, because you shall not think that I say this in
excuse, I will write unto him. Shortly after the rain ceasing, and the weather
being clear, Dorilas and his company left the Gentlewoman with Lisanders
Footman, under color of the Letter; and the time of hunting being past, they
returned all to Beauplaine; where they supped as hungerly as if they had spent
the time in hunting. In their supping, they (discoursing from one thing to
another) began to speak of Lisanders Footman; which gave a warm alarm unto
Calista, who (as all those who find themselves guilty) thought that every word
spoken would have tended unto the discovery of her fault, until by the end of
their speech, she found that they knew nothing of her affairs. The Footman
having told the woman all that had past between those Gentlemen and him at
their meeting, and receiving Calista's letter, returns in extreme have to his
Master, whom he almost put into a fever by the recital of this accident, and
having given him as well Calista's letter as Cleanders, he resolved to ride
instantly, without any company but the same footman, who also rid; and so
they two together took their way toward Beauplaine, from whence the very same
day Cleander, together with Berontus, departed to accompany Dorilas and Lidian
to Fountain Bleau: but the good old man would not suffer them at any hand to
ride far, but made them (though unwillingly) return back; so that his
return being more speedy than Calista expected, much perplexed her: yet she
wisely dissembled it by a fained joy, which seemed true; although her light
supper did manifest unto Cleander, that some thing did trouble her, and she
her self confessed she was not well, but he judged it to be only sorrow for
Dorilas and Lidians departure. This indisposition of health did aptly serve to
color her sudden retyring to her chamber, which shortly after supper (
Clarinda alone being with her) bidding the rest of the company good night, she
did; and Cleander also (who was somewhat weary) did the like into his chamber,
and all the rest by their example. The night was dark, and all the house in
silence, when Clarinda going softly out of her Mistresses chamber, went unto
the garden gate, where Lisander was appointed to be, who, because he would not
fail his appointed time, had almost killed his horses to get thither: Having
found him with his faithful footman, she took him by the hand, and without
being perceived by any body, she brought him (to his unspeakeable joy) to
Calista's bed side, where she then was lying. When he saw this incomparable
beauty (which he could not religiously enough adore) wait him within her
bed with so many graces, he was about (loosing that respect which he did
accustomably bear her) to forget the condition upon which he was permitted to
see her: But Calista, who had no less severity to make him fear, than
sweetness to make him love, stayed this motion of his, and with one word made
him sit down in a chair by her bed side: unto whom she began to speak in
this manner; Lisander, if you knew the pain and danger which I hazard to
content your desire, you would love me more for this alone, than for the beauty
which you say is in me, Know that Cleander is not at Fountain Bleau, as both
he and I did think he should; for my father would not suffer him by any means
to go far with him, but forced him (though against his will) to return
again, so that now he is retired into his own chamber, to let me rest with
more quiet here alone, because to keep my word with you, I made him believe
that I was sick, choosing rather this night to break company with him, than my
promise with you. Calista had scarcely uttered these words, when they heard
knocking at the door, and Lisander judging that it was Cleander (as it was
indeed) did believe that Calista had set this match to undo him; the very
first news, that a man, whom he thought so far off, should be so near, having
raised this doubt in his mind: But when he heard the knocking at the door,
there was no discourse of reason strong enough to divert him from thinking that
he was betrayed; wherefore he said to Calista, Madam, you had many other means
to destroy my life, but I perceive you do desire it should be together with
Cleanders. No, said she, in taking him by the hand, I take heaven to witness
(I have now neither means nor leisure to make other protestation) wherefore I
pray let that, together with the proof which you shall see, satisfy you. I
do conjure you by all that may be dear unto you, to stand close behind this
Tapestry: speaking this softly as she could, she asked aloud oftentimes, who
was there? and called Clarinda, who being fitted for the purpose, mad show as
if she were asleep. In the end, Lisander being placed between two pieces of
the Hangings by the bed side where she was, and holding with one hand both
the pieces close together, but only for a little hole through which he might
see who came, and to put the nose of his Pistol, which he had ready in his
other hand; Clarinda, seeming half asleep, and being but half ready, went to
open the door unto her Master, who going round about his wives bed, shut
close with a curtain but upon one side, came so near unto Lisander, that he
touched the end of the Pistol. Lisander has many times since related this,
and I have heard him often say, that this was the greatest fear that ever his
heart was capable of; although that seeing Cleander come alone in his
night-gowne and nightcap, he knew Calista had not betrayed him, as he did
believe. Cleander then coming unto his wife, asked her how she did? she
answered that her fever had increased since supper, for want of sleep, and
that she did believe her recovery did consist in rest. Cleander taking her by
the hand, and finding her pulse beat violently, as it could not choose in that
her apprehension, told her nevertheless that it was nothing, and that he was
also much more perplexed: but my trouble proceeded from another cause; for I
dreamed even now that I had lost you, and that there was a Dragon here, which
would carry you away: so that waking in this fear, and remembering that you
went sick to bed, interpreting my own dream, I feared that your sickness
was the Dragon, which I saw carrying you away: And this is the cause of my
coming at this time, to see how you do; but God be thanked you are not so
ill as by my dream I thought you were, for which I am glad. I will only lie
down by you a while, to feel the course of your pulse, and then I will let you
rest. When Lisander heard Cleanders dream, he did verily believe that he was
discovered, until he heard the exposition which was made: and Calista her
self knew not what to think; who seeing Cleander resolved to stay, bid
Clarinda draw the curtain close, because the light of the candle did trouble
her eyes. Clarinda going to obey her Lady, was constrained to let go a little
dog which came in with Cleander, which she had held in her arms upon the
bed, fearing that he would wind Lisander. The little dog was no sooner
out of her arms, when running toward the bed side, it presently (smelling
that there was a stranger) began to bark so eagerly and so loud, that Cleander
would have risen (seeing that Clarinda could not catch it) from off the bed
to drive him away: and had done it, if Calista had not lovingly withheld him.
In the end the dog was taken and put out of the doors, because he was as
importunate as faithful: and Cleander having stayed about an hour with his
wife, went his way, suffering (by his absence) Lisander to take a little
breath, who during his stay had been vexed with so many warm alarums. The one
was no sooner gone out of the chamber, but the other came out of his hiding
place, and kneeling down before Calista, demanded pardon of her for his
mistrust, proceeding from such apparent likelihood; unto whom (lifting him up
with her hand) she said, Hereafter Lisander learn to know Calista, and
believe that her soul shall never be spotted with infidelity.

Lisander beginning to grow warm by the touch of her hand, although it were
cold as snow, and forgetting the danger past, by the sight of her present
beauty, answers her with so amorous a kiss, that he thought his mouth ought
to be knit unto Calista's, and his soul to be gathered-in at her lips; neither
would he willingly have been drawn from so agreeable a trance. Soft
Lisander, said Calista, I promised you nothing but sight, neither did I think
to have permitted any further than speech: content your self with the danger
wherein I have thrown my self, and the wrong which I have done unto my duty,
to acquit my promise unto you, and constrain me not to withdraw the love
which I now bear you, through your indiscretion, as I have now pulled you to
me under the assured respect which I did promise my self from your modesty.
Madam, replied Lisander, I do humbly crave pardon, if I show my self
unwilling to lose so fair an occasion of enjoying so many wonders; for I
should dye out of grief, and give you just cause to laugh at my simplicity: my
passion is stronger than my self, and my violence is the more excusable,
proceeding from your wonderful beauty, which forces me now to constrain you
to have pity upon me; And in saying this, he invaded earnestly his Mistresses
Dominions, endeavoring to ravish away the last favor, for which he had put
himself into this hazard; when with an extreme anger, and a loud and shriller
voice than the danger wherein both of them were, would well permit, she called
her Gentlewoman, and said unto Lisander, Is this the recompense of the danger
whereinto I have cast my self to oblige you? Well, be gone presently if you
would not that I should show Cleander the true Dragon, which he saw but in his
dream: Thereupon Clarinda rising up of one side, and Lisander forbearing of
the other, Calista's voice was a little quieted, but not her heart, what words
or submissions soever Lisander said or did, who was constrained to go away
with this biting sorrow, that he had lost the favor of his Mistress with too
much importunity. Was not this well rid, well waited, well suffered, and well
frighted, to buy with the price of so many fears so bleeding a grief? I do
wonder that he did not presently kill himself before her, at least to work
horror and fear in her, seeing he could not stir pity: but he did better in
doing nothing, but going away fuller of sorrow than of life, lighted only by
Clarinda unto the door, who durst go no further, fearing lest he might be
discovered; so that he being in the dark, grabling his way, with one hand upon
the rail of the stairs, and a Pistol ready bent in the other, as he was
against Cleanders chamber door, which was somewhat lower than Calista's, his
feet slipped from him, so that he fell down the stairs, even to the bottom,
and besides the noise which he made in falling, the Pistol which he had in
his hand went off, and gave such a report, that it awaked all the house.
Cleander, Berontus, and as many as were in the house rose in a fright, and
began to cry out all together, asking one of another, what was the matter,
others calling for light. Calista, who was not asleep, nor any way disposed
thereunto, hearing her husband and brother-in-law cry, and not knowing whether
Lisander had shot his Pistol against them, or whether they had taken him, was
in more than a deadly agony. Clarinda fearing to be discovered and punished,
desparately cried out, All was in disorder and confusion. Lisander being at the
foot of the stairs, more amazed than hurt, and more hurt than seen, his
Pistol being fallen out of his hand, and his hat from his head, and fearing to
be discovered if he should leave them behind him, was a good while before
he found them in the midst of the darkness and cries; which when he had
done, he runs toward the Garden gate, through which he entered: but as he
passed by the Kitchen door, where there were seven or eight servants, and
two or three dozen of dogs, he was follovved and barkt after until he found
his man who had his horse; and getting speedily upon his back, he escaped
away over the fields, without being known by any that follovved him.

The End of the second Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE THIRD BOOK.
I Shall now want apt words to express the griefs, wherewith, in the third
part of this Story we begin to be traveled: Hitherto they have been but
feared, now they are to be felt. But not to raise more sorrow in you than the
relation of the truth will bring with it, I will return to our amorous
Lisander, disgraced not alone by fortune, but (which was most insupportable to
him) by his Mistress, gallopping toward Paris, whilst Cleander and Berontus
having gotten lights, visited all the house to find what it might be, that had
so unexpectedly troubled their deep, but quiet sleep: but although they
searched both high and low, within and without, the quest ended with no more
knowledge than it began: and not being able to imagine the true cause of this
Alarm, they judged that some thieves would have robbed them: For confirmation
of which, some of the servants, who with eyes hardly awake had seen a glance
of Lisanders running by, for one whom they had not well seen, they said that
they had seen six, and there was one, who to seem more valiantly fortunate,
assured them that the Pistol was shot at him, and that the bullet came
whistling so near his ears, that it blew and shaked his hair. Thus Lisanders
escape passed for an attempt of robbers in Cleanders opinion, who failed not to
go presently to Calista's chamber, to tell her that the noise was made by
thieves that were fled, wherefore he wished her to take her rest this
morning (for the day did begin to break) and recompense her nights unquiet
rest. Truly he had reason, for she had but small; yet this last coming was
much more welcome unto her than the first. Thus was appeased this trouble,
greater in Calista's mind than in all the house beside.

Dorilas being (with Lidian) arrived at Fountain Bleau, and willing in some
measure to show himself thankful unto Lisander, obtained his pardon, and
Lidians of the King for their combat, as also Clarangeus and Alcidons, who was
now healed of his wound. But as they went to Paris, he received letters from
Normandy, by which understanding that Otranta was sick, he ridd^ directly to
Bellaire, where the joy of his return, and the good news which he brought her
of her children, helped much to the recovering of her former health. Lidian and
Alcidon meeting with Lisander and Clarangeus, they went to Fortlevesque to have
their pardon entered with the great Provost, from thence all together they went
to Beauplaine: Cleander, Calista, and Berontus bid them most exceedingly
welcome, and after accustomed embracings and complements were over, the first
discourse wherewith Cleander entertained them, was, how he was likely to be
robbed, telling it particularly unto Lisander in the presence of Calista, who
could not tell almost what countenance to hold. He showed them the Kitchen
door, where (he thought) the Pistol was shot at his man: he showed also the
Garden gate, where (as he said) they came in and went out; leaving all the
company, either in deed, or in show, wondering at the accident: finally, after
so tedious a discourse to the two Lovers, they altered the subject of their
speech, of which though there were diverse opinions, yet none thought the truth.
For three or four days while they stayed at Beauplaine, Lisander used all his
endeavor to speak with Calista, and she, all that she could to avoid him,
unless it were in company. Lisander seeing himself barred of that means, had
recourse unto Clarinda, and unto the woman who had delivered his first letter:
both of them excused themselves, upon Calista's express forbidding, not alone
to speak for him, but also to deliver any letter for him. When he saw all his
instruments fail him, he resolved again to banish himself from the presence
of his Mistress, and to go into some place where he might at least ease
himself by complaint. Holland, which was then the seat of the war, and is at
this day the School thereof, by the valor and capacity of that brave Earl,
who has better understood it, and better made it than can be said, furnished
him with a brave occasion: The Archduke threatened to attach Reyne Berk with a
siege, and the States prepared themselves to defend it. Of the one side was the
Marquess Spinola, General of his Highnesses army, who by his exploits against
Ostend and Sluse, had gotten immortal renown with the Spaniards and
Walloones, who without bragging may be called good Soldiers, and who do best
observe the discipline of war of any nation of the world; and among all
other, the brave Count Bucoy, and our French Terraile. Of the other side was
the valorous Prince Maurice, of whom we spoke even now, under whose name alone,
in one word, may be comprehended all warlike virtue, accompanied with his young
brother, who does nobly imitate him, as the most perfect example which he can
follow; with a brave army, but not so strong as the enemy, composed for the
most part of French and English, two of the warlikest nations this day, or
which ever have been upon the earth: over whom shined (like two great stars
in a clear night) the dead Bethune, and the brave Castillion: The first dying
with the reputation of knowing better the art of war, than any man of France;
and the other (having had a grandfather, an uncle, a father, and a brother,
who, in these our days, have filled the world with the knowledge and
admiration of their valor) lives this day in estimation, worthy of their
memory. Lisander propounding these reasons unto Cleander, the better to build
lawful excuses of his departure, made them appear so just and honorable unto
him, that in stead of diverting him, he resolved (...) accompany him, and to
take part in the danger, intending to leave with Calista his brother Berontus,
who (not thinking it honorable for him being young, and a bachelor, to remain
shut up in a house, whilst his elder brother exposed himself into the dangers
of war) entreated to be excused. Alcidon, Lidian, and Clarangeus hearing also
of it, would needs go along. Lisander seeing so brave resolutions, promised in
himself to do such deeds of arms in their company; that he would force
Calista's obstinacy, and make her as amor^us of his valor, as he was of her
beauty. Calista knowing that Lisander, not being able to endure her angry
presence, did deprive her of her beloved husband, was so extremely grieved
therewith, that she began much to repent that ever she had driven him to that
resolution, by her ^igour* And not finding a better means to break off this
journey, than by his means who had first propounded (...), she endeavored to
fall into some speech with him before their departure were fully resolved upon,
with as much earnestness, as formerly she had avoided his entertainment;
hoping to effect so much with him, and he with Cleander, that this enterprise
should be laid by. To that end therefore ^he (the very same day) willing to
entertain him, came unto the window, faining to lean there where he was
standing: Lisander seeing her come, seeming to apprehend her coming thither to
be only to rest her self, with a great reverence forsakes the place, and
goes to talk with Alcidon and Clarangeus. It is not to be told, whether
despite or shame were greater in Calista: she only said in her self, I will
run no more after him, although I should lose whatsoever is dearest unto me.
Cleander coming thereupon unto her, and seeing her alone, and sad in the
window, incontinently judged one part of her grief, but not all: for, besides
that which was wrought in her through his going whom she so dearly loved, she
suffered much through Lisanders disdain (there being nothing whereof a proud
Lady is more sensible than to see her self despised of one who had so entirely
loved her, and so religiously adored her.) There were all the reasons which
might serve either for or against this voyage, brought and debated between
them: and although Calista's tears were more plentiful than his discourse,
yet they gave place unto his will, and consented to that which they could not
hinder. It was therefore determined, that during his absence she should go unto
Bellaire to Dorilas and Otranta, who passionately desired to see her; he
further assuring her, that she should hardly be returned home before he were
come back.

Cleander having brought his wife unto this resolution, two days after he took
leave of her, to go unto Paris to accommodate him there of such things as were
most necessary for his voyage; again were their tears renewed at so pitiful a
departure. Lisander had much ado to contain, having his heart so pierced with
anguish, that he could not utter one word. Truly Cleander himself went away
less sad than he. But Calista upon a sudden reduced into so great a
solitariness, and deprived of all things which were most dear unto her in the
world, was most afflicted.

The Knights being come unto Paris, and in two days accommodated, especially
of good arms, they went into Holland, and (to make short) put themselves into
^eine Berke a little before it was besieged. My intention is not here to write
the general or particular actions of the siege, because it is not the subject
of my Pen; only I will say, That among those which got extraordinary fame of
my knowledge, besides our adventurers, were Monsieurs de Sowbisse, de Fleis, de
B^r quart* and de Canaillaice: and that in one, of many brave Sallies which
were made, Alcidon and Clarangeus being carried away wounded with two Musket
shot, the one in the shoulder, and the other in the leg, Berontus taken
prisoner, and Lidian and Clarangeus so engaged, that they could expect nothing
but death or imprisonment; they were succored so valiantly by Lisanders
incredible virtue, that it might be truly said, their lives and liberty were
preserved by him. A strange felicity of a man, and more worthy to be envied
for the joy he felt, that he had so obliged her whom he loved, not only in the
person of her father and her brother, but in her husband also, than for the
glory which he received: for although he were then publicly honored of all,
and after the siege highly commended by Count Maurice, and admired of all the
States; yet the occasion which Fortune lent him to serve his Mistress, and to
acknowledge Cleanders love, was more esteemed than the honor for which he had
so nobly hazzarded his life. Now as the skill of besieging places in these our
days, and rather in that country than any place of the world, is come to
such perfection, that there is no town which is impregnable: Reyne Berk
having held out three months against the attempts of the besiegers, rather by
the valor of the besieged, than by the strength thereof, yielded upon
composition. The States having paid Berontus his ransom, and Alcidon and
Clarangeus being healed of their wounds, our Warriors covered with Laurel
returned into France. Calista in the mean time, having stayed three or four
days after her husbands departure at Beauplaine, left the house in the guard
of a keeper, and taking an old Gentleman with her, whom Cleander had left to
attend her, and two maids, with Clarinda, early in a morning entered into her
Coach toward Paris, with purpose to go from thence into Normandy to see her
parents. Aussun is a village whereof we have spoken before, which lies in the
midway, not alone between Beauplaine and Paris, but between Fountain Bleau
also and Paris, and therefore well known and frequented by all those especially
who follow the Court. Calista coming unto this town about dinner time, saw a
Caroch standing at the door of the Inn, and going into the house, a Lady
perfectly fair, who came from Fountain Bleau, and was going to Paris. At
first they did not know each other, but saluting, Calista knew that it was
Olinda her brothers Mistress, and Olinda knew her also to be the fair
Calista, Lidians sister. Their complements quickly gave place to the admiration
which they had each of others beauty, and to the ceremonies which are usually
among women: but their dinner being over, Time, which they were to husband,
called on them to depart; and being to go all one way, the more commodiously to
entertain one the other, Olinda entered into Calista's Caroch, leaving her own
for the other Gentlewomen and maids. There she understood the cause of her
journey, how she went to visit her parents, to see if the contentment which
she hoped to receive by their sight, might wipe away the sorrow of her
husbands absence. Olinda (who knew not that they were gone into Holland) with
the pleasure which she received to hear that Lidian and Clarangeus were gone
together good friends, felt no less sorrow for Lidians absence, than Calista
suffered in her heart for Cleanders and Lisanders. Nevertheless, as they gave
not place one unto the other in affection, so they did not yield one unto the
other in skill how to dissemble it: for Olinda had always loved Lidian, yet so
discreetly hid it, that he himself could not discern it; and from thence
proceeded the quarrel which he had with Clarangeus, because that thinking she
loved the other better than she did him, and Clarangeus thinking as much of
Lidian, they grew jealous one of the other. Now (according to a natural desire
of holding speech of that which one loves) they almost spoke of no other thing
all their journey; and being come unto Paris, they parted, with assured promises
of perpetual friendship. Calista promised to be back again at Paris within a
month, and not to depart from thence until Cleanders return, which she
hoped would be shortly after, and to write to her in her absence. Thus Olinda
remained at Paris, and Calista three days after arrived at Bellaire, who was
received there with the tendrest and dearest affections that could be
expressed: They demanded news of Cleander, and she told them how Lisander and
the other whom we have named, were gone to Reyne Berk, according unto the
design which Lisander had propounded. God send them a happy return, said the
old man; for next unto my children, whom natural affection makes me prefer
before all others, nothing can be so dear unto me as this Lisander, who you
say is the author of this journey; He saved my life once, and gave it me the
second time in preserving Lidians your brother. I do not think that two such
obligations can ever be perfectly acknowledged. Calista replied not, because
she would not discover what she thought; but falling into other speeches, told
them, how upon the way she met with Olinda, whom she no less wished to be
her sister-in-law, than Lidian did to be her husband Dorilas himself knowing
the quality of her person, and her great estate (a consideration which at this
day, especially with old men, does extraordinarily work) would also have been
glad to have been her father-in-law. A month after Calista came unto
Bellaire, news came of Berontus his taking prisoner, of Alcidons and
Clarangeus being wounded, and of the extreme danger wherein Lidian and Cleander
were; which had been to their utter loss, if Lisanders incomparable virtue
had not freed them. This news came like an unresistable blow, to imprint deep
in Calista's heart, already made flexible by his former services, his
incomparable qualities, and matchless person, as also his most religious
affection unto her, which wrought no less effect than any of the other, it
being that alone for which she entered into the consideration of the one, and
did presume was the cause of his atchieving the rest; yet wisely dissembling
whatsoever was in her heart, it appeared not in her eyes, but with silence past
it over, until in the end Dorilas and Otranta breaking out, cried, O God, will thou never be pleased to bless us so much, that we may be able to acknowledge
these unspeakable favors, for which we are so much indebted unto this Knight?
Some comfor it would be if we might but see him. Daughter, said Otranta unto
Calista, you shall not go from hence before Cleanders return; and if he will
have you, he shall come himself for you, that we may see this Lisander, so
good an Angel unto us. These words did wonderfully please Calista, unto whom
now it was a pain to dissemble the love which she bare him; and who
(considering the strange effects of this love, the means by which Fortune did
necessarily constrain her to acknowledge them, otherwise tied in the same
necessity unto that, which she owed unto Cleander and unto her own honor)
could have wished Lisander less accomplished, that she might not be so taken
in his love: Yet though she found her self consumed with the same fire which
devoured him, she resolved rather to extinguish it with her life, than to ease
her self by any means which might wound her honor. Thus having spent a
month longer at Bellaire than she made account, and desiring that Cleander
should find her at Beauplaine, or at the least at Paris, where she had
promised Olinda to be a month sooner, they took leave of her with tears in
their eyes: she also (contributing hers unto their grief, which seized them
as violently at their departure, as her coming rejoiced them) went away
accompanied with the same sorrow which she had left. They would have stayed
her, if the old Gentleman who came with her, had not told them that Cleander
had a business in court, which did require the presence of his wife: Away then
she went unto Paris, where the Court then was, and where she employed a month
more, as well in soliciting her husbands affairs, as in visiting her friends;
amongst whom Olinda was not forgotten, neither was she by Olinda: Their
friendship was confirmed by this conversation, so much the more agreeable unto
Olinda, by how much she seemed to be with Lidian when she was with Calista.
They were lodged near unto the Arcenall, where almost every day there was
tilting, sithence the return of the Court (for the royal tilting place was
not then finished.) One afternoon as they were all together, they were told
that there were strange Knights, who were come in the morning, and had
challenged the Knights of the Court to break some staves with sharp points in
open field, and that the King himself about four of the clock would be there
in person, thinking that they were English, who preserve, in this exercise, the
ancient reputation of the Knights of the round Table. The novelty hereof (for
it was not usual to see any tilting but with blunt staves, and most commonly
against Quintan) made our Ladies go to see it, as also almost all the Court,
some to have part of the danger and honor, some only the pleasure. But it
continued not long, for one of the brave Knights of the Court, a great
favorite of the King, called Cloridon, running first against one of the
strangers, was overthrown from his horse, and wounded not only with the
sharp steel, but also with a splinter of the staff. And although the blow
was not mortal, his Majesty nevertheless was so sorrowful, that he caused
the tilting to cease almost so soon as it was begun, entreating the strangers
to discover themselves; who pulling off their Helmets to do reverence unto
him, were known to be Frenchmen, and those who about three months since went
from Beauplaine with Cleander and Lisander, who was the man that had justed:
these men coming from Holland, had agreed to make their entrance into Paris in
this manner. The King glad to see them, more easily bearing that Cloridon
should be overthrown by Frenchmen than by strangers, as he did believe at the
first, joyfully embraced them, and after he had from them learned some
particularities of Reyne Berke, and witnessed by the honor he did them how
well he was satisfied with their actions, returned to the Louvre, leaving them
amongst the Ladies. Cleander finding out his Calista, who shined among the
fair ones, as the bright Moon does among the Stars in a clear night, went
unto her, being between Olinda and Argire, no less joyful for his return,
than for Lisanders honorable achievement; who heaped up so many proofs of
his valor one upon another, that the last made the first forgotten. This
Argire whom we here named, was a fair Lady, who among many slaves unto her
beauty, had captivated Alcidon, who was not long before he came unto her.
Lidian also and Clarangeus took either of them Olinda by the arm, who
remembering the bloody quarrel which they for her sake had had between them,
was in great care to content them both with such indifference, that they might
have no cause to be jealous: and Cleander with Lisander saluting Calista, in
kissing her, said in her ear, Friend, make much of this Knight; for without
him your brother and I had not been here now. Sir, answered Calista, this is
not the first time that he has obliged us, and that his good offices have
exceeded all means of acknowledgement: But yet although he has taken from us
the power, the will at the least shall remain with us, which is only left unto
us, to pay those unvaluable courtesies. Madam, replied Lisander, the services
which I have done you, are small in respect of those which I, together with all
the world, do owe unto your merit; and I think you do reproach me for their
smalnesse, when you speak of their greatness, and that so highly honoring
such poor actions, you would make me blush out of shame that I have done
them. Many other discourses past between them, which I omit, desiring rather
to relate matter than words. They retired all together unto Cleanders house,
where Calista prevailed with Olinda and Argire to stay supper, besides whom,
they were visited with many other Ladies, and Monsieurs of the Court. After
supper Lisander, Alcidon, Lidian and Clarangeus, leaving Cleander and Berontus
to entertain those which came in, retired themselves to the Ladies, who were
apart, and entertained them with extraordinary discourses, because Lisander
could not speak particularly to Calista before the company, nor Alcidon to
Argire, and less could Lidian speak unto Olinda, because of Clarangeus, who
gathered all their words, and besides the passions of love, felt also those of
jealousy; wherefore Olinda spoke to neither of them (as little as she could,
that she might not offend) but addressed her speech unto the brave Lisander,
who speaking but little, and that (God knows) far from his heart, stood as
if he were there only to judge of others discourse: And you brave Sir, said
she, will you be always as free as you are invincible? Can it be that so much
valor can be altogether unaccompanied with love? We are all unhappy, and
ought to account little of our beauties, that we are not able to give one wound
to your mind. Lisander and Calista had much ado to forbear blushing at these
words; And Argire, seeing that he answered not, spoke unto Olinda: Think you,
Madam, that seeing that greatest courages are most subject unto this passion,
that his can be free? For my part, I do not think him less amorous than
others, but I think him more discreet; and I believe his flame is so much the
more violent, by how much he desires to hide it. Truly she had reason, and
failed not: but who would not have thought, that she had discovered the secret
of Calista's affection? who hearing her love thus discoursed by persons who
knew nothing thereof, could not well tell what to judge of it. In the mean
time Lisander calling himself from the deep silence wherein he stood, as if
he were lost in it, answered both of them in this manner; Since that Mars
himself was not able to resist love, in a time when he had not those arms
which you give him, there is no great appearance that I should be able to
vanquish him now, he being armed with those unavoidable arrows of your
beauties. But alas, why should I say that I am vanquished? what would it avail
me to complain of an evil, whereof I can hope for no remedy? What do you
know, answered Argire? it may be, said she, you sigh secretly for one, who
would be very glad that your complaints made known might oblige her to give
you that remedy which you desire. All the company laughed at Argires answer.
And Calista, to augment the pleasure, fearing lest her too much reservednesse
might raise a suspicion that she was interest in the discourse; followed in
this manner: If I knew this proud one, who inslaveth so much glory in
captivating you, and that I were persuaded my prayers would have easier access
unto her than your merits, I would never forbear importuning of her, until
she did leave her cruelty toward you, in yielding that recompense which your
valor meriteth; and I do assure my self, here is none in this company who
does not promise as much: wherefore if you desire we should employ our selves
for you, and that you do not lessen us so much, as to believe our intercession
is unprofitable, or that you presume not so much of your self, to think you
have no need of our help, tell us this fair ones name who has the honor to
possess you, to the, end embracing your passion, we may in some measure
requite (and I in particular) so many inestimable good turns wherewith you
have obliged me. Lisander seeing himself set upon on all sides, and by
Calista her self, who could not better witness the great confidence which she
had in his discretion, answered her thus: Madam, although I do not name my
Mistress unto you, it is no argument of my presumption; neither if I do name
her, is it out of any hope of any bodies favor, but hers only, because as I
am not so vain to presume that I can merit her, so can I not believe, that all
the prayers in the world can prevail with her beyond her duty. Now there is so
great disproportion between her merits and my wants, that there is nothing
more contrary to her duty than loving of me: nevertheless, Madam, I value
your favor so highly (your contentment is so dear unto me, and I have sworn
so much obedience) that although I have promised never to name her, yet there
is no body living, unto whom I would more willingly name her than unto your
self, upon condition you will also promise me never to speak of it, until
she permits the publishing thereof. I had rather never know it, than be tied
to this condition, answered Calista: but seeing you will not content our
curiosity this way, satisfy me another way; we will quit you for a Song,
provided that you will sing it to the Lute, I do conjure you (said she) by
her love, and in favor of all this fair company who entreat you. Now she knew
that Lisander played excellent well upon the Lute, and that having an excellent
voice, did accord it with so much art, that there was no sweetness in the
world comparable unto it, nor no heart so hard, that could avoid being charmed
therewith; yet he would have been excused, though not like unto Musicians, who
will never sing when they are entreated, nor hold their peace when they are
bidden: seeing himself conjured by the thing in the world which he held most
dear, he said, Madam, you demand such poor small courtesies, whereas the
greatest are due, that although I am the most unable that can be to content
you, yet had I rather err in obedience, than excuse my self by reason. So
receiving the Lute from Calista, he began to touch it so sweetly, that all
those who walked in the Hall, came about him; but when he added his voice, it
brought so great a silence, that the minds of all the hearers; ravished with
this wonderful harmony, seemed to be deprived of all motion in the body.
Every one admired at the incomparable perfections of this Knight, every body
had their eyes fixed upon the beauty of his face, and their ears chained unto
the sweetness of his tongue. Now was remembered the grace which did accompany
him in his ordinary conversation with his friends, and his invincible courage,
which drew him victorious from the danger of his enemies, and wherewith he
finished so many brave deeds of arms in his youth: He sung verses which he had
made when he was in Reyne Berke, then when he being assailed within and
without, and being to defend himself from love and his enemies; he who gave
life unto others, could not have it for himself, and complaining of Calista's
cruelty under the name of Hipolita, said:

Hipolita fair, if in the end
I for your sake must yield my breath,
I never could my choice amend,
In finding out a sweeter death.
But yet alas what cruelty
Procures you to make me dye!
Only in loving till this time,
To serve you was mine enterprise:
And if to love you be a vice,
Then to be lovely is a crime.
Lisanders last words, pronounced with the grace of his singing, and mingled
with some tears, let them know, that he was truly amorous, and touched the
heart, not alone of the Ladies, but also of the Knights, so deeply, that
compassion sprung up in stead of envy. Calista her self was moved unto so
great pity, that she repented of her entreating him to sing. Thus all the
company being raised into admiration, and their memories filled with this
object, lost themselves in this pleasure. Being now night, there came a Page
into the Hall, who asking to speak with Lisander, was led unto the place
where he was environed with the Ladies: there the Page said aloud unto him,
Sir, there is at the door a Lady, who hearing of your safe arrival home,
sends you a goodnight by me, which she had rather give you her self, if you
would be pleased to take the pains to go down into the street, Lisander, as
the courteousest Knight living, had not the leisure to ask the Page what Lady
it was, desiring rather to see her, than to lose time in informing himself, so
much he feared to make her attend: wherefore rising up from among the Ladies,
with great reverence unto them, he followed the Page, leaving Calista with a
new suspicion, that this was some new Mistress, who had part in that, which
she thought she wholly possessed. In the mean time Lisander going out of the
Hall, found four men armed at the door: two of whom presently clapped the
door after him, and the other two instantly catching fast hold about his
middle, stabbed him into the body with their Poniards. Lisander finding
himself wounded, and not being able to draw his sword, held them very hard
with his arms, and with his nimble strength (wherein he, if any man, excelled)
lifted them both up from the ground, and being upon the top of the stairs,
he missing his footing, they all three fell down the stairs together. The two
who had shut the hall door, came running down the stairs after him, and
there finding Lisander grasped between the other two, and wallowing all
together in his blood, thrust him twice through the body, before he could draw
his sword. The noise which was made, as well in shutting the door, as in
falling down the stairs, together with the clamours of a Page, who cried out
that they murdered his Master, gave an alarm unto all the house: Some cried
out to have the street door shut, others began to break open the hall door;
Alcidon, Lidian, Clarangeus, and Berontus with their swords in their hands,
leapt out of the windows of the hall which looked into the Court, and having
found the four murderers (who endeavored to get away, having (as they
thought) dispatched Lisander) there began between them a bloody combat: for
besides that they were valiant men, the necessity wherein they were, and
despairing to save their lives otherwise than by their swords, enforced them to
a greater resolution, together that being armed to the very throats, against
men who had only their swords, they were with less fear, and bare themselves
more hazzardously than otherwise they would have done. Nevertheless the
courage and the nimblenesse of the others was so great, and the fury wherein
they were through Lisanders death, which they did account certain, that,
notwithstanding all advantages, they came victoriously off. The first who
achieved any thing in revenge of Lisander, was Lidian, who entering with a
point upon his enemy, lighted just between his arm and the curats, and run
him clean through: almost in the same time, Alcidon having closed with his
adversary, and overthrown him, disarmed his head, and without pity cut his
throat.

Clarangeus and Berontus casting themselves desperately upon those two, who
were against them, got them down, and killed them with the very Poniards
wherewith they had wounded (though most cowardly) the most valiant Lisander;
who being found by Cleander after he had broken down the hall door (in the
plight we have spoken of) was carried unto a bed (having lost his knowledge
with his blood) without moving, and almost without breathing. There Cleander,
who, besides the perfect love which he bare him, was obliged for his liberty,
Alcidon to whom he had spared it, being in his power to kill him, Lidian whose
life he had twice saved, and Clarangeus whom he had served against Lidian,
began to make such lamentations as are not to be expressed. Above all, Olinda
and Argire wept as bitterly as a little before they had heard him sing sweetly.
But the fair Calista seeing the most lovely Knight, and best loving her of all
others, carried all bloody and pale (though lovely) as if death had taken that
shape to make her in love with it, received so feelingly his wounds into her
heart, that without complaint or tears, immovable as a Statue, the violence
of the evil taking away all sense, she fell down into a swoune, as far from
showing any token of life as her friend was; in which plight she was carried
unto another bed. The Surgeons, who in all diligence were sent for, having
searched Lisanders wounds, were not able to resolve of his recovery, and less
able to stanch the blood, or keep him from his swouning; which made every body
despair of his life: only Lidian remembering himself of an Operator who had
formerly cured him, so excellent in his skill, that he not only stayed the
blood with a word, but healed the most mortal wounds with an incredible
facility; went out of the house in all haste, without speaking a word to any
man, and stayed not before he was with this Operator: but he found him in his
bed, and so sick, that it was not possible for him to rise; Yet sir, said
he, send me the wounded man's doublet, and if he be not absolutely dead when I
receive it, I will assure you his life. Lidian being unable to comprehend this,
and fearing to lose time, together with his friends life, he returned with the
same diligence wherewith he went, and brought him the same doublet which was
taken off from Lisander, whom he found in the same estate wherein he left him:
but being returned the second time unto Cleanders, he found that Lisanders
wounds were closed, and his blood stopped, neither could the Surgeons, more
than any of the company, tell the cause. Then did he tell them what he had
done, whereat they all wondered: But the old Gentleman, whom Cleander had left
with Calista when he went into Holland, told them that he had seen the very
like practiced in the person of the father of S. Andrew de Vins, a brave
Gentleman of Provence, known by them all, who being at the siege of Rochel
Squire unto Monsieur, afterward Hen. the third, cast himself before his Mr.
when he saw a Harquebush levelled and discharged at him, whereby he received
the shot in his breast, and was healed by a man who never saw any thing but his
doublet. Shortly after Lisander came unto himself, which Cleander ran
presently to tell unto Calista; who being a little before recovered, received
with this new cause of joy for hope of Lisanders life, a new occasion of
affliction, out of fear that she had discovered her love. Nevertheless it was
received by Cleander, as an honest and pitiful affection which she truly bare
unto the virtues and merits of Lisander, who having recovered knowledge, with
so feeble a voice that he could hardly be heard, had yet lost the memory of all
that was past; neither did he know why, or whereof he was sick. The Surgeons
forbad him to speak: and after they had considered of all things that were fit
for his recovery, they bethought themselves of the cause of this assasination.
No body could imagine from whom it should proceed; for Lisander had no enemies,
at the least which were discovered, and those who had so wickedly wounded him,
being disarmed after they were dead, could not be known. In the end, the Page
whom they had at first sent, was found hid behind a door, who being brought
unto Cleander, confessed that this match was set by a cousen of Cloridons, who
was first killed by Lidian; he desiring to revenge upon Lisander the blow
which was given in the tilting, had with those three others, who were all
Cloridons servants or friends, sworn Lisanders death. Cleander and all the
company were extremely offended, and went all the next morning at the Kings
rising to complain of the attempt, and to demand justice against those whom
they had killed: but Cloridon demanding it also with them, and witnessing more
sorrow for Lisanders wounds, than for the others death, testified that he knew
nothing of so divellish an enterprise: And the King, who loved them all,
desiring to make them friends, expressed, that for the love he bare Cloridon,
he should be glad if they would content themselves with their deaths, who had
worthily received it as a chastisement for their fault: wherefore all things so
rested; the dead were dead, Cloridon and Lisander wounded, were afterward made
friends by the Kings command.

The End of the third Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE FOURTH BOOK.
THe haste which I made to have Lisander cured, and the necessity of his evil
remedied, made me forget in my last part how Olinda and Argire, having watched
at Cleanders almost until day, retired to their houses, the one conducted by
Alcidon, the other by Lidian and Clarangeus, who with the first flames of their
love felt also those of jealousy. Olinda, who by that which had happened,
judged what might happen, fearing to be the cause of a second mischief,
determined to go no more unto Calista; who never stirring from Lisander,
continually kept him company, and showed the best countenance unto him that she
could, feeding him with sweet hopes, and raising in him an imagination, that
as soon as he was recovered of those his bodily wounds, she would also ease
those of his mind (which he said she had made.) In the mean time, Lidian
and Clarangeus, not able longer to endure Olinda's absence, went both of them
to her at her house, where she entreated them, not to take it in evil part,
if for some important reasons which she would not speak, she did conjure them
for some time to deprive her of the honor which she received by their company.
This she said with great demonstration of sorrow, seeing her self constrained
to make this request unto them: Both of them witnessing as much obedience unto
her as love, promised to forbear, although this banishment were more cruel
unto them, than any torment which her rigor could have inflicted. Alcidon (who
made the third in this business) remonstrating unto them what extremities they
were brought unto by their jealousy, having made them commit a fault, a
relapse whereinto could not be but inexcusable and mortal; entreated them to
give this passion unto their friendship, or at the least not to take it away,
having once given it before: and if they loved Olinda, they ought not to
constrain her good will by violence, nor make her odious unto all the world,
as being the cause of dividing so ancient, and perfect a friendship as theirs
was, with many other reasons: so that they promised not to forbear loving of
her, for that was not in their power, but at the least to abstain from seeing
her, as they had promised.

This promise was for some days religiously kept by the two friends, who would
not by any means be justly taxed for wronging each others friendship, but
believing that they should either vanquish, or by diversion wipe away their
love and jealousy, seeing every day all sorts of objects excepting that which
was most fixed in their imagination: But Clarangeus having taken a lodging near
unto Olinda's, to the end he might see at his window, as she went in and out at
the door, her whom he durst not go to see in the house, (as lovers have
strange fantasies, and content themselves with what they can get, when they
cannot get what they would) made Lidian think this his taking of a house was
no apt means to make him forget her. Wherefore believing that he was
dispensed of his promise, and no more to be bound to the oath which was first
broken by his rival, he found the means to meet Olinda one evening in the
garden of the Tuilleryes, where she was gone to walk, and there (with some
tears) complaining of the torment which he suffered in his absence, by the
commandment which she had given not to see her, which Clarangeus had
disobeyed, in taking a house so near hers; expressed his love so lively unto
her, that Olinda who truly loved him, and did not like that Clarangeus had
taken a lodging so near hers, believing that he had done it to observe her
actions, suffered him to see her at certain hours; which she did assign unto
him so secretly, that it was not perceived by Clarangeus, although her near
neighbor. These visites were by night: Olinda retired her self early, and
went late to bed; and when every one else was asleep, Lidian, without any
followers or light, was brought into her house, and spent a great part of the
night with her, although with all the honest respect which could be between
honorable lovers: But the Moon, envious of Lidians fortune, discovered him to
jealous Clarangeus, who watching like a Dragon at a window which looked into
the street a little upon the one side from his Mistresses, saw him come out
from thence about two hours after midnight. The unfitness of the time, and
the astonishment to see him come from a place where his word and friendship had
barred him the entrance, raised such humors in his brain, that he could
hardly contain himself: and to perfect the cause of his complaint, Lidian
being in the street, and Olinda in her window, they took new leave one of the
other (without thinking or remembering of their neighbor) with such amorous
words from Lidian, and so favorable from Olinda, that Clarangeus fell from an
ague into a fever; and Lidian (as if he had not had leisure in two hours,
which he was with her to speak, so blind are both love and lovers) entreated
her to fling him down her handkerchiefe, that he might have the contentment to
lodge with it, and to embrace it all night, in remembrance of the dearest
person unto him in the world. Olinda, who was otherwise discreet and wise, so
far yielded unto his prayers, that as well to satisfy his importunity, as
not to let him stay any longer there, cast it unto him, thinking that he would
go his way so soon as he had taken it up: But the wind, jealous of this
favor, blew it upon the bars of Clarangeus window, who saw this action with
a motion of so violent a passion, that impatience and rage were likely to have
carried him into the street, there to decide by a last combat the difference
and jealousy of their love. Olinda and Lidian were in no less pain,
perceiving (although too late) their undiscreet improvidence; yet her
Gentlewoman running speedily with a pole, got down the handkerchiefe, which
Lidian catching before it came unto the ground, and in his Mistresses sight
lovingly kissing it, retired himself, leaving unto her a good night, and unto
Clarangeus the worst that ever he felt. The next morning they failed not to
meet at the Mass, rather to see Olinda than for any devotion: where Clarangeus
coming unto Lidian, said, You cannot now deny that you have not seen Madam
Olinda, both against her command and your promise. Against my promise, I do
confess, answered Lidian, because you have made me dispense with it, in first
breaking your own; but not against her commandment, because she has permitted
me, as she did formerly forbid me.

Clarangeus provoked with this answer, said, Wherein have I broken my promise?
I yet never did it, and do well know the means to compel others to perform
what they promise. You need not compel (answered Lidian) those who are ready
to pay: and you did break your word, when having promised not to see Madam
Olinda, you took a lodging close unto hers. Well Sir, answered Clarangeus, I
would not so lightly have departed from your friendship, as you have from mine;
but this is the truth, herein I am your enemy. Sir, answered Lidian, I will
always oppose my services unto your hatred: But I entreat you to consider,
that our promise is reciprocal, and has no more force than my Ladies
commandment gave it; and if you (nevertheless) believe that I have sooner
broken my word than you, pardon it unto me, and think that I have no more
power of my self, than you have of your self. The holiness of the place, and
their friends which did accompany them, interrupting their discourse, they
heard Mass together with Olinda, who understood part of their dispute, and was
no less offended with Lidians answer, than with Clarangeus complaints; who was
the more provoked at that time by Lidians holding of the handkerchief against
his mouth. Their friends having sent to seek for Alcidon and Cleander, and
they coming, the best means they could find to agree them, was to entreat
them that their differences might be determined by her will, who was the cause
thereof. Lidian at the first word consented hereunto, assuring himself of
Olinda's favor: but Clarangeus, distrusting his cause, would not refer
himself unto the judgment of a woman, already gained by his adversary; yet
Alcidon and Cleander used so many persuasions unto him, that he yielded, if
Olinda made choice of Lidian for her servant, Clarangeus should leave her
service, and should never pretend any interest in her love; and in like manner,
if she should rather choose Clarangeus, Lidian should forbear any further suit,
and never come in any place where he might hope for grace or favor from her.
Commission to deliver this agreement unto Olinda, was given unto those who had
made it, and their honors were engaged to the performance of these conditions,
declaring themselves enemies unto the first breakers thereof. Olinda being
equally offended with them both, believing also that she had power to call
back Lidian when she pleased, and not thinking it fit to make choice of one,
and offend the other, resolved to be rid of them both, entreating both the one
and the other to absent themselves, and promising to choose him for her husband
who should last come unto her. The Oracle proceeding from this mortal
goddess, so unexpected by those who asked it, so astonished Clarangeus, but
most Lidian, that the next morning, without communicating their design, or
taking leave of any person, they got to horse, leaving the Court, and all their
friends in great sorrow.

In the mean time feeble Lisander by little and little recovered his strength,
and no less by Calista's charms than by the Operators skill (who only
applied his salves unto the doublet) lost the pain of his wounds: The
contentment which he received in her company was so great, that fearing to lose
that, he was unwilling to be healed; out of which respect, when she asked of
him how his wounds were, he answered, Better than I would, Madam, because the
happiness which I receive in your most dear company, does infinitely surpass
the pain which they put me to: and I do so much fear the losing of this
glory when I shall be healed, that to preserve it eternally, I could wish them
incurable. Calista gently smiled at these words, and told him, that he should
only take care for the healing of them, and after they should enjoy more
pleasure being whole, than in being sick. But what pleasure Madam, answered
Lisander, can I hope from your rigor, if you use me always according unto
your accustomed manner? You complain without cause, replied Calista, knowing
(as you do well) unto what extremity I have been reduced to please you: but
as it is said, to be willing to be healed is a beginning of health; only be
willing to be healed, that I may see you once do what I desire. With these
sweet words Lisander thought that Calista did but defer the remedy of his
love, until the healing of his wounds did make him capable of the receiving
thereof: And thus deceiving his hope with his evil, unsensibly he was reduced
to his former health. But then when Lisander thought to gather the fruit of
this love, for which he had suffered so many rigorous absences, travels, and
wounds, and that Cleanders, Alcidon and Berontus riding after Lidian and
Clarangeus, who being gone this very day (as we said) put them all in fear
that they were gone to fight; made him hope of a favorable occasion to enjoy
his Mistress. She entering (with Clarinda) into his chamber, spoke thus unto
him: Sir, since the time that I suffered you to see me at Beauplaine, unknown
to my husband, I have been always followed with a multitude of torments,
which have never left me in peace; and I do believe that God has justly
suffered them to punish in me the wicked design which you have had to
dishonor a person who entirely loves you, although I have committed no other
offense, but suffering that which I could not hinder, and that I did not give
notice of an injury which you procure unto him, who ought to be more dear unto
me than you are, and who ought to be more dear unto you than I am. This has
been confirmed unto me in this last affliction, which I have had for your
wounds; in which time I made a vow to God, that if he showed you so much mercy
as to suffer you to escape, I would never draw his anger upon my head, by
having any connivence with your crime: I do entreat you therefore Sir, and
conjure you by that love which you say, and I believe you bear me, that if you
will love me, you would love me honorably, and according to the love which I
owe unto Cleander, and the friendship which he bears you; if not, I do most
humbly entreat you to pardon me, if in paying the vow which I have made unto
God, and in satisfying the just obligations which are amongst men, I am
constrained to entreat you to retire your self, and use that great courage
(which you make appear in every danger) to suffer constantly the loss of a
person, who cannot be acquired lawfully by you.

I would feign have all those who are apprehensive of love, think with what
patience Lisander could hear a speech so little looked for, at the instant
when he expected the possessing of a pleasure, so long, and so vainly
followed. Ha, Madam, answered he, is it possible that in the midst of so many
fair hopes, which you have made me conceive of your pity, you should use me
so cruelly? Is this the recompense of so many services which I have done you,
of so many dangers whereinto I have thrown my self, of so many wounds which I
have received, and so many passions which I yet suffer? Had it not been better
you had then suffered me to dye when I was so near death, when I should have
felt no pain (it being a kind of pity to kill those quickly which of
necessity must dye) rather than to make me suffer it with so much violence
after so much sweetness, having prolonged my life to prolong my torment? Alas,
it was not without cause I feared to be healed too soon, seeing that in
recovering my health, I lose your favor; and then to feign a counterfeit vow
to excuse your ingratitude, and cover your cruelty with the cloak of Religion,
will not heaven punish this hypocrisy? Lisander, said Calista, I will speak
but one word, after which I entreat you not to hope for any other: I take the
same heaven to witness (which you do invoke against me) that I grieve that I
cannot love you as you love me; and do wish that I may be punished according
to your desire, if I use either hypocrisy or dissimulation: You wrongfully
accuse me of ingratitude and cruelty, seeing I cannot satisfy you, without
being ungrateful unto Cleander; nor have pity upon you, without being cruel
unto my self. I have told you that I loved you, and with so perfect a love,
that it could not be increased nor lessened since the first birth thereof;
neither am I ignorant of your merits toward me, but withal, I told you what
hindered me from acknowledging them, and to let you see that you lose the glory
of your good turns by the recompense which you require: is there any
appearance of justice or reason, that for having saved my fathers, my brothers,
and my husbands lives, you should bind me to make them lose their honor? Do
you think, that if I should forget my self so far, I could excuse my self
upon the obligations wherein I am tied unto you, and justify the injury which
I should do them by the services which you have done unto me? Content your
self that I have no less grief to give you this command, than you have to
receive it; and the same passion which you feel, because you cannot obtain
that which you unlawfully desire, I suffer, because I cannot lawfully yield it
unto you. At this word Calista went out of the door, leaving Lisander in that
confusion and perplexity which may easily be imagined. He went three or four
times about the chamber, sat down, and rose, cast himself upon his bed, and
not finding in any place the rest which he every where sought for, after a
thousand discourses in his imagination, as little resolved as he was at the
first, he used these words: O ungrateful woman, and I more fool to think
the earth could bear other! Well, Calista, death shall free me from thy
cruelty (if thy tyranny does not stretch after death) and so thou shall avoid
the sight of me, but not of my Ghost, which, together with the Furies,
revengers of my blood, shall always hang about thy neck; yet I will not dye
before I my self have enjoyed the contentment of my revenge, and do show
thee, that I am as able to hurt thee as to oblige thee. Was there no means but
a pretense of courtesy (like a gentle bit in a horse mouth) to constrain me
to endure this woman's indignities? But stay thy madness, Lisander; thou thy
self art both ungrateful and disloyal, whereof thou complainest: base as
thou art, thou do with infidelity and treachery go about to deceive thy
friend; thou do also injury Calista, because she will not consent unto thy
wickedness. Alas, who shall punish me for these crimes? and if I be not
punished, who shall ever pardon me?

Thus Lisander, sometimes injuring Calista, and then crying her mercy, digested
his bitterness with so much anguish, that he thought he should end his life
with the day: insomuch that Cleander, who in the morning left him in good
disposition, coming home at night with Alcidon and Berontus without hearing
news either of Lidian or Clarangeus found him sick in his bed: Yet he rose
early in the morning before Sun, and went unto Cleander, who was a bed with
Calista, unto whom (having given him good morrow) he said, that resting
better this night, than he had done (although with terrible disquiets, out of
the fear he had that Clarangeus and Lidian might fight again) he found
himself so well, that he was resolved never to rest until he had either
found the one or the other. But my dear friend (said Cleander) the weak
estate wherein you are, will not permit you; Less will my care suffer me to
take rest, answered Lisander, for if it should happen so unfortunately that
they should fight again, I should never enjoy my life; When (replied Cleander)
will you come again? So soon as I shall find them, answered Lisander; who
having embraced him, went from him unto the side of the bed where Calista
lay; unto whom (in saluting her) he said aloud: Madam, I should leave you with
more sorrow, if I did not know how acceptable the service will be which I go
about to do unto you. Cleander believed that he spoke this in respect of
Lidian, but Calista better apprehending his speeches, referred them to his
departure: yet faining to understand them in the other sense, answered thus:
Sir, you have tied us in so many bonds, that although you bring back my
brother, hardly can we be more obliged; for debts being infinite cannot be
increased; and from this infiniteness it follows, that not only your
services are agreeable, but all your other actions in respect of them, although
they were not so in their own nature; but only your departure, which, in
regard it does deprive us of the contentment we receive in your company,
cannot be pleasing unto us. Lisander said nothing unto this, but having kissed
her, went his way speaking to himself; O treacherous Calista, how artificially
do thou hide thy malice, and minglest sweetness with cruelty! From thence he
went to take leave of Alcidon and Berontus, who would at any hand accompany
him: but he remonstrated unto them, that it was much better for them to
separate themselves, the easier to find their friends. So going alone, he
took his way toward Burgundy, and stayed not before he was come unto a sister
of his called Ambrisia, who had been married in that country, and then was a
young widow, rich, of a great spirit, and of an excellent beauty, who receiving
her brother as the dearest thing in the world, could not so divert his
melancholy, but that after he had strove the space of a month against his
love, he yielded to the violence thereof, and fell from this melancholy into a
strange sickness, which produced the most admirable effects, that ever memory
has heard. In the mean time, Cleander having a journey to make into Italy, to
dispose of some possessions which he had in Naples, into which place for the
like effect he was accustomed to go every three years, left Berontus with
Calista, and Calista accompanied with the heaviest solitariness that ever she
was reduced unto. And unto him there happened this accident, so memorable, that
(I think) the like is seldom found in any history: He being gone a great way
in Italy, to a place called Aquapendent, at which place always in his journey
to Naples he was accustomed to lodge: the place was inconvenient enough, and
Cleander came so late, that the lodgings were all taken, and he forced to
travel further, or lie in the streets. He asked to speak with his old Host,
who (said he) before he would have suffered me to be thus unprovided, would
have lain out of his own bed for me. Answer was made, that his old Host was
dead; yet there was a chamber where a bed (if he pleased) should be made for
him, but of late time it had been frequented with spirits, for which cause no
man durst lie there. Let me have a bed there, said Cleander, I had rather lie
there with them, than in the streets with my men. A bed was then made in a
chamber, which he knew to be the very same, wherein he was accustomably lodged
in the life time of his old Host; where having supped with his people, and
being ready for his bed, his servants retired to look for such lodgings as
the straitness of the house would afford; leaving him with the door shut
unto him, sitting by the fire side, presently he heard a noise at the door,
and turning his head that way, he saw a man come into the chamber, of the same
shape, proportion, and countenance that his dead Host was, who coming unto the
chair wherein Cleander sat, stood still, steadfastly looking him in the face,
without doing or saying any thing. Cleander, whose heart was capable of any
thing but fear, felt nevertheless an unknown shivering run through all his
veins, which curdled his blood; yet he had the heart to say unto him, Good
even my Host, I was told you were dead: So I am, answered the Spirit. How then
come you here, answered Cleander? I come to tell you that I am killed (said
he) and withal to entreat you, by our ancient acquaintance, that you will
cause me to be buried: you shall find my body in such a pit, under a great
heap of stones which have been cast upon me. I do conjure you once again to
give me burial. Well mine Host, answered Cleander, to morrow I will cause you
to be buried. Will you no other thing? No, said the Spirit; and giving him good
night, retired, leaving Cleander more desirous to see day than to sleep: yet he
was not further troubled all that night. The next morning rising very early, he
sent for the Justice of the place, unto whom having recited the vision which he
saw, not sleeping but waking, and before he went to bed, he led him unto the
pit which the Spirit had told him of, and finding it full of stones, they
caused it to be emptied, until they found the body which lay under them,
easily known to be the old Host: every body was astonished at the fact.
Cleander left the information of the cause unto the Justice, and to acquit
himself of his promise to the Host, caused him to be buried with an
honorable service; wherein having spent all that day, he resolved to lie that
night again in the chamber. Being there alone, much about the hour that he
came the night before, my Host came again, and at his entrance into the
chamber, he said, God give you a good evening Sir. Cleander, who could
willingly have spared this visitation, answered him, Good even my Host: have I
not performed my promise? Yes Sir, answered the Spirit, I am now come to thank
you, and to tell you, that if you please to command me any thing where I go,
there is nothing which I can do for you, that I will not do. Friend (answered
Cleander) there is nothing that I have to do in that country which you speak
of, wherefore God give you Peace, and the Rest which you desire. The like I
wish unto you, said the Spirit, and so Sir I bid you farewell. Farewell my
Host, said Cleander; unto whom these complements began to be troublesome
Nevertheless the spirit being at the door ready to go away, Cleander called
him again, and said unto him, Mine Host, one word with you. The Spirit
returning, said, What is your pleasure; Sir* I entreat you, said Cleander, if
you have any power where you go, you would oblige me so far, as to
advertise me of my death three days before I dye. Well, answered the Spirit, I
will do it if I can. Thereupon he vanished, and Cleander presently after
going to bed, slept till the morning; neither he nor any other ever after
either hearing or seeing any thing in that Chamber.

In this time Lisander lying at his sisters house in Burgundy very sick, fell
into that weakness, that he lost all knowledge, and was given over by the
Physicians (who were ignorant of his disease) unto the prayers of the
religious. He had lost both speech and sight, and when he recovered either, it
was only to see fearful illusions; or speak raving, or do such extravagant
actions as never entre^ into the thought of man. Ambrisia bewailing his evil,
with tears as bitter as the remedy was desperate, and seeing the Physicians
knew not what to give; nor what to do (as one who is accustomed to have
recourse unto God when humane helps fail) sent for a Capuchin from a Covent
which was near, to exhort him with constancy to give up his life, unto him who
was the author thereof. At her sending, two Capuchins came, before whom
Lisander fell into so grievous a vomiting, that among other things which he
vomited up at his mouth, he cast up Pen-knives, Inke-hornes, Images of wax,
Bracelets of hair, Cart-nailes: which were not illusions, and fained, but so
real and true, that they yet remain in the hands of the Capuchins, and are
kept as perpetual relics unto their Covent. These good Fathers seeing so
wonderful a Prodigy, lifted up their eyes and voices to heaven, praying God
to have pity upon this Knights soul, whose body they thought was so near an
end. One of the two, who was young, and who hid a goodly personage, and a
beautiful fac^ under this poor habit, began to pour forth so many tears,
that all the standers by no less wondered at him, than at the unknown and
strange sickness of Lisander; unto whom, seeing him a little recover his
spirits, he spoke in this manner; Lisander, my ancient friend, seeing it has
pleased God to reduce you into this pitiful estate, be it either to call you
to the glory of a second life, or to let you see the misery of this, pull out
of your mind these deceiving thoughts of the World, before you be constrained
to leave them, and lift your mind unto heaven, before you go thither: You
shall see that it is the Haven of our Navigation, the end of our Course, and
the true land which has been promised by our Father. This is a cursed one,
into which we have been banished for our sins, and our bodies are the
Prisons where we are detained: If it please God that it be broken by death,
and that you be called from this banishment, resolve your self freely to the
liberty of your soul, and unto the glorious return thereof into the holy city
of the heavenly Jerusalem, which is the natural Country thereof. There shall
you be free from so many travels wherewith you are now enslaved, and there
shall you no more remember the storme^ wherewith you have been beaten; you
shall only there give praise to God, that you have avoided them without
shipwreck, enjoying the sovereign good in recompense of all your evils, and
changing the miserable condition of man into the happiness of Angels: Courage
then Lisander, valiantly meet death in the face, whom you have so many times
braved in the most perilous hazzards of this life; the passage from earth unto
heaven is not so terrible, nor so painful as is thought: Our Lord has
himself plained the way, and so disarmed death, that he can neither hurt nor
fear those, who rest assuredly in his goodness. Emplore his aid, he neither
can nor will refuse any person relying upon him: for, what can he refuse unto
us, having given himself for us? so much lessening himself, as to be borne
basely, to live poorly, to dye shamefully, that if his divinity had not been
witnessed, not alone by men living and dead, but by Angels and by Devils, the
obeying of the winds and waters, by the trembling of the earth, and darkning
of the Sun; it would be impossible to receive it in our belief. Lisander
eased by the voiding of these things which he had vomited, and comforted by
the remonstrance of this good religious man, lifted up his ^ye^ to his face,
and having earnestly beheld him a good space, laboring to recover his speech,
and to remember where he had seen him, in a feeble and broken voice, spoke
unto him in this manner. Father, I have always little feared Death, assuredly
trusting in Gods mercy; wherefore my hope of one, surpassing my fear of the
other, I cannot be afraid of a passage which is common to all men; I know
nothing is more natural, that living is not more ordinary than dying: And so
far am I from being astonished at it, that I confess, I have desired it with
less ^eare than impatience. That which afflicts me, and fears me, is to
see things come out of my body, which never entered into it, nor cannot be
framed there, and therefore cannot come naturally from me. And if any wonder
can have place in my mind, next unto that, (...) is to see my self known,
and to hear my self named in this agony by a man, whose face I think I have
seen, and heard his voice in another world, and in another habit. This good
man discovering then his head, which was almost hid under his Coule, and making
himself known unto Lisander, with tears in his eyes in kissing him, said, if
nothing were wanting unto your health, but the removing of these two causes of
astonishment, I durst promise my self to see you well; no less astonishing
the company with the Miracle of your healing, than it is yet with the wonder of
your evil: For the things which you have vomited, although they are true, and
seem to be truly come out of your body, ought rather to be ascribed to the
illusions of the evil Spirit, who has deceived our sense, than unto the
testimony of our own eyes. And it is to be believed that they are real,
seeing they are palpable: But it is to be believed also that he has charmed
our sight, as the Operator, who last healed you, charmed your wounds and healed
them, in applying salves to your Doublet. And it is likely that from this first
charm, proceeds now this second: For the Devil has done nothing for nothing,
and did not succor you in that extremity, but only to reduce you into a
greater. As for your astonishment, which proceeds from my knowing you, I
think it is now wiped away: And Clarangeus, having been so perfect a friend
unto Lisander, cannot be unknown by so strange a change as mine, or by the
violence of a sickness like yours. For the rest, you have reason in saying you
have seen me in another world; for this wherein I now am, is much differing
from that wherein I then was. Lisander, who knowing Clarangeus (who, cast from
serving, and banished from the presence of Olinda, had confined himself into a
Cloister) embracing him, with a joy mingled with sorrow and astonishment to see
him in this habit, answered: Is it possible that my eyes do not deceive me,
Clarangeus, and that it is not one of the illusions of my sickness? how have
you left the world? As those (replied Clarangeus) who being beaten by storms
at Sea, do search for some safe Port where they may be covered from the
tempest. O how happy are you, said Lisander, to have that power of your self!
Yea, if you knew the happiness, said Clarangeus, and if after so many storms
wherewith you have been beaten, you would (with me) prove the sweetness and
quietness of a religious life, you would despise and mock at Honors, Loves,
and other vanities, which cast away the most part of men. I would to God, said
Lisander, I could do it, but I know my self so weak and so chained to the
world, that though I should leave it to day; I should take it again to morrow;
and, as it ordinarily happens, my second entrance would be much worse than my
first. You have reason, replied Clarangeus, For as there is nothing worse for
health, than to pass from one extremity to another; so there is nothing more
dangerous in the world, than to go from a religious life unto an irregular
one. From thence it comes, that there is nothing more evil than a Monk, who
has cast away his frocke; and that the most part of our errors owe their birth
unto these Apostata's, who, as vipers, do endeavor in their birth to rend the
sides of their mother. Ambrisia, and many Gentlemen of the Country, who were
come to see her in this sickness of her brothers, were no less joyful to see
him so well recovered, than of Clarangeus his discourse and knowledge. Unto
whom Lisander in continuing his speech said, that not finding himself strong
enough to observe such a perpetual vow, he promised ((...) the least if it
pleased God to restore him to his former health) the first voyage he would
undertake after his sickness, should be unto our Lady of Mount Serra^.
Clarangeus confirmed him in this devotion, and afterward taking his leave, he
returned with the other religious man into the Covent.

Shortly after, were it by the prayers of those good Fathers, or through
Lisanders vow, he began to amend; but (as the proverb faith) sickenesses come
on horseback, and go away on foot, of a Snailes pace. It was fifteen days
before he could rise out of his bed, and fifteen days more after he was
out of his bed before he could get strength: which being past, and having
visited his friends, but principally Clarangeu^, and taken leave of his Sister
Ambrisia, he secretly caused a ^acket of gray Serge to be made, and a Cloak
of skins over it, and having gotten a Palmers staff, in a fair Evening he
began his Pilgrimage. In the mean time some of those who had left him sick,
going unto Paris, not only carried news of his sickness, but of the habit
which Clarangeus had taken; which brought forth no less astonishment than
sorrow in the minds of their Friends. Olinda herself witnessed some feeling of
pity which she had of poor Clarangeus, and it was increased by the grief
she had for Lidians loss; But this was nothing in respect of what Calista
suffered for Lisanders sickness, she being so much the more afflicted, by how
much she durst not make it appear, although her brothers and her husbands
absence had been color enough for her to have justified her grief. Alcidon
being advertised of these accidents, which happened after the departure of his
friends, determined to go see them, and taking his leave of Argire, took his
journey toward Burgundy: But finding Lisander gone, and being no less glad to
hear that he was well recovered, than sorrowful because he knew not whither
he was gone, he went unto the Covent, which Clarangeus had chosen for his
abode. He came a little after their Evening song, and being guided unto his
chamber, found that he was busied in making a little wooden frame for a
window. Alcidon embraced him not without some tears of Compassion, and being
joyfully received by Clarangeus, they sat them down, a table being between
them, upon which Clarangeus had set his window frame; and then Alcidon began to
say unto him, Sir, is this the trade of so brave a Gentleman as you are? have
you so much forgotten what you are in the world, that you will ruin your
fortune, together with the hope of your friends? But if you have no respect of
them, at the least have consideration what your enemies will say; Do you
think that they will believe that Devotion has reduced you unto this
Cloister? no truly, they will believe rather that it is some violent passion
of love, or some weakness of spirit, which has rather by despair than sound
judgment transported you. I tell you, answered Clarangeus, that this is an
excellent fine frame for a window, and the chamber will be much the better;
when it shall be set up. Ha, Sir, answered Alcidon, what do you utter? leave
these frames and windows, are those things worthy of your courage? will you
shut up that greatness which does attend you within this little chamber? But I
tell you, answered Clarangeus, that with a little oil of Spike it will be
clear, and the smell will not be amiss. Alcidon seeing that he answered so
from the ma^ter, in the end said unto him, Sir, I see well that the discourse
does not please you, I will follow it no further, but only to assure you, that
it proceeds from affection which I have long borne unto you, and which I will
pr^serve unto you, so long as I shall remember your merits which do oblige
me. Sir, said Clarangeus, when you shall speak of any thing to me which is not
against my salvation, I shall be glad to hearken unto you, and to answer you,
as one who has always dearly esteemed, and will eternally cherish the memory
of your friendship: But I pray speak no more of returning into the arms of so
dangerous an enemy, as the world; I am exceeding happy that I have escaped so
good cheap, and I shall always bless my disgraces, which have wrought me
this felicity. Alcidon would not further impor^ne him, but taking leave of him,
and lodging one night a^ Ambris^a's house, took pos^e the next day to return
to the Cour^, where being come, he delivered unto Calista the news of
Lisanders health, and confirmed unto Olinda that which she had formerly heard
of Clarangeus his vow, leaving them both in care to know what was become of
Lidian and Lisander.

Calista in this time led so solitary and retired a life, that she was
neither visited, neither did she visit any body, but Olinda and Argire. And
although the bravest and greatest in the Court sighed for her love, and that
she was the subject of the richest (...), and of the beautifullest Spirits in
France, who all together assailed her chastity; they were nevertheless but as
ways against a rock, which break themselves without moving it: so that she
was no less admired for her virtue, than adored for her beauty. But, as we
seem to have more ^lination to evil than to good, Clarinda was not able to
(...) her in this perfect example of chastity, which she practiced before her,
as she did in the favor which she had lightly y^ded unto Lisander* then when
she permitted him (...) see (...) she contented her self within the bounds of
her (...) honesty, her example had with reason served her; but she passed so
far in love to a young Gentleman (...), who often visited Berontus, more for
the love which he bare unto Clarinda than unto him, that Calista was
constrained to open her eyes: But her misfortune was such, that having
communicated unto this Maid the honest love which she bare unto Lisander, she
durst not chastise her, nor reprehend her with the free liberty of a Mistress,
fearing nothing; doubting (that as the false glasses which represent all faces
much different from the natural) she should make her own affection seem
clean otherwise than it was, she only gently remonstrated unto her her
fault, and not daring to search the soar unto the bottom, she suffered it to
increase to that height, that it was past all hope of cure, and grew the Spring
of all misfortunes, which we shall see in the sequel of this Story.

The End of the fourth Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE FIFTH BOOK.
IN the Book going before we have left Lisander going toward our Lady of
Mount Serrat, who (because he would not be drawn to stay in towns, through
which he might pass, nor at strange sights which he might see) traveled
forty days after his departure, over those high mountains which serve as an
everlasting bar between two of the greatest kingdoms in the world; and
entering by the country of Rosilion into Catolonia, he came in the end to the
holy Monastery of the blessed Virgin. After he had paid his vows, confessed
his sins with tears, and prayed with fervency, as he rose up from before the
great Altar where he had kneeled, beholding the beauty of the Temple, and the
rich Tapestry wherewith it was adorned; he saw three or four men apparelled
like slaves, standing under a Lamp of silver, which was lighted before the
holy Image: and one of them who by his shape, fashion and action seemed to be
master of the other, although he was no better clothed than they, asked the
Sexton why this silver Lamp was placed before the other of gold, which was
much richer and bigger than the other? who answered unto him in this manner;
That Lamp of silver which you see there, was heretofore vowed by a King of
France, and that which is after it, was given by our King: and as well because
it is gold, and so to be preferred before the other (being silver, less also
in quantity and quality) as because it seemed unjust that any other whatsoever,
should precede our great King in his kingdom, he preceding all others in
extension of Empire; we have diverse times endeavored to place that of Spain
before that of France, and as often lost our time as we did endeavor it,
because in the next morning we found them again in their first order; so that
we have been constrained to let them alone, after we had in vain a thousand
times changed them. Your King (said the Slave then) ought hereby to know, that
there is a superior power which will not suffer him to dispute the right of
eldership with the King of France, neither did he ever dispute it but to his
loss, nor ever shall but to his confusion. Presently did Lisander by his
gesture and speech know this Slave; yet the strange habit wherein he was
clothed, and great distance from the place where he had left him, contradicted
his judgment, and made him doubt of what he saw. But the Slave beholding him,
and being in the like perplexity and doubt, could not imagine that this
Pilgrim was the same Lisander, who four or five months before had left him in
Paris; wherefore to clear his doubt, he came unto him, and then knew him
plainly both in face and voice.

Lisander seeing it was his friend Cleander, running to embrace him, with
tears of joy, asked him by what good or evil fortune he was met in a place so
remote from his own, and in a habit so differing from his condition. Cleander
no less ravished with the same astonishment and joy, asked him the like
question. The admiration of this meeting ceasing, they entered into greater,
when they told unto one another the accidents which happened unto them.
Lisander told him how he had been sick, and of those strange things which
prodigiously he had vomited at his mouth, and how having been visited by the
Capuchins when all hope of life was lost, he was known by Clarangeus, now
entered into a religious Order, whose conversation, together with his own
extreme sickness, had caused him to make that vow which he had there to pay,
never once thinking of so happy an encounter. Cleander, more wondering than
before at his friends relation, in exchange, told him the discourse of his own
journey, and the vision of his Host; and proceeding in telling what you have
heard, he also said, how being returned from Naples to Rome, and from thence
to Lygorne, the convenience of a small Galley which was bound for Marcels, and
the desire which he had to hasten his return into France, made him imbarque
himself: but being upon the coast of Genoa, they were encountered by a Pirate
of Argire named Marrabut, who having quickly taken them (being altogether
without arms, and so without any means of resistance) was carrying them into
Afric, when a storm, favorable unto all us Captives, cast him into the Gulf
of Barcelon, where being retaken by a Galley of Malta, which a Spanish Knight
commanded, they were set at liberty; and seeing himself so near unto our Lady
of Mount Serrat, he had come thither to give thanks unto God for his
deliverance.

That day, and the night following they ate and rested together, they and their
people (for the other Slaves with Cleander were his servants, and Lisander had
a Gentleman and two Lackeyes with him:) Cleander enquiring if he had learnt
any news of Lidian. I did persuade my self (answered Lisander) that I should
have learnt something of him from Clarangeus, but he told me, that he had
neither seen him not heard of him, since the time they departed from Olinda. I
much fear, said Cleander, that the same despair which wrought upon
Clarang^us, has also brought him to the like extremity. With this talk,
sleep, assisted with weariness, took fast hold of them, until it was fair
day next morning, which was a great feast unto our Lady: upon which occasion a
number of Pilgrims were come unto the Covent, when word was brought them, that
they should rise, if they would hear a Hermit of the mountain preach; unto
whom (in regard of the great fruit of his eloquence) it was permitted, being
otherwise against the rule which forbid them, the better to follow their
contemplative life. This news made them rise, and go to the Church, where the
Sermon was already begun, and so great a number of Pilgrims, that they could
not come near the Pulpit. At the first they perceived this Hermits Eloquence
to be accompanied with great youth, and excellent beauty, whereby he no less
delighted his Auditors eyes with his sight, than he charmed their ears with
his words: He had such action in his speech, and such grace in his action,
that he raised attention with no less admiration than silence* and although he
spoke Spanish, he was so neat in his discourse, saying nothing which could
well be omitted, nor omitting any thing which ought to be spoken: his words
were neither curious nor affected, but did properly signify the things which
he would express, and were received by long use and custom; a rule which
whosoever follows cannot fail. He spoke not alone from his lips, but from his
heart: neither did he always observe one sound in his voice, but did carry it
according to the diversity of the subject; always grave and deliberate, full
of sentences, without staying upon after repetitions for the spending of his
hour; sometimes more earnest, sometimes more gentle, but never idely wandering
from his matter. And as his words were not affected, so his countenance was not
composed, but natural and without art. His discourse was free, but orderly: in
brief, so excellent, that our Pilgrims, who were borne and nourished in the
pure French air, did wonder that Spain could bring forth so excellent a
spirit: but at the end of his Sermon, having discovered his head, and Lisander
considering him more nearely, judged by many circumstances, but principally by
the air of his countenance, that he had nothing in him of Spanish but his
tongue; and leaning unto Cleander, said unto him in his ear, What think you
of this Hermit? is he not an able man? So good, answered Cleander, that if
he did appear to me but little less, I would say I knew him: but fearing to
witness my being deceived, I dare not speak what I think. Think you what
you will, answered Lisander; but if I did believe that Lidian were learned, and
spoke so good Spanish, all the world should not persuade me, that he were any
other. For Spanish, answered Cleander, he speaks it as naturally as French,
and so he does Latin and Italian: But for the doctrine, although he be not so
ignorant as the most part of our French Gentlemen, who (out of an unexcusable
sottishness) do take it as a glory to be ignorant of learning; yet I do not
think him capable of treating of this point, whereof this Hermit has so
happily acquitted himself. Whilst they thus discoursed, Lidian (being the
same Hermit of whom they spoke) whom despair (whereinto his Mistress had
driven him as well as Clarangeus) had brought into this Mountain, coming out
of his Pulpet, went into a little Chapel, and kneeled before the Altar:
whither Cleander, together with Lisander, and their servants following, the
better to clear the suspicion which they had that he was his brother-in-law,
after the Hermit had finished his praying, said unto him, Father, we are here
three or four French slaves, who within small time have been taken captives
by the Turks, and have been delivered, yet have lost all that we have; I do
therefore pray, if you preach again this day or to morrow, to do us the
favor to recommend our poverty unto the charitable alms of your well disposed
audience. Lidian looking steadfastly upon him who thus spoke, and seeing
Cleander clothed in those rags, which were no other than a red Wast-coate
of poor Cotton, a pair of Breeches of course cloth, and a blew Cap which he
had in his hand, not being able to imagine that it was his brother-in-law, who
was reduced to this fortune, asked him with a troubled countenance, and an
unassured voice, in what part of France he was borne, how he was taken, and
whither he was going when this misfortune happened? We are borne in the I Will of
France (answered Cleander) at least I am, and those whom you may see in this
habit; for this Pilgrim, and those who accompany him, they are of another
part: we were taken coming from Italy, whither we went in quest of a Knight
whom the cruelty of a Lady has banished out of France. While he was thus
speaking, both he and Lisander had always their eyes fixed upon Lidian, who
with an unconstant countenance often changing color, confessing what he could
not deny, in embracing him, said, Oh brother you have found him; for how can I
hide my name from you, from whom I could never hide my heart? It is not
possible to describe the first motions of this meeting; yet after long
embracing in silence, Cleander said, Brother, embrace this Pilgrim, who is
also of the country, and will tell you news which will be no less welcome
unto you than my coming. The joy wonderfully increased by Lidians knowledge of
Lisander, who in few words told him, how his almost mortal sickness had
wrought in him this heavenly vow. In which sickness he had been visited by
Clarangeus, who had changed the worldly pomp, and his vain pretenses to
Olinda's love, into a Capuchins habit; which brought so great admiration into
Lidians mind, that he did not know whether he should think them dreams or
truths. For who would have thought young men so engaged in love, that they
thereby had ruined the foundations of an ancient friendship, and had been
carried unto such dangerous extremities, through such small occasions; should
in one and the same time choose for their retraict, the one the Cloister of so
austere a profession as the Capuchins, and the other the Cells of so retired an
Hermitage? Who also could have believed, that two friends, whom the Alps and
Perrenian Mountains had divided by ways and designs so distant, and contrary
one unto the other, should meet in one time, in a place so remote from their
affairs, and in habits so differing from their conditions? But to return unto
our disguised Knights, who seeing the other Pilgrims assemble about them, as
curious to know how these extraordinary embracings would end, retired
themselves into the Covent, where dining together, after many discourses* they
resolved to leave the Hermitage, and Mount Serrat, and the next morning to take
their way toward France. After dinner Lidian made another Sermon, at the end
whereof (praying God to bless the assembly, and graciously to accept of those
vows which were paid in the Temple) he took leave first of the holy Virgin,
of the religious Order, and of the holy Mountains, where he had led a life
so solitary, and so sweet; delivering his last farewell in such pitiful words,
and with demonstrations of so tender an affection, that they pierced the very
Rocks, and the walls of this devout house. The next morning, together with
their people, all three of them began their journey: and because Lisander could
not leave his Pilgrims habit without breaking his vow, Cleander and Lidian
also determined to wear theirs until they were come home; so one under the
habit of an Hermit, and the other of a Slave, accompanied our Pilgrim, with
as much contentment in their return, as they had sorrow at their going out.
They entered France by Languedock, and by easy journyes they came in a month
into Burgundy. Ambrisia was then at Paris with Calista, who loved her both for
her own merit, and her brothers sake, although she knew nothing of their
affections. But Clarangeus was in the same Covent where Lisander left him, who
together with his companions going one afternoon to see him, they found him
walking alone in a Garden. Now it was not hard for him to know Lisander,
because he knew the vow which he had made in his sickness; but when he saw
him accompanied with an Hermit and a Slave, he knew not what to think of
either, but saluted both without knowing of them. Afterward turning himself
unto Lisander, I think, said he, in a low voice, that in steed of amendment by
your Pilgrimage, you debauch others, and have reduced this young Hermit from
the solitary life of Mount Serrat, to entangle himself again with the world.
It is true, answered Lisander, but it is upon so good occasion, that there is
more merit in the action, than offense. What merit, replied Clarangeus, can you
find in causing him to break his vow made unto God, and yield himself to the
service of his enemies? Vow he has made none, answered Lisander, and so
broken none; for he has not taken this habit, but to leave it when the evil
influence of a star (the only cause why he took it) is passed over. And of
merit it cannot be said that I have less than is acquired by reconciling of
two persons who were always one, and lately upon a light occasion divided.

You have reason (answered Clarangeus, not imagining of whom he spoke) for
Charity is recommended unto us above all virtues, and without it all other are
unprofitable; For this cause are we commanded to leave our offering at the
foot of the altar, and reconcile our selves unto our brother, and then return
to our offering void of all passion. I am well assured, answered Lisander, that
you know this better than I do; but dispute with this man, whom you will not
find ignorant, and I think, it is with a religious man of this house, with
whom he desires to be reconciled. This word coming near unto Clarangeus,
made him remember the difference he formerly had with Lidian, and in the
instant earnestly beholding him, he cried out: O God, how mavelous are thy
works! Lidian approaching unto him, they embraced, not without sorrow for
their past follies, yet mingled with such joy, that it brought show of tears
into their eyes. Sir, said Lidian, by that love which you bear unto the
religion which now you have undertaken, I do entreat you to pardon those
displeasures which I have done you, and believe, that the sorrow which I
apprehend does far exceed the punishment due unto my fault. It is I, said
Clarangeus, who do cry you mercy for the grief which I have foolishly raised
unto you, and if I have received any from you, I am so much the more obliged
unto you, as unto the cause of this celestial happiness which I enjoy in this
Cloister, and it makes me hope for the glorious life which is in heaven.
Enjoy therefore (O Lidian) your love without fear ever to be troubled by
Clarangeus, and suffer me to possess the contentment which I have in my soul,
by having none in this world. But this is not all (said Lisander) you must
needs go with us, not to stay, seeing you will not, but to help us convert a
Moorish Slave, whom we have in our company, who would willingly be of our
religion. Clarangeus, who at first thought that he mocked him, was about to
tell him, that he had profited little either by his sickness or pilgrimage,
when intentively beholding Cleander, upon whom (so busy he was in embracing
Lidian) he had not yet so much as cast a look, and less imagined that he was
there present, he fell from his first admiration into amazement. It were a new
story to relate the words, the imbracings and entertainments which passed
between them; wherefore I will omit them, and only say, that after the first
motions of this sudden joy was over, it was agreed that Clarangeus should ask
license of his Superiors to go stay some time in the house of the Capuchins
at Paris, and that they would stay for him at Dijon, from thence to go all
together to Paris. Departing in this resolution, that very night Clarangeus
demanded and obtained of the Fathers, leave to go to Paris in the company of
another of the Order, whom they gave to him for a companion: and having
received their benediction, he went the next morning to his friends, who waited
for his coming. Thus went these four together, whilst Calista in the mean
time afflicted with an extreme sorrow, which daily increased in her, through
Cleanders not returning, and by Clarinda's evil deportments, which by
Calista's gentleness were now grown insufferable; neither was Lisanders and
Lidians absence a small cause.

In this adversity, besides the ordinary visiting of Olinda and Argire, she was
seldom without the company of Ambrisia, and Otranta her mother; whose presence
would have diverted much of her evil, if it had been curable by company: yet
she set a merrier countenance upon it, than the sadness of her mind would
well suffer. But disloyal Clarinda being come to such a degree of impudency,
that she made no scruple to admit Leon into her chamber after her Mistress
was in bed, so far wounded Calista's patience, that breaking into a most
just choler, she discharged her, giving her but three days warning, either to
retire to her friends, or otherwise to provide for her self. Clarinda growing
desparate at this putting away, knowing that together with her Mistress she
lost her friend, besides the discredit which it would be, to be turned away
upon such an occasion, which she did believe Calista would never conceal,
determined to prevent her in accusing her Mistress for her own fault; like as
falling into one depth hasteneth unto another, so she endeavored to cloak her
sin with a crime, and to weave the basest and treacheroulest infidelity, that
ever came within the compass of any wicked woman's heart.

In this thought weeping, Berontus coming unto her, whilst Calista
entertained Otranta and Ambrisia, who knew nothing of Clarinda's act, asked her
the cause of her tears; and finding that they proceeded from her turning away,
more curious to know the cause thereof, than of her tears, said unto her,
Clarinda, my sister is moved to this extremity by some great cause; I pray thee
tell it me, and I promise, I will either reconcile thee again unto her (if I
can) or if I cannot, I will otherways work you so good conditions, that you
shall not sorrow for your departure from her, and this I promise upon mine
honor; also if it be for a cause not fit to be spoken, I swear never to
utter it to any. Sir, (answered Clarinda, who knew that Berontus envied
Lisanders virtue) under the assurance of your promise, and to discharge my
conscience of the treason which I have been constrained to use against my Lord
Cleander, in serving my Lady Calista, I will tell you that, which to my great
grief I have concealed until this time: After that my Lady had heard
Lisanders plaints which he made for her in the woods of Beauplaine (where I
think you then were) she so far imprinted his love in her mind, that her
heart never took rest, nor I ever saw good time about her. From thence
proceeded the Alarm which one night you had at Beauplaine, occasioned by
Lisander, whom my Lady had brought into her chamber unknown unto any body,
whatsoever I could say to divert her, and with so small discretion, that he
was very likely to be surprised by my Lord. Then mingling this truth for the
greater credit of her lies, she told him at large what you have heard of
Lisander, when he saved himself out of Calista's chamber: and continuing her
discourse, she added that from thence proceeded her Ladies sadness, and
affliction, wherewith she was so continually overwhelmed, uncessantly bewailing
Lisanders absence, under the color of her brothers and husbands. Finally, she
told him, that from thence proceeded her disgrace, because she could no^
applaud nor approve an affection so contrary unto her honor, and so detested
by God and man: adding so many tears and oaths unto her words, that Berontus
(who knew the subject was both amiable and worthy) was drawn to a belief, at
the least of part, and wondered that Lisander was the thief who would have
stolen away his brothers honor; yet respecting his sister in law, and withal
desperately of late loving Ambrisia, by consequence was obliged to do nothing
rashly against Lisander, but only desired to clear so dangerous a suspicion,
and never to speak of it but when he could verify it. He judged that these
lovers would never stay in so fair a beginning, if Lisander were once
returned, and that by Clarinda's means it would be easy to surprise them; or
if Lisander did never return, he resolved to rake it up in silence, and never
to trouble his brothers mind or house with discovering an evil, which could
never be helped: wherefore he forbad Clarinda to speak any word, or to make
any show that she had spoken of it, promising that he would work her into her
Ladies favor and service, upon condition that she would advertise him of her
actions, and chiefly of Lisanders coming. Instantly going to Calista, and
taking her apart, said so much of Clarinda's fidelity, of the affection she
bare unto her service, and of her sorrow to leave her (concealing what had past
between them) that Calista's easy and pitiful nature, overcome by his
prayers, and deceived by them both, Clarinda was again received into favor, at
least into service, and Calista nourished an enemy in her house, who lightened
forth strange and miserable effects in small time after.

But at that time Argire willing to acknowledge her Alcidons faithful
affections, determined to affiance her self unto him in the presence of
Otranta, Calista, Ambrisia, and Olinda, who were all entreated by her, and
only Berontus and Leon by Alcidon, the solemnity being deferred until the
return of their friends. Thus being all together after dinner with Argire,
who, as we have said, seldom went from Calista's house, a Page came in and told
them, that a man was at the door who desired to deliver them some news of
Cleander. Calista, who most of all desired to know them, cried, I pray thee let
him come in: and not having patience enough to stay his entrance, was rising up
to go meet him, but was prevented; for there entered in a straight young man,
with a brown hair, and sparkling eyes, a sweet and spritely look, his face
being no less excellently composed than was his body: His gate, his motion,
and his Pilgrims habit made him known unto Ambrisia for her brother, sooner
than unto any other, because she had seen him put on this habit, and only of
all the company knew the secret of his voyage; wherefore suddenly rising up,
she cast her self with her arms about his neck, before Calista had leisure
to behold him, saying only, Brother, Brother, is it you? Calista hearing this
name, and beholding this face, which was so lively imprinted in her mind, was
ready to snatch him out of his sisters arms, to receive the kisses which with
an envious eye she saw gathered from his lips. But she discreetly retained
her self, seeing the assembly, of all whom he was known, unless it were of
Otranta, who hearing that this was Lisander, unto whom she was so much obliged,
and whom she had so earnestly desired to see; received him with no less joy
than if he had been her only son Lidian. Argire, Olinda, Alcidon and Berontus
for Ambrisia's sake, entertained him with no less joy for his happy return,
so much desired of all, but only of Leon and Clarinda, who feared, in regard
of their foolish words which they had spoken. All this contentment might in
some measure be expressed, but Calista's can only be apprehended by thought,
who having with great impatience suffered all the company to salute him, in the
end, said unto him; Sir, is it you who was said to bring news from Cleander?
Yea, Madam, answered he, for going (upon my recovery out of a sickness,
whereof it may be my Sister has told you) in this habit to our Lady of Mount
Serrat, I met with a Slave, who told me, he had met him at Rome coming from
Naples; and that he had followed him to Ligorne, where being embarked both for
Marcels, they were taken upon the coast of Genoa by a Pirat of Argire, who in
his carrying them unto Affricke, was by a storm driven into the Gulf of
Barcelon, and there taken by a Galley of Malta, who set all the slaves at
liberty. This man is come along in my company all my journey, and can tell you
more particulars, if you please to see him. O God, said Calista, where is he?
Here hard by (answered Lisander) and I do assure my self, that his sight will
bring you contentment. The Slave then appearing at the door in his Wast-coate
of read Fryse, his Breeches of course Canvas, and his blew Cap; Calista would
have demanded news of Cleander, but finding that it was he himself, she for
joy (for his unexpected, but most welcome coming) fell almost in a swoune in
his arms. Being thus busied in knowing Cleander, and entertaining of Lisander,
Clarangeus entered into the room, who was presently known by Alcidon and
Ambrisia, who had seen him in that habit before, and went before all the
other to salute him: Olinda was not long after before she knew him, and
witnessed by the change of her color, the trouble which his presence brought
her. Calista being hardly come out of her husbands arms to suffer others to
salute him, and going to salute Clarangeus, whom she had but now seen, she
turned her self unto Otranta, who was talking with Lisander, and said unto
her, Madam, here wants none now but my Brother to satisfy our desire. You
ought, Sir, said she unto Lisander, to have brought him back also, as well as
the other. Madam, said he, it is true that we have found him preaching at our
Ladies of Mount Serrat in the habit of a Hermit, and have used our best
endeavors to bring him with us; but he told us, that he would never come back
but by her command, who banished him: and having heard her say that she would
witness most affection unto him, that should be most obedient unto her, of
Clarangeus or himself; he was resolved not to be the least obedient. Madam,
said Clarangeus then unto Olinda (who attentively hearkened unto this
discourse) it does now wholly depend on you to give contentment unto this fair
company, and to satisfy what you owe unto Lidians love and your own promise,
in calling him back again: You know you promised to receive into your favor
him of us two, who should come last unto you; I am upon this occasion come
first, that you may not have any pretense to break your word with him. I
believe the time has been, when you did think I would never have summoned you
to this promise, in favor of any other: but those things are the blessings
which God bestows upon them who do seek him. It is certain, Madam, that
nothing but he has made me resolve, nothing but he has sweetened the sorrow
I had for your loss, and as I left the world because I could not find any
thing which might incite my stay after this loss, so having sequestered my
self from it, I have found that rest and contentment, which I could never
find before: Live therefore happily with him, since that you desire it; and
believe, that he cannot be so obliged to your favors due unto his affection,
as I am unto your cruelty, by which you have procured unto me this happy
estate of life. Olinda not knowing what to answer unto this speech, and more
desiring Lidians return than they did, who persuaded her; Calista spoke in
this manner unto Olinda, Why dear heart will thou confine my brother in those
deserts? will thou deprive me of so dear company? has he committed any
offense worthy of this usage? And shall I (said Otranta) having but one Son,
lose him for your disdain? I pray thee, sweetest fair, be contented that you
have made this Knight become a Capuchin, and accept of the acknowledgement of
the power of your beauty, without Lidians becoming a Hermit. Alas Madam,
answered Olinda, my greatest sorrow is, that he is not here now, that I might
witness before this company, how much I honor him: but I doubt not, but the
occasion which made me separate my self from him, is remembered by you all,
and will serve to excuse me. It is sufficient, answered Lisander, seeing Olinda
consents to his return; and if she please to permit me, I will go seek,
and undertake to bring him back in less time than any one can go thither. At
these words Lidian making the last in the dance entered, easing Lisander of the
pain of seeking him, and Olinda of the shame to suffer him. Who can tell you
the astonishment and joy of the company? especially Calista's and Otranta's,
which exceeded all expressing. He was a longtime in the arms of these two
last, not being able to break from them: Afterward he kneeled before Olinda,
saying, Pardon me, Madam, (although I have not offended) if not for the penance
which I have suffered, yet for the reverence of this habit, which I here lay
at her feet who made me take it. I know not whether he blasphemed in saying
so, or no; but Clarangeus was offended with hearing, and Olinda with
understanding: yet all things being permitted to the amorous, this word was
given to Lidians passion, who was not accustomed to preach unto others what he
practiced: so indulgent are we in our own faults, and severe in others. Olinda
answered, that he should not excuse faults imagined, not done, with such low
humility, nor make her blush with his submission, which was the greatest fault
whereof she could accuse him. And at these words Lisander enterposing, and
particularly entertaining Olinda, told her so much of Lidians love and
fidelity, made now so clear by so strong and manifest a proof; that first
Clarangeus, and after all the company joining to Lisanders prayers, who
interceded for Lidian, the fair Olinda promised marriage: and the same Priest
who had betroathed Argire to Alcidon, did also the like for Olinda and Lidian
the same day, and in the same place; so that Lidians being made sure, was
known before his coming home: The contentment of all the company is easier
imagined than expressed. Presently was it known through the Town that
Cleander, Lidian and Lisander were returned (for they were men of that eminent
quality, that their presence was no more to be concealed than the light of the
Sun) with the religious man Clarangeus, who that night retiring himself into
his Covent, left Lidian in company with Olinda, Alcidon with Argire, Berontus
with Ambrisia, Cleander with his mother in law Otranta, and the valiant
Lisander with the incomparable Calista.

The End of the fifth Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE SIXTH BOOK.
We left our lovers joyfully met, to all their great contentments; where long
they could not possess their Mistresses presence: for Fortune, an
irreconcilable enemy, and a continual torment unto virtue, would never have
believed that they had sufficiently suffered, if that they had continued in
this contentment. The day of their arrival being expired, and every one of
them b^ing retired with the pleasure of so favorable a success, they rose the
next morning to go to Mass, about eleven of the clock: Cleander led his
mother in law, Lisander led Calista, Berontus Ambrisia, the two contracted
either of them their betroathed, and Leon led Clarinda; who seeing her self
supported by Berontus (although he were ignorant of her wicked life) and
placed again with her Mistress, abused her patience, and believed that in
marrying Leon, which she hoped to do, she should not need to care for her. The
Mass was almost finished, when a Gentlewoman coming behind Lisander, gently
pulled him by the cloak, and seeing him turn toward her, she entreated him
to please to hear a word which she had to speak in private. Jesus,
Gentlewoman (said Lisander) command me what you please, and where you please.
In this little Chapel upon the right hand, replied she, where I will attend
you. Saying this she departed, and Lisander letting her go a little way
before, went into the Chapel by another way, because he would not be observed;
discoursing with himself as he went, what business the Lady might have with
him, hoped of some good fortune. Being come into the Chapel, where they were
all alone (but for a Lacquey who waited upon the Gentlewoman) she gave him a
love letter, which she entreated him to read and answer. Lisander opens it,
and finds it said thus.

Cloridons Letter to Lisander.
THis Page (whom, to come to you with less suspicion both of your friends and
mine, I have put into Gentlewomans apparel) will give you, together with this
Letter, a Lacquey, who will show you the place where I stay for you in my
shirt, and without any company but my horse and my sword, to demand reason of
you for the blood which you had of me. I know you spilt it nobly, and without
advantage: but to avoid blame, for being less sensible of my evil, than those
who died to revenge it, and indeed rather to conform my self unto common
opinion, than to satisfy mine own proper feeling, I am constrained to recover
that with my sword which you gained of me with the Lance; Not that I approve
their action, or blame yours, only I will shun the reproach which may fall
upon me, for leaving mine honor in the hands of so brave a Knight, who will
never refuse any honorable condition to restore it. Our combat (at the least
on my part) shall be without any passion, but what proceeds from glory, for
which a great courage ought always to despise his life.

Cloridon.


Lisander receiving this Letter contrary to his expectation, was sorry to see
this new occasion which Fortune did prepare to separate him from his love, and
desiring to avoid it, said to the disguised Page, that if the Lacquey did
follow him to his lodging, he should have an answer; which being yielded to by
the Page, Lisander returned with all the company into Cleanders house, where
retiring himself into his chamber while dinner was getting ready, he answered
Cloridons challenge in this manner.

Lisanders Answer.
I Do not conceive what reason you would have done you for an injury which was
never offered you: and seeing it is the will only which offends, and that I
never had any to offer you the least injury, I think you do unjustly
complain of an action, which you confess you do not blame. I will always
avow, that the advantage which I had of you, proceeded rather from your
misfortune than your want, and to be ascribed to my good fortune, and not to my
valor; and I had your blood with so feeling a sorrow, that, my honor saved, I
would willingly give you as much of mine to satisfy you: You are too wise to
suffer your self to be transported by other men's passions, rather than your
own reason, and have too much courage and honor to propound persons, whose
memory is rather to be abolished than their example followed. I represent all
these things, having your friendship in deerer esteem than your honor, which
I do entreat you to believe, cannot rest in any others hands than in your
own; and to accord my affection with that which the King bears you, my
natural obedience, and the desire I have to please him in honoring you,
besides your own merit, which does oblige me unto it, and enforces me to
desire you to satisfy your self any other way than by the sword: yet if you
do not apprehend these reasons, send me a Gentleman, upon whose word I may
send you answer; for I should justly be accused of rashness, if after narrowly
escaping with my life, when I went out of my chamber upon the assurance of a
Page, I should now again go out of the town upon a Lackeyes word.


Lisander having closed this Letter, went himself down unto the street door,
where having found the Lackey, who stayed for him, he said, Hold friend, tell
thy Master I will wait all day to morrow to hear news from him; so turning
into the hall where dinner was ready, he sat down with the rest of the
company. All that day, and the next night he was in a deep meditation of what
should become of him after the combat, if God were so merciful unto him that
he were the last alive; knowing well, that in respect of Cloridons favor with
the King, he could have no sure abode in France. The next day he stayed in
his chamber all the morning, expecting every hour when he should be
challenged, and therefore caused a man to stand at the street door, to bring
him who should be sent (without any further enquiry) directly unto him. But
when he saw noone past, and after the whole day without hearing a word, he did
think that Cloridon was satisfied with his reasons, or was contented in
himself that he had witnessed his courage in challenging. That night there
was a Cook, who, amongst other mean wherewith they were plentifully served,
dressed some rost-meate made with the marrow of Beef; and in stead of chopping
of Parsley, which was usual, he put in Hemlocke, which was likely to kill all
the company, and especially Lisander, who having had a most sick night, was
constrained to be let blood, and take physic the next morning. Hardly had he
swallowed it, when one came to tell him that a Gentleman at the door desired
to speak with him. Presently he imagined that he came from Cloridon: and
although he did not then look for him, and that things which come beyond our
expectation do most n^ly and most lively pierce our minds when they happen,
yet without any alteration he commanded he should be let in. The other (who was
a brave Knight called Chrysantes) as soon as he came into the chamber, seeing
the Surgeons sawcers full of blood upon the table, and the glasses wherein the
Physic was, empty, was about to return back without a word; yet hearing
Lisander ask who was there, he entered in: and being set down close by the
bed, every one being commanded away, he said thus; I came hither, Sir, to
have spoken with you about a business, but now I see the state wherein you
are, will not permit you to hear of it, wherefore if it please you, I will hold
other discourse, expecting a time when the disposition of your health may
better fit both you and me for the uttering thereof. Pardon me, said
Lisander, my sickness is not so great, that it can let me from hearing, and
less from giving you satisfaction; I pray therefore forbear not to deliver
your message, for I know already the contents thereof, and if you had come
yesterday, as I did expect, it had been by this time dispatched. Sir, answered
Chrisantes, I could not come yesterday, and I believe you cannot go this day,
whither I would have you, without endangering your health: for by the tokens
which I see upon the table, you have been let blood, and taken Physic this
morning. It is true (replied Lisander) but he who by the consideration of the
danger of his life cannot be retained, will not refrain in consideration of
his health, which is less. You have reason, said Chrisantes, because sometimes
one may lose his health without losing his life, but never his life without his
health: yet because in this business, the conservation and loss of one
depends upon another, I would persuade you to stay until you are in better
health. Sir, answered Lisander, you cannot be my enemy and counselor in one
and the same business: I know you come from Cloridon, and the notice he gave
me two days since of his design, may make him think that my indisposition
is rather fained than true; therefore to make him lose this thought, or to
keep him from having it, tell me where he is, and I will go to content him
with my arm in a skarfe, and my physic in my belly: for seeing he will not
receive the satisfaction which I would have given him, he shall never have it
now. Seeing you are so resolved, replied Chrisantes, I will only entreat you
to take a friend with you, who may witness with me your endeavor in this
action. I have no friend, answered Lisander, having too many; for there are
many in this house, who will not yield that point one unto the other: so that
in stead of a particular combat, we should fight a battle, and put you to
trouble in finding friends to oppose them. But to satisfy your desire which
you have, not to be idle, I promise you, that if Cloridon leave me with life, I
will give you some exercise. Let us go then Sir, said Chrisantes, and not
suffer him to wait any longer: for he has stayed a great while in his shirt.
Lisander presently rose, and his faithful footman, who only stayed in his
chamber (no body doubting of a quarrel) having made ready a Courser, which
Cleander had sent him out of Naples; he went out of the house with Chrisantes
(accompanied only with his footman) to find Cloridon, who stayed without S.
Honorius gate, in a wide field, which is between Roll and Mountma^tre.
Chrisantes seeing him, said unto Lisander, Sir, yonder is my friend, if you
please I will go speak with him one word, yet if you think not fit, I will
presently leave you together, until a better or worse destiny part you. Do
what you please, replied Lisander, but dispatch: He then set forward toward
Cloridon, who came toward him; and seeing Lisander have one arm in a skarfe,
he asked the cause. Chrisantes in few words told him what had past, and so
retired two or three hundred paces on the one side. Cloridon then gallopping
toward Lisander, who made toward him (wearied with so long stay) spoke unto
him in this manner: Knight, so far as I can perceive, your indisposition
makes me dispense with you for fighting: we will therefore, if you please,
defer it until your health will better permit it, for this present estate of
yours, can neither be commodious for you, nor honorable for me. No, no,
answered Lisander, two men of our quality and making, cannot return out of
this meadow without fighting: Resolve therefore to overcome or dye, seeing you
will not live in friendship with him who has sought it at your hands. Go too
then, said Cloridon, let us prove whether you have done well or no in despising
a courtesy from one, who did think to have obliged you thereby. I will
neither ask it, nor afford it to you, answered Lisander, and therewith
furiously spurred one upon another. Lisander, who (as we have said) rid upon
a lusty and strong courser, but such a one, as in regard of his long resting
idle in the stable, was not so steady a runner as Cloridons (which was one of
the bravest and readiest horses that ever came out of Andolusia) spurred lively
upon his enemy, intending as he did strike with his sword, to shocke also with
his horse; but Cloridon fearing the shock, and desirous to get the crupper of
his enemies horse, turned his own speedily to shun the shock of Lisanders,
unto which he gave so great a reverse blow upon the nose, that he cut him into
the mouth; but he stayed not his course, were it that the horse being chaft,
felt not the pain of the blow, or that being in his course he could not
suddenly stay himself: so that Cloridons little horse could not turn so
nimbly, but that Lisander joining unto him with an incredible speed, thrust his
sword clean through him from side to side, wherewith Cloridon fell down dead to
the ground in the sight of Chrisantes, who was a spectator of this pitiful
tragedy* He seeing his friend upon the earth, turned his horse toward
Lisander, who in this instant was troubled as well with his horse, the wound
which he had received making him bound up and down, and run in the field,
without being able to stay him, as also by his being let blood, and the pain
of his Physic; so that in one instant of time, he was to resist the gripings
of his physic, the bounding of his horse, and the fury of his adversary: who
taking Lisander in this disorder, and having more respect to revenge the death
of his friend, than to the disadvantage of his adversary, after he had cried
unto him two or three times, Turn, Lisander, turn, or I will strike thee,
thrust the point of his sword so far into his back, that he did think he
had revenged Cloridon. Heaven nevertheless kept it from being mortal, thereby
reserving Lisander unto other adventures, who, moved with the smart of the
wound, with great violence turned his horse almost upright upon his hinder
feet, and with a reverse blow met with Chrisantes his arm so strongly, that
he cut it clean off above the elbow, it falling down unto the ground with the
sword; and Lisanders, with the strength of the blow, and with the resistance
which he met with, was broke in the handle Chrisantes thus without a sword,
and without an arm, was carried away by his horse cross the fields, so long,
that growing feeble by the loss of his blood, he fell down, and afterward
died, as you shall hear. But Lisander, having dispatched both his enemies
(although vvounded in his (...), bleeding by his arm through the opening of
the vein, and his sword broken in the handle) as well as he could
accomodated himself with Cloridons sword and horse, which had not his fellow
in the world, when he perceived both his adversaries footmen upon his man:
wherefore with speed he spurred unto them, and came timely enough to save his
life (who was wounded) by the loss of theirs; their obstinacy to defend
themselves, and the fury wherein he was (being wounded himself, and his
footman all boody) surmounting the sweetness of his disposition. After this
execution, Lisander would have taken again his own horse, but he would not
suffer him to come near him; and as he rode upon Cloridons after him, he
espied Chrisantes his horse, which he took with small labor; upon which
setting his footman, he retired himself unto the Capuchins, unto Clarangeus
his chamber, no less pained with his physic than his wound, nor less glad
for the victory, than sorry that he had bought it with so much blood, and
fouled it with so many murders.

Leon in the mean time, having seen Lisander go from Cleanders house with
Chrisantes, whom he knew to be one of Cloridons friends, advertised Berontus*
they doubting of the quarrel, went out after them, but dividedly, the better
to find them; in which having spent long time in vain (and the longer
because, the combat being short, Lisander had retired himself before they
came) they came in the end, the one to the place where the miserable Chrisantes
was ready to give up the Ghost, and the other where poor Cloridon, and the two
Lackeies lay dead. Leon, who first found Cloridon, took up the sword which
Lisander had left, with the horse which ran about the fields, and hiding the
sword, showed only the horse to Berontus, whom he found talking with
Chrisantes; of whom they two demanded the cause of this misfortune: he told the
combat that first Cloridon, and then he had with Lisander, as you have heard,
exalting even in the pangs of death the free courage and valor of him, who had
handled them so ill* and contrarily blamed Cloridons passion, which had engaged
him rashly in so unjust a quarrel. Berontus would have given him his hand to
lift him up, but Chrisantes wringing him with his lefthand which was left him,
spoke these words, Berontus, there is nothing so unjust as the Devil, nor any
thing just but God; keep thy self from the one, and pray unto the other for my
soul, for my body is no longer to be reckoned of: and with this last word he
gave up the Ghost, leaving Berontus and Leon no less astonished at his death,
than at Cloridons, and at Lisanders powerful Genius, which brought him so
happily victorious over all his adventures. God was pleased to prolong
Chrisantes life, that Berontus and Leon might find him before his death, and
might from his own mouth know the history of this combat, that Lisanders
virtue might be witnessed by those, who were most envious of it. Leon led
Berontus unto the place where Cloridon and the Lackeyes, of whom we have
spoken, lay, which augmented Berontus his astonishment, who, without learning
any news of Lisander, returned into the Town with Leon, where the report of
this combat was presently spread: As the humors and affections of men were
diverse, so also their discourses and judgments were different; Lisanders
friends, who had heard so many proofs of his valor, did not wonder to see a
new example, and did easily believe the truth, which sounded from the mouths of
Berontus and Leon, his enemies: But Cloridons and Chrisantes their friends
could not imagine that one man could so soon have killed them with their
Lackeyes; and the King himself, who dearly loved Cloridon, and esteemed him
for a valiant man (as certainly he was) could not believe that Lisander had
killed them without some disadvantage, persuading himself, that in respect
Cloridons friends had formerly done the like unto him, now he had not made
difficulty to render the like again. Howsoever it was, he was so angry, that
he commanded diligent search to be made for Lisander, neither would he hear
Cleander, nor any other who spoke in his behalf, who all this while was at the
Capuchins in Clarangeus his chamber, where a religious man healed in a small
time, as well him as his footman, without applying any thing unto his wounds
but wine and oil. It is not to be asked i^ Cleander, Lidian, and Calista were
grieved for Lisander, of whom Clarangeus went (yet secretly) and carried them
news, entreating them not to see him, lest by their visiting he might be
discovered: neither is it to be demanded whether they had more joy to see him
out of danger of his wound, or fear to see him in the Kings anger, or sorrow
that they were deprived of his sight. Ten days after, Lisander finding
himself able to travel, determined to leave Paris; which he presently made
known unto Cleander, who resolved to have him unto Beauplaine, it being then
Autumn, when all the World is invited to the fields to taste the fruits: Not
that he thought to keep him long there, for it was too near the Court, but
until they had conferred of the means which was to be holden in his
affairs; wherefore early in a morning sending away Calista, Otranta,
Ambrisia, Olinda, and Argire before with Berontus, he followed after in the
evening, with Lidian, Alcidon, and Lisander, whom he went to receive at the
Gate of the Capuchins, where Clarangeus made him a christian remonstrance,
remembering unto him the graces which God had bestowed upon him, and the
punishment which he did incur by neglecting them: for there is no doubt, said
he, but as God in this life cannot give us any thing more excellent than his
grace, so we cannot offend him more than in abusing it. After bidding him
adieu, and unto the whole company, who also took their leaves of him,
recommending themselves unto the prayers, as well of him as of the other
religious men; they departed in the night, and came unto Be^plaine when it was
day light, where having rested themselves, they rose to dine with the Ladies:
There began new welcomming unto Lisander; there began also his love unto
Calista, and with the pleasure which he received in her company; an extreme
sorrow that he must part from he^: ^or he truly considered that there was no
long abiding, and first entered into the discourse of his departure, as well to
avoid the danger which threatened him, as because he would not inwrap friends
in his evil fortune, and make them fall into the Kings displeasure. Cleander
thought it fit that he should re^te into Flanders until the Kings anger was
over; which was presently resolved, and thereupon all this fair company brake
up, for his sister went into Burgundy with Berontus, Otranta returned into
Normandy, whither she was conducted by Lidian, and accompanied by Argire and
Alcidon unto Paris.

Behold, how unto this short pleasure succeeded long sorrow, tears, and
farewels; a pitiful departure: the grief and words, which were conceived and
uttered between persons so near of blood, and so knit in affection, go beyond
all expressing. Cleander remained at Beauplaine with Calista, in so great
solitariness, that it seemed to presage the mischief which happened. Now must
I foul my Story with the mischievous and lewdest accident that ever befell,
and I do abhor to write this bloody and sad discourse; but it is not to be
omitted. Leon (when Cleander withdrew himself unto Beauplaine) remained at
Paris, were it that he had particular business which held him there, or that
they did not so much rely upon him as upon the others, he was not entreated to
go with them thither: And Clarinda, who could not live without him, seeing this
company scattered, unwilling to lose so fair an occasion of seeing him,
determined to use the same means which her Mistres formerly did to see Lisander:
but there happened first a Prodigy, which cannot be told without wonder.
Cleander, being in this evil humor through the loss of so good company, was
visited by a Kinsman of his named Verasco, who sometimes had been his Tutour,
unto whom he being willing to give all the pleasure he could, and thereby
endeavor to divert himself from this melancholy which did consume him, he
made a match to go hunt the wild Boar; unto which sport (besides the
domestics) he sent for some of his Tenants, who were better acquainted with
the ways and layers of the beasts, commanding them to call him early in the
morning, and bear him company. In this determination having supt very early
with Verasco, and left him in his chamber, he himself went to bed: it was
not day by a great while, when he heard knocking at the gate of the Castle,
which awaked him: and remembering what he had commanded his huntsmen over night,
he thought they were come to call him unto his sport; wherefore he called up
him who waited in his chamber, commanding to go let them in, while he made
himself ready: The Gentleman went, and opening the gates, found no body;
therefore s^eing it was not near day, he went to bed again, thinking his
Master ^ad dreamed that he heard. He was no sooner laid, when they heard
again great knocking at the gate, by the hammer thereof. Cleander, who upon
the answer which was made, that it was not yet day, thought his people were
gone back again, hearing new, and more violent knocking, thought that day did
now appear, and that they were returned, caused his servant to rise the second
time, and go unto the gate, who finding nobody there, went to lie down
again. Morning began to show the brightness of her beams above the Horizon,
when Cleander hearing one knock the third time, rose himself out of his
bed, and putting on his night-gowne, without calling any of his servants,
went himself unto the door, where he found his Host, whom he had caused to
be buried in Italy, who said unto him these sad words: Good morrow Sir, I
come to acquit my promise, that you may the better discharge your duty to your
soul: think upon death, for within three days you shall suffer it. This
shape vanishing after these words, left Cleander in that fear which may be
imagined; so that lying down by Calista, he told her the fearful vision which
he had seen. Calista ready to swoune at this discourse, yet so well as she
could hid her astonishment from Cleander, for fear she should add unto his
fear, and like a woman of great spirit and courage, comforted him as well as
she could, telling him that he ought not to tie his belief unto these
fantastic illusions, although it were well done always to prepare himself to
the loss of this life, that death might not surprise him; and rising both up,
they went to prayers. Verasco also rose shortly after, from whom Cleander would
not hide what he had told unto Calista, whereupon as well by the counsel of
the one, as by the prayers of the other, he altered his determination of
hunting, and sent for a Priest to reconcile himself unto God, waiting with a
quiet mind what it should please God to send. These three dangerous days,
wherein he had been threatened, were spent in prayers, fastings, watchings,
and christian meditations. Cleander feeling no indisposition of body, whereby
he might apprehend a natural death, neither did he suspect any enemy, from
whence he should fear a violent one; so that the night of the third day being
come, seemed to assure Cleanders life, and to convince his Host of a lie: then
did he accuse himself of weakness, and blamed his overmuch credulity, which
had over lightly given such an alarm upon the uncertain report of a shadow,
being ashamed that Verasco and Calista should be witnesses of the fear which
he had: and Calista gave thanks unto God, for making vain so evil a
presage, when the cursed Clarinda having brought Leon into the house by the
garden gate, whereof we have formerly spoken, and having made him enter into
Calista's chamber, thinking that she would lie with Cleander, as she had done
since this last voyage.

It chanced for all their mischiefs, that Calista, wearied with her passed
watchings, and sick with the affliction of her precedent fear, whereof she
thought her self now free, seeing the three days expired wherein her husbands
life was threatened (after she had born him company until midnight, together
with Verasco) would go unto her own chamber, to sleep alone, and with more
quiet. Clarinda who had carried her night-cloaths into Cleanders chamber,
hearing her say so, carried them presently back into her Mistresses, from
whence she made Leon presently depart, that he might not be surprised: But he
could not go down the stairs, because Verasco withdrawing himself into a
chamber upon the side of Cleanders, Calista going with him, they stayed
themselves between the two doors; both which opened upon the stairs, with so
much light of diverse candles, that he could hardly hide himself there where
he was, neither durst he go higher for fear of making a noise: and being
desirous to escape at any hand, he no sooner heard her bid Verasco good night,
but he came down against the light which was going up into Calista's chamber
with her self. The Page who carried the candle, frighted to see this man come
hastily down the stairs, unknown unto him, with his sword in his hand, and
she also cried out: Cleander, who was at his chamber door, going in, hearing
his wife cry, came suddenly out, and was just in Leons way, having nothing
about him but his night Gown; yet he stepped unto him and stayed him, and so
took hold of his sword, that both the one and the other had stayed, if Leon
finding himself taken, and not being able otherwise to get away, had not
stabbed him with his dagger, which made him let go his hold. This wretch Leon
having deadly wounded him, and by this means got clear of him, was yet happy
in this, that he escaped by the way which he entered, and saved himself,
without being followed or known, because that every body ran presently to
Cleander, and the remedy which they did endeavor to bring for his life, saved
his murderer, together that this accident did so surprise them, that he was
sooner gotten from Beauplaine, than it could be imagined that he was entered.
Cleander being carried to his bed by Verascus, and his servants which were
run thither at the noise, together with discomfited Calista, who grew desperate
at this mischance, having always the sword which he had taken from this
cursed hand which hurt him; looking earnestly upon it, knew that it was his
friend Lisanders, (you have heard how Leon found it, and having amended it in
the same hilts wherein it was before, wore it in Lisanders absence.) Cleander
judging himself dead, without knowing by whom, or how, not being able to
comprehend that it was Lisander, and not knowing how his sword should come into
any other man's hand, was no less astonished to see it, than at his own death:
In the end, finding that he fainted, and having a greater feeling of Calista's
sorrow than his own, he took her hand, which he wrung, and looking upon her
with a firm countenance, in comforting used these words, Calista, I suffered
your tears these three last days, in which we both feared what is now
happened, believing that they might have prevented this stroke, and been of
use to prolong the time which I had to remain with you; but now being
unprofitable, I cannot suffer you vainly to afflict your self for me, who
find no other evil in death, but my leaving you: for believe, the separation
between my soul and body troubles me but little, in comparison of that from
you. But knowing that I cannot possess you, but upon condition of parting from
you, that our life is so knit unto death, that we cannot enjoy one without the
other. I infinitely comfort and rejoice my self, that God does now grant
(which I have ever begged of him) that I might not live to see thee dye. To
this favor he has added so many more, that I should dye in unexcusable
ingratitude, if I did not acknowledge how incapable I am worthily to
acknowledge them: but there is no blessing which I have received, wherein I
account my self more happy, or more satisfied, than in the sweet life we have
led together, which I may well call a marriage without thorns. I conjure you
Calista, by the desire which you ought to have to sweeten the anguish and pain
of my death, not to increase it by your grief; but conform your self to Gods
will, who has done me this favor, to advertise me of the time, that I might
have leisure to prepare my self: In time you shall know from whence this
stroke came, for Gods justice will never leave it unpunished before men; yet
take special care that this sword do not deceive you, for I had rather dye
twice more than enter into any distrust of the true Master thereof, whom I do
entreat you to love above all persons next me, as I did love him next unto you
above all things in the world: but good God, said he, how is it possible that
it should come into the hands of this murderer? with these last words he
fainted, and calling upon the name of Jesus, he died even upon the break of
day, at the same hour wherein the Spirit appeared, with that discomfort unto
Calista, and such astonishment unto Verasco, and all the servants, that no
humane discourse is able to express it. Cleander thus dead, and Calista
extremely sick, and overwhelmed with insupportable grief, Verasco, who was a
grave wise man, not being able to call again his life, resolved to revenge his
death, and to find the spring from whence it came. The dead man had no nearer
kinsman than Berontus, who was then absent; wherefore Verasco was obliged to
procure justice upon the crime: first he began to inform himself which way
this man came into Beauplaine, and he found that it was by the garden gate,
whereof we have spoken, which of necessity must some of the house open; for
since the alarm, when Cleander took Lisanders coming in the night for
thieves, he had been careful to keep it shut: this evening it had so
rained, that the prints or marks of shoes did plainly appear in the alleyes,
where was manifestly seen that there were two prints of different bigness,
from whence he collected that one had opened the gate for the other. Verasco
perceiving this, caused all the servants of the house to come into that alley,
whose feet he measuring with the prints which were made in the sand, there was
none found any way agreeing, but only Clarinda's, whose shoe did perfectly
fit the lesser print, which served as a great proof, at the least for a
violent suspicion against her; who (otherwise accused and convinced by her own
conscience) did not deny the fact: But alas, it had been much better that she
had disavowed this truth, than to have added so execrable and notorious a lie;
For it is very true (she said) it was I who opened the gate, notwithstanding
it was by my Mistresses command.

Verasco not willing to proceed further in examination of a cause so criminal,
made Clarinda fast, and sent for the Justice, strictly forbidding every body to
speak of it unto Calista, who was so plunged in sorrow, and drowned in grief,
that her sickness moved no less pity than Cleanders death. The Judges, who
for the most part are like Surgeons, seeking for nothing more than for wounds
and swellings, quickly came unto the place, visited the body, and examined
Clarinda, who persevering in what she had formerly said, added, that Lisander
was the man who had killed her Master, as might easily be seen by the sword
which he had left; that she had let him into the house by Calista's command,
as formerly she had done, although to her extreme sorrow, which she no longer
able to bear, had discovered to Berontus, whom she called to witness these
words. Calista being upon this accusation heard, for the fullness of her
misfortune, saw her self accused of her husbands death, by her who was the
cause thereof, and for her last calamity (that she might the more lightly
pass this troublesome passage) was carried unto prison in the little Castle in
this proud City of Paris, where in former times she had been often seen in
so much pomp and glory.

The End of the sixth Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE SEVENTH BOOK.
CALISTA being thus in prison, the very center of misery, and a sepulcher unto
those who live therein, must not be forgotten, nor suffered to lie long there:
yet her coming forth cannot be so soon, for innocence does not easily
appear in dark dungeons, neither is the getting out of prison so easy as the
entrance thereinto: Clarinda was also placed in another chamber, and in her
stead there was a strange woman appointed to wait upon Calista, whom she had
never before seen, in appearance to serve her, but in truth to observe her
words, and espy her actions. As for Verascus, he remained at Beauplaine, unto
which place having sent for Berontus, and there celebrated Cleanders funeral,
and settled his household, he afterward went unto Paris to become Calista's
adversary, who being brought into this pitiful estate, began first to tear
her hair, and to do mischief against her self; after having remained in
silence a long time, without speaking one word, as one whose grief took away
her sense, at the length her present mischief bringing unto her mind her
former fortune, brought tears into her eyes, and these words into her mouth,
stirring pity in that place, where it never had been: O Calista, where art
thou! what are become of all thy pleasant days? unto what is all thy glory and
vanity reduced? O Cleander, my only joy and comfort, was it not affliction
enough to lose thee, without being accused for thy loss? Ah Lisander, the
services which you have done me heretofore are now dearly sold unto me, and I
pay those honest acknowledgements of your love, with a high price. O Lisander,
why do not thou know of my imprisonment? And you my Judges, why do you not
know mine innocence? And thou Clarinda, why do thou accuse me? In the
midst of these complaints (much more grievous than I can express) nothing
comforted her but the hope of death, which was preparing for her; which she
would have much more desired than her liberty, if she could have received it
without incurring infamy for the crime whereof she was accused: But not to be
long upon so grievous a subject, I will briefly say, that Berontus being come
from Burgundy, and (being no less astonished than sorry for those accidents
since his departure) was heard by the Provost, and confronted with Clarinda,
unto whose former speeches, his being conformable, it seemed that Calista was
sufficiently attainted and convicted of her husbands death, so that her
process was (in the worlds opinion) judged both to the loss of her life and
honor. I must not forget the grief which this misfortune brought unto Olinda,
Alcidon, and Argire, who were then at Paris; the sorrow which Ambrisia had, who
was in Burgundy, and that which was suffered by Lidian and his Parents in
Normandy, when they knew of it. Argire and Olinda employed all their friends to
speak with Calista, but were not able to obtain it. All the world wondered
that Lisander had so fouled the glory of so many brave deeds, by so
dishonorable an act. There was none but Cloridons friends, who (believing that
he was cowardly murdered) rejoiced that he had committed this last base act,
as a proof of the former. Lisander was then at Brusels, far from thinking
upon such an act, where a faithful Post, whom Alcidon had sent, let him
understand the news of this deplorable disaster. When he heard of Cleanders
death, he uttered great sorrow, as for a person whom next unto Calista, he
truly loved above all creatures; but when he knew that the common belief was
that he had killed him with his wifes privity, who was for that cause a
prisoner, and upon the point of her punishment, he was struck with silence,
the news taking from him both his feeling, and all his senses, like a great
stroke which is not felt at the instant, but some time after it is received.
When he had gathered his spirits unto him, which were wandered away with the
violence of the first motion, and that grief had given place unto his words; O
God, what did he not say! his grief cannot be represented, but by that of
Calista; for never two souls were so equally wounded with one stroke, and
their wounds unlike unto all others, had nothing to parallel either the others,
but themselves: yet being a man, and having his liberty, he did resolve to lose
it together with his life, or else to assure Calista's. Now if he durst
appear, he had done his Lady a great service, for his flight was one maine
argument against her, and his presence would have much served for their
justification. But Cloridons murder being fresh, and his blood almost warm,
representing it self every day to the Kings memory, who would never grant him
his pardon, he thought that his presence, in stead of satisfying things, would
exasperate them, and that unprofitably he should carry his head to be lost at
Paris, without saving Calista's: but what cannot love do in a gentle heart?
he resolved to go thither, and so taking Post with the same Messenger, which
was sent unto him, he came in the night unto Alcidons, trusting both his honor
and life into his hands, although being of Cleanders friends, he had cause to
have feared (if he had been guilty.) Having conferred with Alcidon, Argire,
and Olinda, whom he also saw, and having told them how he left his sword in the
field, and took Cloridons which he still wore, they all rejoiced at the
appearance of his innocence: He asked them, if they had not seen Calista in
prison, and they telling him, how far they had endeavored, and how little
they had effected; he said, he had thought to entreat Clarangeus* to go
thither, who through the reverence of his habit, might have the more easy
entrance undercolour that he came to confess her, being so near her
sentence: But this could not be, for some three or four days before this
unfortunate accident, Clarangeus was gone toward Rome, and had taken his leave
of Alcidon the morrow after his coming from Beauplaine. As they were upon
these terms, one came to tell Alcidon, that Berontus was at the gate, who had
not seen Alcidon since his coming from Burgundy, which was some two days
before, and that time he had spent in visiting Verasco, the Judges, and
Clarinda, whom he did confront. Alcidon was not of opinion that he should see
Lisander; wherefore leaving him in the chamber with Olinda, he with Argire
led Berontus into another: They found him much afflicted, as he who did not
alone bewail Cleanders misfortune, but Calista's and Lisanders also, for
Ambrisia's sake; so that their first embracing was mingled with tears, which
being over, Berontus could not forbear, saying, Well Sir, would you ever have
thought that so brave a Knight as Lisander, and so honest a Lady as Calista,
should have agreed together in committing so base a wickedness, the one
against his friend, the other against her husband? No truly Sir, answered
Alcidon, and do no less believe it than ever I did, although I know the world
is possessed with this opinion. Oh (replied Berontus) I would to God it were
false, upon condition it had cost me some of my best blood; but alas it is too
true. Sir, said Alcidon, condemn not those which are absent without hearing
them: it may be they have reasons which you know not: and although I do not
know them, yet the experience which I have of Lisanders virtues, is sufficient
unto me to repel the belief of a thing, so far from the nobleness of his
former actions. Sir, answered Berontus, this very knowledge has also stayed my
judgment: But let me say to you, it is six months since Clarinda told me the
very same things which she now speaks, and it is more than a year since
Calista and I, walking in the woods at Beauplaine, heard the loving complaints
which he made for her sake. And as for my brothers death, would you have a
clearer proof than his sword? For the rest (said Alcidon) it (...) for him to
answer* and I believe, were it not for Cloridons death, whereof you well know
the importance, he would not fail to be here to acquit himself: but whereas
you allege the sword for so sure a proof of his killing Cleander, I will say
that Lisander by the reverse blow wherewith he cut off Chrisantes his arm,
having broke it in the handle, left it in the field, together with his horse,
and took Cloridons horse and his sword, which he wears yet: From whence it
necessarily follows, that it is some body else who has found his sword,
wherewith this unfortunate stroke is happened. No person, replied Berontus,
knows that better than I, for I went first after them into the field,
accompanied with Leon, who found his horse, but not his sword: Speak unto
Leon, Sir (answered Alcidon) and know of him if he saw it not, for the
consequence is not small. Berontus upon those speeches retired himself, not
knowing what to think of this sword, and less the next morning when he could
not hear of Leon, who was lost. Alcidon returning unto Lisander, told him what
had passed between him and Berontus; but when he touched the complaints which
Berontus had heard in the wood at Beauplaine, Lisander changing color, and not
willing to deny a thing so true, It is true, said he, that I loved Calista
before Cleander knew her, and not being able to resist the powerful charms of
her beauty, nor the amorous shafts shot from her eyes at me, without her will;
and knowing her to be as virtuous as fair, I did bewail my self in the midst
of the wood, for that which I never durst declare unto her, believing that I
had spoken only unto trees, and not unto her, or unto Berontus: but let him
remember, seeing that he was there, that I blamed my passion for the injury it
did unto Cleander, as well as for that which it did unto my self, and that I
did not forbear to prefer his friendship before my own love, although it
were after in time: It is also true, that I saw her one time, as Clarinda has
said, but if Cleanders honor did then receive any offense, I desire that
neither Gods justice, nor man's may pardon me; and less his death, if I had so
much as a thought thereof: And how is it possible, that I should think so
basely to compass his death whom I had (pardon what I say) so bravely saved?
They saying many other things which would be too long to recount, went to
supper, and from thence to bed, waiting the days coming, when they first
resolved that Lisander should send for his sister into Burgundy, for to mediate
some agreement with Berontus, over whom she had a great command; and that
Olinda should write unto Lidian, who might openly defend the innocence of his
sister and Lisander, in requital of so many obligations wherein he and his
father Dorilas were tied unto him: and that in the mean time the best should
be done to suspend Calista's judgment. All these remedies did not cover the
moytie of the evil, besides, they were far remote, and the evil hard by,
neither would they serve unto any purpose: But Lisander looking nearer, as he
who had greatest interest, after a thousand thoughts tossed up and down in his
heart, which kept him waking all night, resolved to provide by another means;
and to that purpose rising the next morning before there was any store of
people stirring in the streets, he went (not awaking Alcidon) unto the gate of
the little Castle, which he found shut: between the Castle and the little
bridge there is a street, where dwell none but Butchers, and whither none do
go but such as will buy meat, because there is no way out at the end thereof.
Lisander having learned by Alcidon that Calista's chamber did look into this
street, entered thereinto, waiting the opening of a little wicket, and lifting
up his head, he perceived the iron grillis of one of the prison windows just
opposite unto a window of a house, and so near unto it, that there was nothing
but the breadth of a narrow street which did separate them, although the
grillis was a little higher: Lisander coming unto this house, found the
Mistress thereof at the door, not yet ready, who wondered to see a man of that
appearance in this street so early. With her he stayed, and entreating her to
hearken unto one word which he would say for her profit, for a Preface unto his
discourse, gave her a Purse with some ^ore of Grownes in it, which did more
captivate her good will, and raised more attention than all the eloquence in
the world could have done* Afterward he said, Madam, there is in this Prison a
Lady, who is my Kinswoman, whose affairs are solicited by no man but my self,
and whereof I can neither give, nor receive from her any instruction: That
which I desire of you, is nothing which can either hurt you or prejudice any
person, for I do not desire any other thing, but that you would for a day or
two lend me the chamber in your house, which is over against the prison window,
thereby only to see if I can convey her a letter: and it is for this favor
that I do entreat you to take the hundred crowns which are in the purse,
assuring you (if it please God I justify her innocence, which I hope to do)
she and I will give you more. She, who was a woman, and more, of Paris, and
beyond, of that common sort which will give themselves unto the Devil for
money, hearing him speak of a hundred crowns in ready money, and a promise to
have more for lending her chamber two days, in receiving the crowns, said
unto him, Jesus Sir, this cost need not, the house is at your command, and I
hope also you have not much failed, for this barred window* which you see a
little higher than ours, is one of the best chambers in the Castle, and where
they are accustomed to lodge their prisoners of the best quality, so that I am
much deceived if this Lady whereof you spoke, does not lodge there: and with
this gracious speech, she brought him into the chamber, which was a beastly one.

The husband, who saw a Courtier (as he thought) go so early into his house
with his wife, being not used to such visits, rudely asked of him what he came
for into his house. Man, said his wife, he is an honest Monsieur, who has
entreated me to stay here only one day. How? stay here? said he, how long
have you accustomed to lodge guests? Sir, sir, you may get you into some other
place, it is time enough, for here is no lodging. To this Lisander answered
nothing, letting the wife alone, whom he had paid so well, that he doubted
not of her speaking for him: she drawing her husband aside, and showing him the
hundred crowns which she had received in earnest for so short a hyring out of
her chamber, made him more gentle than a glove; so that changing both his
countenance and voice, he said unto Lisander, that he should dispose not alone
of his chamber, but of all the house, and of himself, who was at his service,
excusing his rudeness upon two Gentlemen, who having taken their meat and
lodging with him upon credit, had gone away without paying, which had put him
into this humor: but God forbid (said he) that I should take you for such a
kind of man; for upon the sight of your countenance, I would lend you all my
wealth. Although Lisander was vexed, yet could he not forbear laughing at this
Butchers speech, who was a true Parisian: so thanking him for his honest
courtesy, he entreated him to lend him an inkehorne and paper, which was
presently brought him, and having written a short letter, he tied it, with pen
and inkehorne of the least size he could get, to cast it into the window through
the bars thereof, which being double, made the entrance very difficult. But
because the letter should not fall into the street, and that he might pull it
unto him until it went in, he tied it with a thread of the length the street
was broad, and somewhat more; and so flinging it, and drawing it again, he
continued it so long till he flung it in. Calista was then upon her knees, at
her prayers before this window, and was not then risen* but when she saw this
letter fall, she thought it fell from heaven, whose help she then emplo^ed: at
the first she could not imagine what the inkehorn and pen meant, until
opening the letter, she found this which follows.

Lisanders Letter unto Calista.
MAdam, I have felt your misfortune, not as mine, but as mine and yours
together; the first and chiefest is to get out of prison, to which I am
resolved, Madam, easier than to dye, and rather to dye than suffer either your
life or honor to run any hard fortune: have only patience and courage, and
believe that God will never forsake our innocence. I have tied this Pen, and
this Inkehorne unto the letter, that you might w^ back, and command him, who in
obeying you can find nothing impossible* you need but cast the letter through
the window without caring for the taking it up, or for any other thing but for
your self. Farewell.


Calista knowing the letter both by the writing, and by the style, felt strange
motions in her soul; for although she rejoiced to see that Lisander took her
cause into his hands, thereby hoping for a happy success, according to that
great fortune which did accompany him in all his actions: yet remembering the
common opinion which was had of his killing Cleander, she had as willingly
dye, as preserve her life by his means, who was accused of her husbands death,
although he were innocent: for she thought (as it was true) that the succors
which she should receive from him, would be a proof of his love, and
consequently confirm the opinion that he had murdered him; so that if she had
seen any other door of safety open, she would never have passed that way: but
necessity (which is a hard and intolerable mistress) constrained her to take
that part, which she could not refuse without a most unevitable ruin, and
thereby hazard her reputation in appearance to assure it, together with her
life in effect: wherefore after she had consulted some time with her self,
having told the woman who waited upon her (whose good will and love she had
already gained; for Calista had such admirable graces, that she did easily take
the most churlish hearts) that it was a kinsman of hers, who moved with pity
and compassion of her miserable fortune, endeavored to comfort her. She wrote
back.

Calista's Answer.
SIR, I doubt not, you do lively feel a misfortune, whereof in part you are
the occasion, although I think you as innocent as I know my self to be. The
chiefest (as you say) is to get out, but withal it is the most difficult: the
enterprise is not small, I pray you therefore guide your self so wisely, that
while you endeavor to preserve me, you lose not your self; and if you fear
not for your own sake, yet fear for love of me, for from your loss follows
mine most unevitable: you know the dangers which threaten you besides this,
which breeds more care in me, than you would I should take; but I firmly hope
in God, that with the courage and patience which you entreat me to take, he
will (if it be his good pleasure) give me means to make my innocence and his
justice shine, as he now gives me affliction and adversity to try my
constancy. I know not what to command you, nor what to forbid you, but only
that you will bring with you in this business, the least of your courage, and
the most of your wisdom; and have a care to gather up my letters, seeing you
would not that I should have any.


The time which Calista spent in her answer, was by Lisander passed in such
unquietness that he could not rest, his eyes being with much impatience, as it
were fixed upon the window to observe the coming of it through the bars
thereof, until in the end he saw it fall into the street: for Calista could
not cast it into a window which she did not see. As soon as he saw it upon the
ground, he speedily ran to take it up; but the chamber wherein he was being
upon the highest floar of the house, he could not be there so soon, but that a
Sergeant of the bar (which is hard by that place) who was there by chance) to
buy some meat, had taken it up, and as he began to read it, Lisander came, who
snatching it out of his hands upon the difficulty which the other made to
deliver it, he gave him so great a b^te on the ear that he overthrew him, and
believing that he had astonished him, he ran away under the Castle, toward our
Ladies church, followed by all the Sergeants which were at the bar, and an
infinite rabble, who cried after him, Take him, take him, stop him, he has
killed a man; all the rascal people (who are as the Hangmans hounds) rose upon
Lisander in the most inhabited part of all Paris, so that he had no fewer
behind him than before him: being alone in the middle of them all environed
with a great number, who eagerly pressing upon him, he set his hand unto his
sword, and having wounded two or three of the most importunate, so scattered
the rest, that he had means to save himself among Coaches and Carts, wherewith
this Bridge is always plentifully furnished: having freed himself like ^dion,
he^ ^pt away like a Hare from corner to corner by the most unfrequented
streets, until he had gotten into Alcidons house unmarked of any body, having
(besides the danger of being taken) run a great hazard of being known. There
he had first leisure to read the letter, which he also showed unto his
friend, and told him all that had happened. Alcidon, who had been all the
morning in a continual alarm for his absence, greatly blamed his rashness,
praising God that it had so happily succeeded: for without thrusting your self
into this danger, said he, this which you have done might as well have been
done by a third as by your self. By whom (answered Lisander)? there is no man
in the world in whom I would rely, but in your self, and there is no less
danger for you than for my self: for if it be known that you meddle either in
Calista's business or mine, you lose Berontus his love (whereof we have now
need) the Kings favor, and I my retiring place, together with the assistance
of all my friends, who cannot openly help in a business so perilous. But how
will you now do to have news from Calista (said Alcidon)? for to fight
against the Sergeants at the bar again, is a manifest ruin, and belongs
only to a madman to be so desperate. I will tell you, said Lisander, a
conceit which is come into my mind* I will apparel my self at night like a
poor man, and I will so disguise my self that you shall hardly know me, so
will I go begging toward the Castle, where I will attempt two things; one is
to write again unto Calista by the same means I did before, the other to
speak with the Porter, to see if he will deliver her unto me, for though it
cost me all that I have in the world, I shall think my self both happy and
rich, if I may see her at liberty. You must then (replied Alcidon) do two
things more: The one, that I may follow you a great way off on horseback to
prevent any mischief that might happen, if you were known, or if any accident
should happen like this first: The other is, that you take money to give unto
the Porter, for if you speak in any other language, he will as little
understand you, as if you spoke Greek, and if he can, will apprehend you. I
have (answered Lisander) yet five hundred Crowns in gold left, wherewith I
hope so to dazell his eyes, before I do prepare him to ^eare me, that with a
thousand more which I will promise him upon his delivery of Calista, I believe
I shall shake his fidelity. There must yet another thing be done, said Alcidon,
which is, that in writing to Calista, you advise her to sdipose the Jailer who
brings her meat, to hearken unto one who should speak with him from her, and
that she promise him, and give him what she please; for it shall be performed:
and she may much better negotiate this business in the chamber, than you in
the open street, with the danger of your life, together also that she has such
means to practice the good will of men, that he must be a Devil if he can
deny her. This resolution taken, they went to dinner with Argire and Olinda
(who were there together) it being past one of the clock, and yet had neither
eat nor drunk.

It was a little before the feast of Christmas, after which time Calista's
process was to be judged: neither was there any means to hinder her
condemnation, according to her Councels opinion, but in justifying Lisander,
who durst not present himself for the reasons abovesaid, so that every one did
with several passions expect this fair Ladies public execution, and she
her self was not ignorant thereof, being courageously resolved. All these
things concurring in Lisanders memory, pressed him in such manner, that hardly
had he patience to dine, much less to stay until night for the executing of
his design; wherefore having put on the most tottered beggars weed that he
could find, and being so disguised that he was unknown unto his friends,
before he went out of the house, he wrote the letter which he intended to
fling unto Calista; and accompanied with Alcidon and two stout footmen that
followed afar off, he went again into that narrow street by the Castle, not
without fear of some misadventure, as well in regard of what happened in the
morning, as because he was to enterprise without a sword, or any other arms,
but only a poniard which he had under his weeds: when he had past the Castle,
leaving the bar of Sergeants on the left hand, he entered into the Butchers
street upon the righthand, and Alcidon walking up and down between the little
bridge and S. James street; he went directly into the house* where he had
formerly written unto Calist^. But this woman who had so courteously received
him in the morning, seeing him enter by her stall, and taking him for a
cutpurse, or rather for some poor man who would steal something out of the
house, as he looked more like such a one than as he was indeed, cried aloud
unto him, Friend, get you gone, you are a notable fellow to come into the house
before you beg; you should have done very well to have made choice of another
street to beg in, farther from the Castle, and not like a fly come to scorch
your wings here: this is a house for such Pigeons as you are, and by Gods mercy
if I cause you to be shut up there, you will not get out, but with a
Flower-de-luce upon your shoulder. Madam (said Lisander, who much doubted the
scandal which might arise from this ignorance) I am come hither to do you
good, and not to beg or to take, only take the pains to hear a word which
I have to say unto you at this door* O, answered she, behold the Gentleman
with the little sword, who will do us good; by S John I must call my husband
to fly-flap you. But Madam (said Lisander, who was desperate, hearing this
discourse, not knowing how it might end) will you not make one step for your
profit? She then believing he was one of those who sold counterfeit chains,
and would deceive her, in shaking her head, said unto him, No friend, you
mistake me, get you gone, or I will -- But let us see, sure he has some
chain to sell: Saying this, she came near unto the door, looking more upon
Lisanders hands than upon his face, who then said unto her; Madam, I am the
Gentleman who came this morning unto you, having thus disguised my self in
regard of an accident which happened at my going from hence: I pray say nothing,
for you will get nothing by my hurt, and may hope for much profit by my
prosperity, which consists in comforting this poor prisoner. This woman
hardly knowing him, said, Jesus Sir, and my good Master, who would have known
you in these clothes? how could you get away from their hands? how durst you
come again? enter quickly for fear you should be known, for I tremble still
for love of you. He without more entreaty enters, and having cast his Letter
through the bars into the window, he presently went into the streets, because
he would be ready to take up his answer. The letter was in this manner.

Lisanders Letter unto Calista.
MAdam, I have catched your Letter, and have found the means to convey this
unto you, thereby to entreat you to dispose the Porter who serves you, to hear
a word from me, which I would speak for his good and ours, and assure him of
five hundred Crowns, which I will give him at the first word, in earnest of a
thousand more: but let him not think to deceive me, for I would kill him a
thousand times, if he had so many lives, what punishment soever should come
unto me. You may speak unto him at supper time, and he may speak with me at
ten of the clock at night, so near unto the Castle as he will, provided it be
not within: make haste (if please you) to give me your answer by the window
presently, and shortly you shall tell me news your self, if at the least we
can bring it to the pass^ we do desire. Farewell.


Calista having received this second Letter, and upon Lisanders design had
already tasted the Porter, whom she found not altogether averse from her
purpose, although she had offered nothing in particular, nor he promised any
thing but in general terms, only she had proceeded so far, that she might
have some hope from his mercenary and barbarous mind, whom she had with gifts
and fair words so softened, that contrary unto his cruel and stony
disposition, he had witnessed a sorrow for her misfortune, and a desire to
help her; which she presently writ unto Lisander, who with an incredible joy
conceived some good hope of this enterprise: but as he retired himself with
this Letter, always accosted with Alcidon and his footmen, who never lost
sight of him, being gotten from under the Castle, and in his opinion free from
danger, he met a Marshall with many Archers, who apprehended as prisoners all
that were poor, and begged in the street, because it being (as we have said) a
little before the feast of Christmas, in which beggars are very importunate,
they were taken and shut up in a place, where they were clothed with the money
which was put into the poor men's Box in Churches, and a straight command was
given, that none should beg upon pain of whipping, and that none should give
upon pain of Fines. These men meeting with Lisander at the end of our Ladies
Bridge, and taking him not for such as he was, but for such as he seemed to
be, would have had him to prison; but he, who would not go with them, so
shook off the Marshall and his Archers, that he made them leave him at
liberty: he being assisted by Alcidons footmen, who came as if they would know
what the matter was, and Alcidon himself riding among them with his horse to
know the news; so that Lisander (by whose apprehension the Marshals men
thought nothing was to be gained) got unto his lodging without any further
trouble, where having left his beggars weeds, and put himself into his own
habit, he showed the last letter which Calista had flung out, and told not
only what had happened unto him with the Marshall; but also with the Butchers
wife, which Alcidon knew not. It being now night, they went to supper with the
fair Ladies (who did ordinarily bear them company) resolving after supper to
go on horseback about ten of the clock to the Castle, so strong, that
although the Porter should go about to betray them, they would be able rather
to revenge themselves upon him, than be taken. While they were talking with
Olinda and Argire, (who continually prayed to God for the deliverance of their
companion, believing that if she were once at liberty, and Lisander out of
Cloridons business, both of them would easily justify themselves) Calista was
with the Jailer and his wife, who attended upon her, and having given them
jewels which she had about her, to the value of four or five hundred Crowns,
she said unto them, that it was not for the service which she hoped to
receive, that she gave them this, but for that which they had already done;
for if God be so merciful unto me, said she, that I may verify my innocence,
it is the least good which you shall hope for from my liberality; but if it
please God to dispose otherwise of me, this little at the least shall remain
with you, that you may pray for me, and cherish the memory of one, who is
extremely grieved that she cannot bind you further. In saying this Calista
wept, and by her words and tears raised such pity in their hearts, besides
that which the present gifts (which as the Spanish proverb says, breaks
down rocks) and the hope to have more, wrought, that they themselves
prevented the request which she would have made unto them, and encouraged her
to save her self, offering their persons* and their lives to serve her: the
Porter offering further to deliver her, so that she had any trusty friend who
would convey her out of the City, after he had delivered her out of the prison.
Calista, who saw she had touched them, and perceived plainly that it was not
counted it to betray her, added unto her former strokes, saying, My friends,
although you should lose the miserable gain, which you so wretchedly, and with
so much pain get here, by setting me at liberty: yet you should have no cause
to complain, for, besides that which you may hope for and promise yours selves
from me, I have a friend who will give you this very night five hundred
Crowns, if you will, and at your delivering me into his hands, will give you a
thousand more: and be not afraid that he will deceive you, for you shall
receive it all before you deliver me; but withal take heed you do not deceive
him, for if you should do so, no place in the world would assure your lives:
and you should be most wicked (which I will never believe of you) if you
should procure hurt unto them, who intend so much good unto you, for, by doing
this good work, and binding so many persons as have interest in me, by this
act, in one day without labor, or running any danger, you may raise a fortune
worthy of your selves* and live honorably either with us, or else where you
please, all the rest of your lives, without being constrained to practice this
course of life, in my opinion too base for your hearts: With these words and
many others, Calista being assured of the Porter, and drawing from him the
strongest oaths he could give, she showed him Lisanders letter, whereupon it
was concluded that he should go out that night about ten of the clock, to
receive the five hundred Crowns, and agree upon a day for her deliverance.

As they had agreed, it was done; the Porter going about ten of the clock
without the bar of the gate, saw two men, who walking up and down on
horseback, some twenty or thirty paces from the gate, one of them, who was
Lisander, seeing him without the bar, left his companion (who was Alcidon, with
two footmen who followed him) and going unto him, asked him if he were not the
man which carried meat unto the Lady who was prisoner there. Yes, Sir, answered
he. Has not she advertised you, replied Lisander, that I would be here at this
time about her business? She has told me (answered the Porter) that a
Gentleman would about this time come hither to speak with me, but I do not
know that it is you. Lisander hereby knowing that Calista had made the
bargain, said, hold friend, here is five hundred Crowns in gold in this
purse, which I give for a token that it is I, and if thou can deliver her to
me to morrow, I will give thee a thousand more, which she has promised unto
thee, before thou put her into my hands: But do not think to deceive me, for if
thou do, I vow to kill thee, though I fall into all the hangmens hands in
France. Sir, said the Porter, (taking the Crowns) I will not deceive you, but
I cannot promise to deliver her before the feast of Kings. How (answered
Lisander?) what if the process should be judged between this and that? Sir,
said the Porter, I will do what I can to deliver her sooner; but to assure you
that I can infallibly do it before that time, I will not. Thou do promise,
said Lisander, to bring her then hither into this place in the night before
that day at the furthest. Yes Sir, said the Porter, I do promise you to bring
her hither about ten of the clock at night, upon pain of my life; and until
that time let me hear no news from you, nor expect any from me, for fear
we should be taken speaking together. Tell my Lady then (answered Lisander)
what we have agreed upon, and so farewell. In saying this, he turned toward
Alcidon, and both together w^ unto their lodging, where they told unto Olinda
and Argire what they had done, who received an unspeakable contentment to see
Calista's deliverance proceed so well, although the length of the time bred
some grief, and made them fear some cross: But lest the process in the mean
time might be judged, they concluded that Olinda, who was betrothed unto
Lidian, Calista's brother, and might openly declare her self for her sister in
law, should go and entreat the Reporter not to report her process, until the
coming of her Parents, lest the innocence of this Lady might run some danger
for want of a defense: forasmuch as she was so afflicted with her husbands
death, and with seeing her self accused, that she wished nothing more than to
be quickly out of this world, which was the cause (as indeed it was) that she
had not thought upon any justification, nor any person for her; but her friends
being come, they might peradventure bring Lisander, who being heard, would
wonderfully clear Calista's right. These words full of consideration and
weight, with the credit and grace of the Speaker, had so much power over the
Reporter, that he promised to stay the coming of Calista's friends, until
the feast of Kings were past, and rather go into the Country with the
Process, than be constrained to deliver it into the Court. Thus the feast
passed happily amongst these four persons, Lisander never stirring abroad, but
once under his beggars weeds, to let Calista understand what Olinda had done
for her, and to know from her also whether the Porter had faithfully told her
what was resolved to be done the night before the feast of Kings, whereof being
satisfied, he expected the Eve of the feast of Kings with great longing. In
the mean time Berontus knowing that Olinda had solicited for the deferring of
Calista's judgment, went upon that occasion to visit her, made offer to join
with her in her request, desiring not only a delay therein, but Calista's
freedom; so that he who was guilty of his brothers death might appear: And
although Olinda was in a fair way of agreeing them, and that Berontus for
Ambrisia's love did desire it; yet Calista was so far in the hands of
justice, that it was not thought possible to get her out by any agreement. When
the Eve of the feast of Kings was come, the Master Jailer of the prison
intended to make merry (according to his ancient custom) with his wife and her
friends, the chiefest of whom was the Register, and the Hangman his Gossip;
they were to choose a King by a bean, and afterward fall to drinking: for
this cause the Porter had made choice of this night, as fittest for this
purpose, well knowing that sleep does ordinarily follow drunkenness: Calista
and Lisander were advertised to be ready, the one to go out of the Castle,
the other to be out in the street about eleven of the clock (as it was
agreed) with this charge, that if they lost this opportunity, they must hope
for no other, nor yet think to prolong Calista's judgment any longer, which
must needs be both mortal and infamous. Lisander came about ten of the clock
with Alcidon and four other Gentlemen, every one armed with Pistols, and well
mounted to prevent all Treason, and rather to kill all the Provosts and Archers
of Paris, than suffer themselves to be taken. The Porter had received the
thousand Crowns which were promised, and Lisander and Calista did impatiently
wait for the clockes striking eleven, which in the end struck, yet in vain
both for the one and the other: when Lisander heard the clock strike eleven,
and could not see his man, he thought that he was betrayed, yet long he was
not of this opinion before the Porter appeared; but when Lisander saw him come
alone, he was about to have killed him, verily believing that he would break
his promise: nevertheless he forbore, desiring to hear what he would say,
which was, that having heard the clock strike eleven, and not being able to
execute his design, he came now to entreat him to have patience, and not
think much at his waiting, for if his Master were asleep, who was not yet
retired into his chamber, he would without fail deliver the prisoner. This
comforted Lisander, but not Calista, who having expected eleven with so much
longing, and told it with so much earnestness, when she saw it pass without
hearing any body, she accounted her self lost, and confirmed her self in
that opinion, because the Porter had no means to come into her chamber, to
give her that advertisement which he had done unto Lisander; yet there
remained some weak hope which flattered her grief while the clock struck
twelve, but that being struck, she utterly despaired of her liberty, and
consequently of her life.

In this agony more deadly than death it self, came the Porter (when she had
lost all hope) who opening the door of her chamber (a thing so far from her
thought and expectation, at an hour when all things else slept) troubled so
much her mind with his unexpected coming, and with the first motions of a
sudden joy, from an extremity of the contrary passion, that in stead of going
out (as they had projected) she fell down upon the floor in a swound. The
Porter was infinitely astonished, and running unto her, said, Madam, will you
undo me, who have had a desire to save you? sake courage, rise up, and see
your friends who are here hard by waiting for you. Yet at these words Calista
stirred not: the Porter was made, his wife, who was appointed to wait upon
Calista, was desperate, all was in disorder and confusion: if Calista had not
come to her self again, who seeing the danger which she did run by her stay,
with a lively apprehension of her infamy and punishment, rose up, and instantly
went out of the chamber, to the Porters infinite contentment and his wives: But
as she was hastily going down the stairs, which were an ill-favored pair of
stone, her feet light against an old Cauldron of brass (wherein they did use
to put fire in cold weather) which tumbling down from the top unto the
bottom, made such a noise that all had been spoiled, if (by great good fortune
for them) the Jailer and all his friends had not been so buried in wine and
sleep, that they would not have heard a Petar. Calista thus went out of the
Castle with the woman who tended her, and the Porter, leaving the gates open,
and with no less fear than joy came into the street, where she gave her self
into Lisanders arms and Alcidons, who received her with an incomparable joy;
and having placed her in a Caroch (with the woman who always after remained
with her) they retired themselves unto Alcidons, bidding the Porter first
farewell, who was resolved to retire himself into some other place. To tell
you Lisanders joy, Alcidons pleasure, the thanks which Calista gave them, the
words, the tears, the kisses and embracings which afterward past between
Olinda, Argire and she, I should never have done: Only, having spent the best
part of the night, they went toward morning to rest and sleep, after so many
dangerous storms, and so many sorrows; where I will suffer them to remain in
peace, as unwilling to trouble their rest, until we come to the eighth part of
this History, where with more contentment we shall see her innocence verified,
whose imprisonment and liberty we have already seen.

The End of the seventh Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE EIGHTH BOOK.
THe accidents of this world are so mingled one with another, that fear
ordinarily succeeds hope, and good and evil do follow one the other like day
and night; so unto the joy for Calista's delivery, succeeded the sorrow for her
departure, with a thousand important reasons made necessary. And whereas she
had thought, that being once out of the Castle, she had been free from all
care, more than to justify her self with time, she then saw herself wrapped
among difficulties and griefs, which gave little place unto the former. A
poor condition of mortals, who always longing for what is to come, and
earnestly thirsting after them, when we have swallowed them, we find our
selves as unsatisfied as we were at the first.

After then that the Jailer had digested his wine, and rising early in the
morning, according to the manner of such people (who never sleep but when
the Devil rocks them) found his prison doors open, his Porter gone, and
Calista with her Keeper escaped, there was no small noise in the house: yet
after he had in vain tormented himself, not knovving where to search for
her, nor what to do, he advertised the Justice, and the adverse parties, who
were Berontus and Verasco, who diversely apprehended this news: for Berontus,
who was most interessed in the death of his brother, and who ought to have
stirred most at Calista's flight, was least troubled, although he dearly loved
Cleanders memory, and extremely desired revenge. But were it that he would do
it himself with more courage and knowledge, or that he did think Calista
innocent, he was in his heart very glad that she had made an escape: But
contrariwise Verasco made earnest request, that he might be suffered to
search Olinda's house; who soliciting for her, seemed to have been the only
cause of her escaping from the punishment of her crime.

Alcidon was not yet risen, when Berontus came unto him, and being brought into
his chamber, told him, how Calista, with the woman who kept her, and the Porter
of the prison, had broken prison, advertising him further of his uncles design
to cause Olinda's house to be searched, entreating him to let her know so much
from him, to the end that if Calista should be retired thither, care might be
had that she were not taken again, because it would much empaire her
condition, and do her more harm than she thought to do her self by
escaping. Alcidon, not knowing whether this were a pretense, and distrusting
Berontus in a matter of this importance, answered him, that there was no
appearance of Olinda's meddling in this business, especially without his
privity, who was her neighbor and her friend, and who saw so clearly through
her actions: that it was not the enterprise of a woman, but of a man, yea and
of a valiant man, and as much as Lisander (if he had been in France) durst
have attempted; yet he would not fail to advertise her what he had said,
though it served but to let her know the good will which he bore unto her
sister in law. With this Berontus departed, seeing no body but Alcidon, who
going instantly unto Lisanders chamber, and both of them into the Ladies, who
were up and ready, told them all that which he had learnt of Berontus. A
remedy for this there was none but to be gone, yet whither they knew not: for
to retire into Normandy unto Calista's parents, the small account which they
had made of her life, believing her guilty of Cleanders death, did sufficiently
witness that they would not receive her; neither could she have been more
assured there than in any other place, for the King does force obedience all
over his Kingdom, which Lisander swore rather to dye than suffer: so that
Calista must resolve not alone to leave such dear company, unto whom, besides
her ancient affection, she was newly so much bound, but her native country
France, where she had been so tenderly brought up, and take upon her a flight
into a strange country, from all her acquaintance, under the conduct of a man,
unto whom in effect she was obliged for her life and her honor, but who in
appearance, and in the opinion of the world, had been the ruin of them both,
together with the loss of her husbands life: judge if Calista, a woman of a
virtuous and noble carriage, could be sensible of this. Olinda and Argire had
no less feeling than she her self, yet the bitterness must be digested.
Calista resolved to depart in the beginning of the night with Lisander, his
faithful footman, who was come from Flanders during the feast, and this woman
who waited upon her in prison, with a Gentlewoman whom Olinda offered unto her.
Alcidon made provision of six good Horses in a Coach, to the end that during
the long night (always at this time of the year) they might make a great
journey; and Olinda retired her self unto her own house, expecting the search
whereof Berontus had advertised her, which (nevertheless) was afterward
hindered by himself: so that this whole day was past with much fear, care, and
tears, and as much grief for Calista's departure, as joy for her deliverance.
In the evening, Olinda being come from her lodging, they supped together in
great sadness: after followed such pitiful adieues, that I will not by
relating them afflict the reader of this story, sorrow having ordinarily this
contagious quality, that we cannot see it in others, without feeling it in our
selves. After the last embracings, upon this separation, Calista and her woman
entered alone into the Coach, about eight of the clock at night, and going out
of Paris by S. Denis gate, she took her way toward Flanders through Picardy,
followed on horseback by Lisander and Alcidon, who (with the same Gentlemen
who had assisted him the night before) accompanied him beyond Seutlis, where he
took his leave of Calista and Lisander, with more hearts grief unto all three
than can be spoken; and there leaving the two Gentlemen, he took his way
back to Paris in post, fearing that if his absence should be known, he
might be suspected to have bin of the party. Calista and Lisander after their
departure from Alcidon, used all the diligence possible they could until they
had gotten into Cambray, where having rested themselves two days, they took
their way to Bruxels with more ease and leisure, Lisander entering into the
Coach with her, and causing his horse to be led by. But they were no sooner
out from the strokes of Fortune wherewith they had bin so beaten, when
Calista's beauty wiping away in Lisanders mind the remembrance of former
sorrows, and the apprehension of those which might come, renewed the cruel
flames of love: nevertheless considering the pitiful ashes of his friend,
Calista's present estate, hardly recovered from the astonishment of so many
bloody disasters, whereof his love had in part been the occasion, and his own
miserable condition, who by his former unhappiness, was fallen into disgrace
with his Prince, and into the evil opinion of all France, he thought although
it were by another fault, yet his love had done injury unto Cleanders
friendship, and unto Calista's chastity, to whom as yet he durst not touch upon
that string. Being come unto Bruxels, the Archduke (who knew Lisanders valor,
both by the report of what he had done in France, and what he had done for the
Hollanders against himself) having welcomed him according to his worth, and
showed him extraordinary favor, which he did communicate to few, made him
offer of two thousand crowns pension by the year, to draw him to his service,
which Lisander would not accept, humbly entreating his Highness to pardon him,
if he could not be pensionary unto any man besides his King, with whom although
he were now in disgrace, rather by his misfortune than through his fault, yet
he would not commit this error, to take pay of any man but of him:
nevertheless humbly thanking his Highness, whose most obedient servant he
would remain all his life without wages. And although in this Lisander
performed the duty of a brave and generous Knight (as he was) yet he had
occasion to repent himself shortly after, though in the end it fell out
happily for him, as we shall see in the progress of this History.

As for Calista, so soon as she knew the name of the French Ambassadors wife,
with whom she had been acquainted at Paris, she went (with Lisanders consent)
to lie at her lodging, thereby hoping to avoid the scandal of lying at his
chamber. And as nothing is impregnable to her graces, she drew the Ambassadors
wife so much to her friendship, that she was afterward very profitable unto
her: for the King (being advertised that they were both retired unto Bruxels,
and humbly entreated as well by Cloridons friends as by Cleanders, that he
would not suffer the murder of two such Knights to pass unpunished, whom they
thought had been murdered by Lisander, who (said they) not content wickedly to
have killed his friend Cleander by the help of his wives conspiracy, is not
now ashamed to live with her in the face of all the world) writ unto his
Ambassador that he should seize upon them both* which had been done without
fail, if the Ambassadors wife, who heard an inkling thereof, had not first
advertised Calista, who (together with Lisander) getting away as well as they
could, went both together into Frisland, and so escaped this danger with no
less labor than the former.

I know that some Authors, less faithful than slanderous, or willing rather
to imitate the Roman of Amadis, than to follow the thread of a true discourse,
have said, that in the course of this voyage* and during their abode in these
parts, Calista, vanquished with Lisanders importunities and services, ye^lded
in the end into the violence of his desires: But such Authors having had more
knowledge of the false report which in thi^ time was spread against her, than
of her virtues, have (...) tran^ported by the passion of her enemies, than by
the truth of the Story. But leaving them in Friseland, and this discourse of
them in the world, we will return unto Paris, unto which place Ambrisia came
(a little after their going) upon a letter which she had received from
Lisander, and shortly after came Lidian upon a letter of Olinda's. They met all
together at the same Olinda's house with Alcidon, who received them with no
less contentment than they gave, by telling of Calista's innocence and
liberty; Ambrisia was as joyful for her brother, as Lidian for his sister, and
for Lisander himself, whom with reason above all men living he loved.

Berontus knowing of Ambrisia's coming, would, according to his accustomed
manner, have gone to see her, as one whose love was not altered by any former
accidents: But she entreated him not to think evil, if she could not accept
of this honor, until there were better correspondency between him and her
brother; although she so visibly loved him, that Lidian, offended with
Berontus his prosecution against his sister, had challenged him into the field,
if the respect unto Ambrisia and her tears, had not prevailed; wherein she was
assisted by Alcidon and Argire, and by Olinda, who was alone more powerful in
this, than all of them. As for Verascus, the consideration of his age kept
Lidian from quarrelling with him: But Alcidon having told unto Berontus all the
treason of Clarinda, as you have heard, who for to hide her shameful life with
Leon, had accused her Mistress of her own fault, and finally caused Cleanders
death, who could not be killed but by Leon, seeing it was he who found
Lisanders sword, who was at the time of Cleanders death in Flanders (as he
said) he had learnt as well from Lisander as from Calista, and that it was to
be believed in regard of Leons flight. To be short, having demonstrated unto
him, that in the taking of Leon consisted the clearing and proof of the whole
business, he made both Lidian and Berontus swear to enter in quest with
himself, never giving over until either the one or the other of them had
found him, and that he who first should find him, should lead him to Paris,
and make it known unto the other. So leaving their Mistresses at Paris, they
all three one after another departed to seek for Leon in all places of the
world; where we will let them go, and return unto Lisander.

We have left him in Friseland, disputing Calista's favors, whose beauty gave
so full into the eyes of a young Frison Lord called Berengarius, with so great
lightning, that he was too weak to suffer it; for although her mind was
possessed with sorrow, and mourning covered her face, yet could not the luster of
her excellent perfection, wherewith she was enriched, be defaced. Lisander, who
did not lead her thither for him, seeing that he did openly declare himself
confident of the friends and means which he had in the Country, from a lover,
which he was, became jealous, and fearing to inwrap himself in new
mischiefs, yet languishing under the ruins of those which had overwhelmed
him, he knew not what order to give, when as Calista preventing him in this
care, entreated him to lead her into some other place, alleging for her
reason, that this air was unwholesome, and hiding the fear she had of the
events which the rashness of this lover might produce, who being an Almain,
and less subtle than natural, did so ill disguise his affection, that one
not so cleare-sighted as Lisander might easily observe it, which was the true
cause that moved her to make this request: Lisander was glad that this motion
came from her, for he thought it was liberty enough for him to let her see his
love, without making his jealousy known, neither did he give her any occasion
to think that any such hammer beat in his head; but representing unto her how
far they were from their friends, destitute of all goods, which were seized
upon and confiscated, and had no means long to support the expense which they
were constrained to be at, he entreated her to be willing that he might carry
her into Gascoigne, where he had some places so far from the Court, that
there would be none to discover them, and so strong that they could not be
surprised though they were discovered; whereunto Calista yielded, to avoid a
greater mischief (which nevertheless they could not shun) upon condition
that he should first have her into Normandy, to endeavor to recover the favor
of her parents, that having justified themselves with them, they might make
their innocence appear before all the world, and so recovering their ancient
glory and reputation which they had in France, together with the Kings grace
and favor, they might with the approbation of all their friends contract
together a lawful marriage:

This being concluded and agreed upon between them, early in a morning
without taking leave of any body, they trussed up their baggage, and entering
into a Caroch, Lisander, Calista, and her two women, followed with two
Gentlemen well horsed, and with some other servants, who, with his faithful
footman, led Lisanders good Horse along with him; they took their way
toward France, following the least beaten ways, that they might not be
known. Already were they come upon the confines of Frisland, Lisander losing
both the remembrance of Berengarius and his country, studying nothing more,
than how to establish himself in his own; when they discovered five or six
horsemen coming after them, whom Berengarius (vexed at Calista's departure)
had assembled together to take her away from him upon the way. At the first
they did not think that they were enemies, wherefore they hastened not their
way; but when they saw them come a gallop, Lisander leapt out of the Coach, and
was hardly on horseback, when he knew Berengarius in the head of his men, who
saluted him with a Pistol shot, and in the same instant all the others
discharged theirs, as well on him as on those who accompanied him, who returning
fire for fire discharged theirs; so that at this first encounter four fell to
the ground, which were Lisanders two Gentlemen, and two of Berengarius his men.
But it was Gods will that Lisander should escape, although he were covered
with flames and blood, that by his hands might be punished Berengarius his
rapine, who fell unto the ground mortally wounded with the shot of a Pistol,
which was given him by Lisander, who like a lion flew among the rest with his
sword, and either scattered or killed them all; acting in the fury wherein he
was, and in Calista's sight, such valiancies, that thereby he did lessen all
those which heretofore he had done, to the astonishment of the world. Having
revenged the death of his men with so bloody an execution, and no body left
with him but a little Flemmish boy, and his old faithful footman, who was
wounded with a Pistol in the shoulder, and he with two shot, although not so
dangerous, and with some blows of swords which were but slight, he was
constrained to retire himself in great diligence, and no less sorrow, until
he were gotten out of the limits of Frisland, causing his faithful Footman to
get upon his Horse, he himself going into the Coach with Calista, until they
came unto their lodging, where he himself dressed first his own wounds, and
then his footmans, washing them with wine and oil, as he had learned of the
Capuchin, who healed him of the wound which Chrisantes had given him: but
because the Footmans shoulder bone was broken, whereby he was not able to
endure travail, he was constrained to leave him behind in the same lodging, to
whom he gave money in large manner for the charges of healing his wounds,
commanding him so soon as he should be well to follow him in Gascoigne: he
himself (making the little Fle^mish boy ride upon his Horse) went into the
Coach, having no wound which could keep him from travail, and being but
four, drawn by six good horses, they made such haste that in seven or eight
days they came into Normandy, within six leagues of Bellaire (so was the
house called where Calista had received her birth.) It was then in the
beginning of April, at what time the earth begins to wax beautiful, and the
days long. There they entered into deliberation, how they should proceed with
Dorilas; for to go directly to Bellaire, not knowing how they should be
received, they were none of them of the mind: and although Lisander had
infinitely obliged him, as well in saving his own life, as in saving his
sons twice, yet (as it is said) benefits are written in the sand, and
injuries in metal: he believed with great appearance, that this last act
which he (as it was believed) had committed against Cleander, did utterly
deface and wipe out of the mind and memory of Dorilas, the remembrance and
merit of all his former obligations; And that if he would not see his own
daughter, because she was accused for the death of her husband, he would less
see him, who had been her instrument therein, and for whose love she had
caused him to be killed; wherefore they resolved that Calista should write a
letter full of compassion to her father, and another to Otranta her mother, to
move them to have some pity of a daughter who had been so dear unto them, and
upon their answer they would resolve either to go thither, or pass by.
Calista wrote presently, but then they were more troubled than before for an
apt messenger: The faithful footman was not there, and the Flemming was but a
block-head, and they had need of a quick spirited man, who might know and
report back their true dispositions, and help abate, and put by the strokes
of her parents anger: So that Lisander could not find better means than to
disguise himself, and make himself the Carrier of Calista's letters; for
Dorilas had never seen him but one night at Fountain Bleau, and then when he
had no beard: As for Otranta, he had so well known the affection which she bare
unto her daughter, and unto him, that although she should know him, yet he
feared no displeasure from her; but contrarily they hoped she would much help
to convert Dorilas, and to wipe away the evil impressions which he had
conceived against his daughter: Wherefore the next morning he put himself into
a serving-mans habit, and having hired a horse, taking his Flemmish boy with
him, leaving Calista in the lodging he galloped so fast, that he came unto
Bellaire before dinner, where having made known that he came from her with
letters unto her father and mother, and being brought in unto them, he humbly
presented the letters, together with their daughters duty unto them: Dorilas
made some difficulty to receive them, yet having opened them with a severe
countenance, never imagining that Lisander was the messenger, he found it said
thus.

Calista's Letter to Dorilas.
SIr, among all the calamities wherewith I have been miserably afflicted since
the loss of my husband (the unfortunate spring of all the rest) I have felt
none equal unto the grief which I suffer, in being unjustly deprived of the
honor of your good favor: for since that deplorable accident which made me
widow unto a person whom I held dearest in the world, I made so little account
of my self, that the loss of goods and honor which I had acquired, was light
unto me, and the living an exile out of my native country was supportable;
but to be constrained to live out of the good opinion of my father, having
lost the honor of your love, it is a misery which cannot be imagined but by
her who suffers it, and if you were able to conceive it according to my
feeling, it may be it would stir up as much pity in you, as it works
grief in me. For your good will, Sir, was the only good which was remaining
unto me in this world, and was in stead of a recompense, and by which I hoped
to be comforted for him whom I had lost: But clean contrary unto my hope, it
has been the increase of my affliction, and the inflammation of my wound is
proceeded from the remedy which I hoped to apply. Sir, you are my Father, I
most humbly entreat you to be my Judge, and take knowledge of your daughters
fact, as you would of the greatest strangers in the world, I ask no favor but
justice, and do entreat you to execute it as rigorously as the crime (whereof
I am falsely accused) does deserve, not only if it may be found that I am
culpable, but if it be not evidently seen that I am innocent, and your most
humble daughter,

Calista.


After that Dorilas had read this letter, he found terrible cuttings with
grief and pity in his mind, which nevertheless he dissembled, and giving
back the letter unto Lisander, for answer, said, My friend, tell Calista, that
if she were innocent, as she writes unto me, she need not (to aggravate her
crime, rather than justify her self) break prison, nor fly with him, who is
the cause of her doing this wickedness, but if she be so assured of her
innocence, as that she can verify it, let her return into the place from
whence she is escaped, I will become her Solicitour, and will employ all that
I am worth to recover her honor, and assure her life, showing my self as good
a Father as I have been in former times, when she lived according to that
blood and nobleness from whence she is issued* but to think, that she living
in the opinion of having killed her husband, and now conversing with his
murderer, I ought to account her my daughter, or regard her letters of tears,
she is much deceived, and so I pray tell her Lisander never heard words so
grievous as those, not daring to answer again; yet he was constrained to say
that he knew Calista and Lisander so well, that the quality of a murderer was
no way fitting to the one, nor of an adulteress unto the other, and that he
would swear they were both innocent of what they were accused; but by that
which he had heard, the cause which hindered them from justifying themselves,
was, Lisanders not daring to present himself. And why does he not present
himself, if he be innocent (answered Dorilas?) Because (replied Lisander) he
had some small time before killed Cloridon and Chrisantes, and thereby incurred
the Kings displeasure, and he (you know) is astrong adversary. Dorilas with
pleasure hearing this discourse, and being glad to understand Calista's
justification, especially Lisanders, unto whom he was so exceedingly obliged*
entreated him to relate all that he had heard reported. Lisander then told him
how he had left his sword after he had killed Chrisantes, which was found by
Leon, who was since gone out of the way; he being in love with Clarinda, had
been the cause of this pitiful tragedy (as you have heard): with this
discourse Dorilas was much pleased, yet was not resolved to send for his
daughter Calista, neither did he know that she was so nigh, Lisander having
told him, that she was in Frisland; but asking if Lisander were with her, and
the same Lisander assuring him that he was not, he said, he was the only man
of the world unto whom he was bound, and that he should receive no less
contentment to understand his innocence than his daughters; that in truth he
did wish him all, being carried away with the common belief of this false
report: But seeing it was so, he would go speedily to the Court, (whither he
had seen Lillian) to employ all his friends to restore (...) to the Kings
(...), to the end that purging himself together with Calista from the murder
of Cleander, he might receive them both into his house as his children. And
that in the mean time Calista, in the place where she was, should expect
news from him, and should endeavor to preserve that, which he did assure
himself, she had not lost. Whilst Dorilas thus spoke unto Lisander without
knowing him, Otranta not marking him, read Calista's letter, which contained
these words.

Calista's Letter unto her Mother.
MAdam, when Fortune had so wounded me, as to take from me, together with my
husband, the contentment, the glory, and the liberty which I had in the world;
one of my greatest comforts, next unto that which I had in God, and in my
Conscience, was to remember, that yet I had left a pitiful Mother, who,
according to those dear affections which she had ever witnessed, would never
abandon me in so great a desolation, believing, that I had not lost all, and
that if God had taken from me the best husband in the world, yet he had left
me the best Mother under Heaven, and a Father who had ever showed himself
kind unto his daughter and yours. Nevertheless, Madam, I have been driven to
fall from this comfort, to my extreme grief, when I knew that you had not only
left me, but for the top of all my misfortunes, that those whom nature had
given me for my Parents, were become mine enemies. Those things which are most
to be esteemed, are such, as ought most to be sorrowed for when they are
lost; and I have not only lost your affection, Madam, which of all things in
this world is most dear unto me, but it is turned into hatred toward me;
and from being honorable and profitable, as it has been, it is become so
ruinous unto me, that I should have been buried in the miserablest reputation
that ever poor woman was, if my honor and my life had not miraculously been
preserved by him, who is falsely accused of Cleanders death, and Calista's
overthrow. I have said (and do most humbly entreat you, Madam, to pardon me)
that your hatred does me injury many ways; for besides that it makes every
one believe that I am justly accused of that which is imputed unto me, or at
the least has confirmed the belief which was already had of my guiltiness
(seeing that my Parents would not embrace my defense;) it has constrained me,
if I would not dye without justifying my self, and in the opinion of an
infamous Adulteress and Murderer of my Husband, to receive succor and refuge
from him, who is yet all bloody with my husbands death, if it be true that he
is guilty: which is the fairest pretense, and the most lively appearance
wherewith mine enemies have been able to color the falsenesse of their
imposture, and whereat I cannot complain, but only at the hardness of my
Parents. Madam, I do once again entreat you to pardon me; my just and
incomparable griefs cannot frame small complaints: If you knew what I have
suffered, you would abhor that ever you had brought into the world so miserable
a creature; if you will not take pity of my life, at the least take knowledge
thereof, be not more cruel than my Adversaries, nor more criminal than my
Judges: Shall it be said, that a Mother refuses her eyes to the deportments,
or her ears to the justification of her daughter? and if you would not that I
should have recourse unto you, Madam, unto whom would you then that I should
have recourse? Tell me from whom I should hope for more, or in whom I may
better rely than in you, who are my Mother. And let fortune shoot all the
arrows of her anger upon me (if she has any remaining which I have not
felt), yet she shall never do so much, but that (Madam) I will be always
your most humble and most obedient daughter,

Calista.


It cannot be said that two letters so pitiful, from a daughter so fair, did
not touch hearts so noble as those of her Parents; for they were pierced even
to the very soul: but it may be truly said, that they were not so touched,
that either of them would resolve to send for their daughter to their house,
which often made me think, it is not without cause said, The Norman is a
terrible nation. Otranta nevertheless, who was a woman, could not so well
cover her affection as Dorilas; for her tears wherewith she had wet the letter
while she read it, did witness it sufficiently without seeing her face, and
having her heart so oppressed with sorrow that she could not speak, she
commanded that Lisander should be had to dinner with the servants, saying that
after dinner she would give him answer: In the mean time she and Dorilas sat
down to dinner, where they resolved what they should write, and send back to
Calista; for they judged she could not unwind her self from so many troubles
without excessive charge. After dinner Otranta being retired into her chamber,
she called for the messenger, unto whom, not yet knowing him, she said: My
friend, I am a mother, and consequently cannot deny but that I love Calista,
who is my child, and the more, because she has hitherto obliged me unto it by
her good nature, which never belyed her birth; but this wicked accident has
given so great a wound unto her renown, that together with her virtues, for
which she has been honored over the kingdom, she has lost the natural
affection of her parents, who had rather deny their blood, than avow it in
favoring so detestable a crime. Nevertheless, seeing you say there needs
only but the presenting of Lisander to justify Calista, there shall neither
be wanting our means, nor the favor which we can have in Court; all which
we will employ to the uttermost of our frien^s, and of our estate, to the
justifying both of the one and the other* for the obligations which lie upon us
from Lisander, are such, that we will not employ our selves less for him than
for her. But tell me friend, are they not always together? No Madam, answered
Lisander, they are not I assure you, but though they should, whither would you
that she should retire her self, rather than to him, who is at this day the
only proppe both of her honor and her life? Alas, said Otranta; he will never
so well support it as he has ruined it. If he has ruined it (replied
Lisander) it is but in appearance, but in effect he has preserved it, and
will maintain it against the world; and if you think evil of her being with
him, why do you not take her home unto you? I know that Calista never longed
after any other thing, and o^ her will depends Lisanders, who will as
willingly render her into your hands, as he drew her from the hands of
justice: but would you that she should wander up and down the world as a
cast-a-way, as you have left her? With these last words Lisander was so
transported in passion, that forgetting the part which he played, he lost both
the countenance and fashion of a servingman, and took upon him his own true
carriage: So that Otranta marking him more curiously, knew him no less by his
gesture, than by his words, and remained almost transported with astonishment.
He seeing himself known, and that from thence came Otranta's perplexity,
proceeded in his discourse in this manner; Madam, be not astonished to see me
thus disguised, Calista's virtues deserve that all extraordinary enterprises
should be attempted for her service: But that you may know it is with that
honor wherein I am tied, I do entreat you to take her home unto you, and to
believe that this request is the farthest from my desire (which is to be
always with her) and only to conform my self to hers, and to let you see
how much I prefer her contentment before that which I receive in her sight. O
Lisander, said Otranta, who can deny you so just a request, and so fitting to
Calista's reputation? Alas, if it be true (which I doubt not) that you are
innocent of her misfortune, and Cleanders death, what satisfaction can equal
this your merit? Merit, answered Lisander, there is none, and for my innocence,
I hope God will do me the favor to make them see it, who will not now believe
it. Many other discourses passed between them, which would be too tedious to
relate; after which, Lisander having told her where he had left Calista, they
agreed that he should return unto her, without discovering himself unto
Dorilas, who going two or three days after unto the Court, would leave Otranta
at liberty to be able to send for her daughter.

Thus was our messenger sent back, who having found his Flemming, returned a
gallop the same night unto Calista, and gave her a faithful account of his
message: Calista, who was wearied with leading so miserable a life from one
country to another, with so small pleasure and less honor, seeing the evil
opinion was conceived of her love unto Lisander, and seeing how freely he had
employed himself for her in this last action, did no less esteem this
service than any of the former, because in those former he had served her
against her enemies, and in this against himself. When he drew her out of
prison, it was to save her life, without which he could not live, and to enjoy
her presence, which was his sovereign good; so that it was to content himself
as well as Calista: But here he labored to lose himself with her sight, and
to condemn himself unto a perpetual torment to leave her in rest, and he
will repent himself at leisure. During those three days which they stayed in
their lodging, expecting Dorilas going to the Court, Calista never spoke of any
thing but of Lisanders goodness, and how much she was beholding unto him,
which she protested to engrave in her memory with an eternal character:
Lisander entreated her to take pity of the grief, which the apprehension of
this departure wrought in him, and the languishings which would consume him in
her absence.

Above all things Madam (said he) remember the promise which it pleased you to
make me, and the honest affection wherewith I have endeavored to merit it.
Give me not cause to repent the great respect I have born you, and the
incomparable obedience wherewith I have moderated the violencies of my passion,
otherwise you will convert my patience into fury, my discretion into folly, and
you will reduce me to the greatest despair that ever wretched soul was
brought unto. Whereunto Calista answered, Lisander, either you have forgotten
who I am, or else you think my judgment is not capeable of knowing what you
are; yet I do not think that any of my actions or words could lead you to these
distrusts: remember that Calista cannot be accused of ingratitude, but by such
as do not know her, and although misfortune should carry her to this vice
against all the world, yet it is not possible she should be so to you, to whom
she owes more than unto all men in the world. So did these lovers comfort
themselves, expecting news from Otranta, who failed not to give them notice
immediately after Dorilas his departure, which was within three days that
Lisander had delivered Calista's letters. The day of his departure being come,
Lisander conducted Calista within the view of Bellaire (not willing to go in
with her, fearing lest the over much sorrow which would possess him at his
departure, might give more knowledge of his love to Otranta, than he desired
she should have); and there, as they would have bid one another farewell, the
fair words which were accustomed to have birth in their mouths, dyed now
there, and that which they had premeditated to speak, vanished; witnessing
that a mean grief sharpneth the spirit, but an excessive one astonisheth it.
In the end Lisander said, this departure should be less cruel than it is, if
it did leave me power to bid you farewell, and my grief would be less, if it
would suffer me to complain: that which comfort me is, that I suffer for
you, who merit more, and the cause of my martyrdom allaieth the cruelty;
receiving also so great glory in obeying you, that there is no kind of
torment, which my obedience and your service would not make agreeable. And I
conjure you my fair one, by the eternal lights of your fair eyes, the only
Sun whose rays and eclipses I am not able to bear (yet whose light I am now
constrained to lose) that you will forget me the least you can in these
darknesses, wherein I go to inwrappe my self during your absence. Lisander,
said Calista, you see this great light which shines over our heads, I do call
it to witness, that it shall sooner cease to lighten the world, than I will
cease to love you: you have obliged me too much, and when my ingratitude
should come to this height of forgetfulness, your valor is so necessary, that
it would cause it to be sought for unto the worlds end. Farewell, since the
influence of the stars do condemn us to this separation, preserve me
always in your memory, and believe me, your name and representation shall be
always the dearest jewels of my life. In speaking these words, Calista
lovingly kissed her Lisander, with more liberty than ever she had done, and
Lisander embraced her with feelings of joy almost incomprehensible: In the end
(almost forceably) they snatched one the other out of their arms, separating
themselves with sorrow no less pitiful, than the love which produced it was
true. Calista followed her way to Bellaire, and Lisander being on horseback
followed her, with his eyes fixed upon her as steadfastly, and as immoveably, as
if they had been of a Statue, until he saw her Coach enter into the Castle:
and when he had lost his North-starre, O God, what darkness, what trouble,
what confusion rose in his mind! I make a conscience to abandon him in this
solitariness, more pursued and more torn by his own affection, than Acteon by
his dogs. Calista being come to Bellaire, was received by Otranta with great
testimony of love, sorrow, and pity of her misfortune: There were their tears
renewed; there motherly affections succeeded amorous, and amorous gave place to
motherly: clean contrary unto poor Lisander, who only entertained himself
with imaginations, and lived only with hopes of love. He (after he had lost
his fair Bear) took his way toward Paris, determining to enter by night,
and see his friends as he passed by, or else to learn some news, although it
were with hazard of his life: And as he passed S. Germyn, it being late,
travailing in the fresh of the evening upon the banks of Seine, softly, as
well because he would spare his horse, as because he would not come by day
light to Paris, he perceived four Archers of the Provost Marshall, who came
upon a trott after him, and amongst them he perceived a soldier, a prisoner
upon horseback, with his legs tied under the belly. Lisander had no sooner
beheld him, but he remembered he had seen his face, yet he could not call to
mind where; wherefore a little mending his pace, he entreated the Archers to
tell him who he was, and whither they carried him: We carry him to prison
(answered one of them) unto the Castle at Paris, where he was sometime Porter,
and to tell you more, we should have something to do, if we should render an
account of all we take, unto all that ask us. By this answer, Lisander knew
that it was the Porter who had delivered Calista, who by ill fortune was fallen
into those Archers hands; and being desirous to deliver him, he said unto
them: Friends, this poor man if you carry him unto Paris will be hanged, and
it will but breed sorrow unto you for having been the cause of his death: but
if you will give him unto me, I will give you twenty crowns to go drink,
and he shall be bound to pray for you all his life. We neither care for his
prayers nor your crowns (answered another) and it may be, it had been better
for you, you had been less officious, and not so charitable. How (said
Lisander) will you also take me prisoner, because I am charitable? Not so,
answered the Archer, but if the party who causes him to be taken prisoner,
knew the care you have to deliver him, it may be he would make you be further
examined. Leave that care unto the party (said Lisander) and deliver me your
prisoner, for I desire much to have him. You do but jest (answered an Archer)
we will answer him unto the Justice. By your leave (replied Lisander) you shall
not have him to prison, before I know whether he be willing or no to go: and
withal he said unto the prisoner, speak unto me friend, Is it willingly or by
constraint that thou go to prison? By force Sir (answered the prisoner.)
Truly then (said Lisander) this is a great injustice in this manner to force
free persons: Well, my masters, seeing you will not let him go for money, free
him for nothing, or else resolve to dye by my hand. The Archers at the first
thought he had been in jest, or that he had been mad; but seeing him come
violently upon them with his sword in his hand, they began to defend
themselves, which served them to little purpose; for Lisander was well horsed,
and knew so well to take advantage by the nimblenesse of his Horse, and with
the goodness of his sword, that he laid two of the stoutest along upon the
ground; the rest betook them to their heels, leaving him the prisoner, who
knowing by whom he was freed, could not give thanks sufficient. Lisander made
his Flemmish boy speedily unbinde him, and both of them to follow him, who in
stead of going to Paris (as he projected) left it upon the left hand, and
taking his way toward Gascoigne, rode so hard all night, that before day he
came unto Estampes, where having rested himself a while, he took Post with
the Porter (who never forsook him after that day) and his good horse, with the
Flemming, to come after by easy journeyes unto Tholose.

In the mean time Dorilas being at Court, emplored the Kings mercy for
Lisander, urging his valor, and the fidelity of this Knight, heretofore so
remarkable for his combats and by his services, he touched (as in passing by)
the pension which he had refused from the Archduke, although he had no means
from his Majesty, but contrary that he was in disgrace, having lost the honor
of his favor: I do entreat you, Sir, said he, in compassion of this old age,
and of the disaster wherewith I am miserably afflicted in my last days, in the
persons of Cleander and Calista, to add unto so many favors which you have
bestowed upon your nobility, that which I demand in Lisanders name for the
death of Cloridon and Chrisantes; slaughters which are the most pardonable that
ever were, seeing that Lisander being first almost murdered by Cloridons
friends, and after challenged by Chrisantes, he alone had killed them both,
not only by his valor and fortune but by the justice of his cause, which had
been manifestly assisted by the hand of God.

The King possessed with the love which he had born unto Cloridon, and with the
false report which ran of the combat, so much to the disadvantage of Lisanders
free and noble heart, and wondering that Dorilas with so much earnestness
should sue for the pardon of a man who was accused for the murder of his son
in law, said unto him, that he had granted pardons unto his Subjects for
combats nobly decided, but for Murderers he never gave any, marvelling
further, that he would beg pardon for a man who had branded his reputation
with so foul a fault, and who had so mortally offended him in the person of
one most near unto him, whereby he had deserved to have his condemnation
pursued. It is for this cause, Sir, answered Dorilas, that I demand Lisanders
pardon, touching Cloridon and Chrisantes deaths, whereof I account him
innocent, that he may be punished for the murder of Cleander (if it be true
that he be guilty.) Clean otherwise (replied the King) Cloridon and
Chrisantes friends think him guilty of their deaths, and innocent of the
other, so either of you is transported with his particular passion: But I, who
am or ought to be guided with reason only, will give unto every one that
justice which is due unto him. Sir, answered Dorilas, to the doing of justice,
first belongs the knowing of the cause, and to the knowing of the cause,
belongs the hearing of the parties: Your Majesty cannot justly condemn
Lisander without first hearing his justification; but agreeing that he killed
Cloridon and Chrisantes, it follows that he did well or ill kill them; if
well, it follows that your Majesty may pardon him; and if ill, you may punish
him after you have given him pardon: for justice does not allow of pardons
gotten upon a false suggestion; so your Majesty may in time be clear of
Lisanders innocence in respect of the combat. For I am sure he will offer
himself, not only to prove that he killed them like an honest man, but also
to purge himself from Cleanders murder: which I the rather desire, Sir,
because upon his justification depends Calista's. But how should he justify
himself (said the King) of two crimes, both committed without witness? Sir,
said Dorilas, it is for his adversaries to convince him, and for him to defend
himself; I do not know what proofs they can have against him: But in respect
of the combat, Chrisantes before he died spoke with Leon and with ^erontus, who
have told the truth to Lisanders great advantage, although they were his
enemies, as the events have since showed. As for Cleanders murder, it is
certain that Lisander was at Bru^els when it was committed, and that he left
his sword (by which circumstance they would convince him of the murder) in the
field where he killed Chrisantes, having broken it in the hilts with the
reverse blow wherewith he cut off Chrisantes his arm, and accommodated
himself both with Cloridons horse and sword, which he yet has. But, Sir,
though this did not nor could appear, what better course can your Majesty
hold, than that which your progenitors have held? always when such cases have
happened, so doubtful that the truth could not be known, they have granted the
combat to the accusers or the accused, who did demand it. There was standing
by at the Kings dinner, where Dorilas pleaded Lisanders cause, a young Knight
called Lucidon, who was Chrisantes his Nephew, and one of the activest
Gentlemen of France, who hearing pardon asked for his Uncles death, and fearing
lest Dorilas his reasons might be of force with the King, prostrated himself
at his Majesty's feet, most humbly beseeching him, that the death of two such
Knights as Cloridon and Chrisantes might not go unpunished for want of proof,
seeing it was well known such actions were always performed with the fewest
witnesses that could be brought, and that Lisander had killed all that could
witness; yea even unto the foot-boyes, thereby, as it was most likely, to hide
the foul play of the combat. That in case it could not be verified according
to the ordinary form of justice, he did require that according to the custom
alleged by Dorilas, he might be suffered to challenge Lisander, and decide
this combat by a second combat. Whereunto Dorilas answered, The Kings
presence ( Lucidon) makes you speak, and me hold my peace, but if the
inviolable respect which we owe unto his Ma. were not, this white beard (such
as you see it) would enforce it self to show you that there was no foul play
in that action, and if the King please, without entering into further proof, I
do offer to maintain it in the field, my person against yours. I had rather
(said Lucidon) that it were with your Son, nevertheless I hope having done
with you, I may then finish with Lisander himself, of whom question is made at
this time; wherefore I will not refuse you. Dorilas was much provoked with this
answer, and would have answered again, but the King commanded them both to
silence, forbidding them upon pain of his displeasure to proceed any further.
And having granted Lisanders pardon, upon condition that he did come and
procure it to be allowed within one month; and that he might safely come and
justify himself of Cleander^ death, he did assure him from being troubled for
any thing but murders. It was thought that next unto the justice of the cause,
nothing disposed the King so much to the granting of this pardon, as Lisanders
refusing the Archdukes pension.

With this expedition Dorilas returned to Bellaire* where being received by
Calista with tears, which drew them mutually from his aged eye^, after the
first motion of this encounter, having informed himself of Lisanders retrait,
he dispatched a Gentleman to him in Post, with his pardon, and with a letter,
which said thus*

Dorilas his Letter to Lisander.
SIr, having understood that there wanted nothing but your pardon (for your
combat with Cloridon and Chrisantes) for you to justify your self against
those, who slanderously accuse you for the death of Cleander, I have (by Gods
assistance) obtained it of the King, in such manner as this Gentleman will let
you know, to the end, that together with your own innocence, you may also
verify Calista's, and prove them liars, who have scandalously wounded both
your reputations. The natural affection which I bear unto her as a Father,
and that which I owe unto you, as having obliged me, by saving my life and my
childrens, do make me passionately desire to see you free out of this trouble.
I would have sent Lidian to entreat you not to fail within the term which
the King has given you to present your self, if I had (as I did think I
should) found him at the Court, but he was gone before I came thither. Otranta
humbly kisseth your hands: Calista writes unto you, and I remain

Your obliged servant, Dorilas.


Dorilas having communicated this letter unto Otranta, and both of them
thinking it fit, that Calista should accompany it with a letter from her, who
was principally interessed in this business, and had most power over Lisander,
she said thus.

Calista's Letter unto Lisander.
I Write this word both out of my duty and obedience; but although you had not
obliged me, nor my Parents commanded me, yet mine own affection, and the
interest in your affairs have power enough to constrain me: you see by my
Fathers letter, what he has done for you, and what you must do both for your
self and me: I need not entreat you in a thing wherein your honor is
interessed, I should wrong your courage, and the desire you have to recover
your good name, which our evil fortune has made us lose: Farewell. Remember I
am Calista, that is, your best friend, and most affectionate servant.


This messenger dispatched with instruction where to find Lisander; Calista
expected only his return: and now thought she held fortune under her feet: But
it happened by great mischance, that this Gentleman travailed in a season when
the waters were very high and broken out, so that he passing along by a little
river which flowed out into the way, he saw his Post-boy with his packet fall
into the water, whom he endeavoring to save, went so near as that he took
him by the collar; and as a little strength will draw a great weight out of the
water, he had almost pulled him up, when his own stirrup (upon which his whole
body rested) brake, and he fell into the Current, where he was (together with
all that he would have saved) lost. Thus Lisander unadvertised, could not come
to the Court within the time he was expected, from whence sprung many
displeasures, which we shall see happily determined in the sequel of this
Story.

The End of the eighth Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE NINTH BOOK.
LIsander having rode hard, in few days came unto the river Garroune, and from
thence unto Miramont, the house of his father Adrastus, where he was received
by the good old man, and by Hypermestra his mother, with tears of joy, and
unspeakeable grief at his return after ten years absence; In which time, he
had broken the course of their lives with alarums and fears of so many
accidents which had happened unto him: After the first welcomes and the diverse
discourses and recitals of his adventures, whereof he could not be acquitted by
once telling of them, the news of his return being spread through the
country, they were visited by many of the Nobility dwelling thereabouts, who,
some to see Lisander, others to rejoice with his parents for his return, came
unto Miramont by troops. The Flemmish boy came shortly after with his good
horse, which had been Cloridons; and after him came the faithful footman,
healed of the wound which he had in his shoulder, which gave Lisander no small
content. Adrastus, who had a desire to tie his son at home with bonds which
could not easily be broken, fearing his return unto the Court, where his life
was so unassured, determined to marry him near home, with a young, rich, and
fair Inheri^tix, whose excellent virtues, and far surpassing the quality of
her sex, were no less admirable than her beauty. This Lady was called
Hippolita, whose parents had left her an Orphant under the tuition of a Kinsman
of hers, who in her first youth was careful to second her good nature with
exquisite education; as the crescent of her beauty was perfected with ripe^
years, it struck so in the eyes of this poor Tutor, that forgetting all
respect o^ neerenesse of blood, he could not forbear witnessing more love than
affection of parentage: which so much offended the young heart of this maid,
that the first time he went out of the Castle (which was exceeding strong)
where she was brought up, she shut the gates upon him, keeping him out; there
with a maid she had called Erisila, of like age and disposition, she gave her
self not only to such exercises which those of her sex do ordinarily use,
but also to such as are fitting unto men, every day riding of horses, and
exercise of Arms, which she did with an unspeakeable dexterity: and this was
privately within the enclosure of the Castle walls: but shortly after, her Tutor
endeavoring to surprise her by force, was shamefully beaten by his Pupil, and
by her valor repulsed, whereat he took such grief, that he died, leaving
Hippolita free from his love and government. She had also joined unto these
qualities so perfect a knowledge in learning, that those who were not taken
with the unevitable strokes of her face, were constrained to yield themselves
to the charms of her speech, and the sweetness of her conversation. All these
fair parts, making an excellent agreement in this maid, incited all those who
beheld her to adore her (upon whom nevertheless she would never vouchsafe to
cast her eye) and particularly raised a great desire in Adra^tus to gain her
for Lisander, unto whom he would not yet say any thing before he had seen
her, hoping that she would gain more upon him with one look, than all his
remonstrances, joined with his authority; and otherwise knowing that love is
unaptly constrained by duty, and that oftentimes commandments do destroy
desire: He also knew that Lisander was lost in Calista's affection, and that
upon the sudden to endeavor to quench those fires, which were so lively in him,
to kindle new unto a subject whom he had not seen, he thought it would be a
discourse altogether in vain; wherefore the subtle old man desired that he
might see her before he made any demonstration of his intent, hoping that of
himself he would come into the net, and the rather, if he were not advertised
before hand. To attain hereunto, he made a match of hunting, unto which
Hippolita was entreated, who failed not to come: but hearing that this brave
Lisander (whose virtue had sounded so loud in her ears) would be there, she
studied with great Art to tie all those graces together, wherewith she
accustomed to have her admirable beauty accompanied. For although she had no
particular design upon his person, yet the glory which she did apprehend in
captivating such a courage, made her desire to seem fair. She therefore
apparrelled her self in a hunting garment after the Saramatick fashion, of
crimson Velvet, embroydered with silver, over which hung in a rich scarf, a
fair sword with an excellent grace, her hair was gathered up under a little
cap almost covered with feathers, and set thick with stones, which glistering
about her head, dazzled their sight who beheld her; but it was little in
respect of the lightning which came from her face. Her horse was a ^ennet of
Spain, white as Snow, which she rode upon rather for bravery than to hunt
with. In this manner accompanied with Erisila her maid (whose habit was of the
same fashion, but not of the same stuff) she met the Assembly. On the other
side Lisander, unto whom had been already figured the cleerenesse of this
bright star, as of a rising Sun, called for Cloridons horse, and girding
his good sword upon a skarlet suit, laced thick with gold lace, settled
himself in a saddle of the same, and followed Adrastus with those who were of
the match.

When they came to the place where they intended to cast off their dogs, they
found in the same estate I did represent, Hippolita, who both rejoiced and
astonished all the troop with her presence. Never did Atlas appear so fair
to Meleager, when she hunted the Thessalian Bore, as she then seemed unto
Lisander, whom she beheld with an eye full of admiration; she thinking that
he was the fairest object to be seen amongst men. And indeed there was none
in the company that did not think so, nor any mind so envious which did not
confess that they were the fairest couple in the world: but that which raised
greatest admiration, was the sweetness and gentleness of their countenance, with
fiercenes of their courages; for they seemed to be two contraries in one
subject, and (which was rarely found but in them) equally fierce and gentle,
whose hearts were incapable of fear in any danger, and tractable and easy in
conversation. For although Lisander were in war stern and haughty, yet in
peace there was nothing more humble: and although Hippolita was (amongst
Ladies) both perfectly fair and humble, yet she was no less warlike and
stout in arms. And I do not know which was most rare to find, either so much
beauty in Lisanders valor, or so much valor in Hippolita's beauty. Before
they fell to the sport of hunting, Lisander alighted from his horse, having
first made him curvet and bound an hundred times before Hippolita, with such
justness and grace, that those who had taken pleasure in beholding him before,
confessed it was nothing in respect of what they received in this action:
Hippolita her self more than all was ravished by him, whom without doubt she
had ravished, if he had not been formerly gained by another; but his soul was
so filled with the most excellent perfections of Calista, that there was no
place left for Hippolita to make any impression, whereas Lisander finding
Hippolita with a mind free and unpossessed like a smooth white paper, writ in
fiery letters the everlasting progress of his love. All the hunting they
gallopped close one by the other, to Adrastus his great contentment, who did
believe that Hippolita's conversation would work the ordinary effect in
Lisander, as in all others, which was, to force him to subjection, which all
the company believed as well as Adrastus, seeing that Lisander, obliged with so
much beauty, and with his own nobleness, spoke unto her of love, unto which
she answered, mocking and feigning not to believe, that which indeed she ought
not to have believed. In the end, their hunting finishing with the killing of a
great Stagge, as they were upon their return, they found in a Coppice a huge
overgrowne Boar, so furious and terrible, that neither the Huntsmen with their
darts, neither the dogs with their Collars stuck with iron points, durst
behold his wild countenance. Lisander seeing this, leaps from his horse, and
sets upon him with his sword, and with much ado and some danger he thrust it
in between the Boares shoulders up to the hilts: But the blow, although it
were mortal, could not stay the violence of this fearful beasts motion, nor
Lisander so nimbly shift himself, that he did not rush upon him, and
overwhelme him to the ground, carrying away upon his tuskes a great piece of
his Cassaque, so that every one thought him dead: When Adrastus saw his son
fall, it is not to be demanded whether he were troubled, and fair Hippolita
was no less, who nimbly leaping from her horse, instantly ran before all the
rest to help him up. But there was no such need, he rising without help or
hurt, but only the shame he had for his fall; and the Boar falling upon the
other side dead, revived their hearts which were troubled, and raised great joy
to succeed this fear, and a great affection in the soul of Hippolita, unto
whom the glory of so hardy an action, was as a bellows to kindle her new fire.
Lisander, having presented unto her what they had killed, at the departure of
the rest of the company went with her until they came within view of her
house, and there obtaining leave to visit her, he returned unto Miramont
after Adrastus, more satisfied than amorous of her beauty. While these things
thus passed, the time (within which Dorilas had promised to present Lisander)
approached, and there was no news of him, nor yet of the messenger whom he had
sent: which brought care unto Dorilas, grief unto Otranta, and almost despair
unto Calista, who knew not what to say, nor what to think of Lisander. On the
other side, Lidian having traveled all the Kingdom over to find Leon,
without learning any news of him, moved with an earnest desire of seeing his
Lady, at the time which was agreed by Alcidon, Berontus and himself, came
back unto Paris, where having heard of the words that passed from Lucidon unto
his father, he presently challenged him. Lucidon bravely accepted it, and both
of them demeaned themselves so valiantly, that they were carried both
grievously wounded out of the field, with more appearance of death than hope of
life. Lucidon got great reputation in bearing himself so valiantly against
Lidian, whose valor was often approved, and had challenged him, although he
had but lately entered his pardon for the like former fact: wherefore his
friends fearing lest the Officers of justice would search for him, all wounded
as he was, carried him in a Litter by night from Olinda's house where he first
was brought, unto a house of Argires in the country, four miles from Paris,
named Clarevall, whither came Argire, Olinda and Ambrisia, who, expecting to
hear some news of her brother, had always remained with them, and borne them
faithful company.

In the meanetime Dorilas, seeing the month expired within which time he had
promised unto the King to bring in Lisander, returned to Paris, with an intent
to combat Lucidon himself, according to the offer which had been made and
accepted. But when he came there, finding that his son had prevented him, and
was yet in his bed wounded, and believing that it would be thought to be done
by his advice, to excuse him from that wherein he had formerly engaged
himself, he was no less angry with him for fighting, than sorry for his
wounds; yet understanding that he was carried to Clarvall, he went to see
him, and from thence writ unto Otranta news of this accident. She hearing
that her son was wounded, and lay at Argires house near Paris, came thither
with Calista as speedily as she could, and as secretly as was possible. I
need not relate the complements, the entertainments and words which passed
amongst the Ladies, especially with Calista, neither could I express them:
Only I will say, that having found Lidian a little better than they thought,
their sorrow was turned into joy, seeing themselves together, although it was
not perfect. For besides Lidians wounds, the absence of Alcidon, Lisander his
quarrels, and Calista's process, were sharp thorns amongst these roses.

In the mean time such as were equally friends unto Lidian and Lucidon, seeing
they were recovered of their wounds, and seeing the small cause for them to
remain enemies, there having no words of injury passed between them, and
their wounds being equal, they determined to make them friends, knowing that
with the service which they should do unto the two Knights in agreeing them,
they should also please the King which did desire it. The honor, the friends,
and the nobleness of their proceeding had imprinted more affection, than the
blood which they had drawn one from the other had left hatred, wherefore they
were easily disposed to agreement, provided, that in their agreement there
might be no speech held of Lisander, who was the first cause of their dispute:
but when they should see one the other (which must be of necessity) because
Lidian durst not come unto Paris, Lucidon was brought unto Clarvall, where
first embracing Dorilas, and after Lidian, he was ravished with the beauty of
the company, especially when his eyes beheld Calista, who blinded him with so
violent a passion of love, that from a mortal enemy, which (not long since) he
was of her whole house, he was now become a most affectionate servant. He was
young, rich, well favored, comely of personage, of an excellent spirit, and a
great courage; charms which might prevail much with women, which
nevertheless were not of force with Calista, whose heart was ever turned
toward Lisander as the Needle is toward the North, although at this time his
absence, and the little news of him, had much offended her. Lucidon finding in
Calista a mind drowned in sorrow for the death of Cleander, and only (as he
conceived) capable of grief, as well for his death as that she was thereof
accused, and not yet justified, contented himself only to offer her all his
service, as well in this as in any other, neither pretending nor hoping for
more recompense, than the honor to call himself her Knight. And so he took
his leave, with his friends returning to Paris, more wounded with the arrows
of her eyes, than he had been before by Lidian her brother, and no less
studying which way to gain her, than to destroy Lisander, whom all the world
knew both to love her, and to be beloved by her, thinking thereby to satisfy
both his love and hatred together: wherefore the month which the King had
given for him to come and enter his pardon was no sooner past, but Lucidon
remonstrated unto his Majesty, that his crime heretofore clear enough was now
more than notorious, that otherwise he would never have failed to appear
within the time which was limited for the enjoying his pardon, which was
procured with so much instance; but that Lisander, convinced by his conscience,
fled the light of the Sun which discovered him, confessing by his flight,
that he could neither deny it in justice, nor defend it with arms. He
therefore entreated his Majesty to revoke the pardon given him, and yield unto
the shadows of Cloridon and Chrisantes the contentment of seeing justice done
upon their murderer; and if any were found who in his absence would defend him
in so evil a cause, that he might be suffered to fight with him, and submit
his right unto the trial of arms. The King taking Lisanders absence as an ill
sign, ordained, that if within three weeks he came not, nor some other for
him to fight with Lucidon, the pardon which was offered unto him should be
void, and he himself should be put into the hands of justice. Further, his
Majesty ordained, that the combat should be on horseback, the combatants
armed at all points, and in the presence of his Majesty, according to the
ancient custom of this Kingdom: This order coming unto Dorilas his ear, he
dispatched Lidian away in Post unto Lisander, remaining himself at Clarevall
expecting news.

But being one day at Paris (whither he ordinarily went) a little after
Lidians departure, he met with two Gascoigne Gentlemen of his acquaintance,
who came lately out of the country, by whom informing himself of Lisander, no
way disguising the trouble of mind that he had by his absence, considering
what business called him thither; they told him, that they had left him about
a business which did well deserve his stay. And what business (said Dorilas)
can be of such importance unto him, that it can make him forget the care which
he ought to have of his honor and his life? We know not (said they) neither
does he believe that his honor does oblige him to come hither; but the cause
which detains him there, is (I think) partly because he cannot be here in that
safety which he desires, and partly for the satisfaction which he desires to
give unto his parents after so long an absence, but the true and strongest
chain, which tyeth him, is the love which he bears unto a fair Amazon, who
will not give him so much liberty to run up and down in the world as he
has done. Then did they so lively describe Hippolita's virtues and beauties,
adding the greatness of her estate unto her other perfections, that Dorilas
certainly believed it was the only reason why Lisander was deaf unto his
letters, and infinitely bewailing that he had sent Lidian unto him, he
returned to carry this news to Calista at Clarvall. To tell you the ravage
which this news made in her mind, the rage and the fury of her jealousy, the
despite and the shame she had, to see her self so despised and deceived by a
man, who had adored her with submissions and humbleness, as if it had been to
a Deity, it is not possible, it must be conceived by thought, or be
represented by some other woman injured by the feeling of the like affront:
Nevertheless Calista, being wise and advised as well as fair, wisely
dissembled, in the company, what she felt, and showed her self so discreet
and constant in this first motion, that one would have judged this act of
Lisander to have been indifferent; but after she was retired into her
chamber, and her door shut upon her, that she saw she was at liberty to
complain, then her grief, too too strong for her reason, enforced her to
words and actions which cannot be related; for with the complaints she made,
and the tears she shed, little wanted that she did not yield up her life: Ah
Traitor (said she) and the most spotted with infidelity that the sun ever
saw, is it thus, that thou at need leavest the too easy and credulous Calista!
at the least ungrateful; thou should have stayed until she had recovered
the honor which by thy occasion she has lost, and thou should have
assured the life which the too much affection she has borne thee, has
brought into despair: but cruel as thou art, thou have left me in the hands
of justice, from whence thou have drawn me, only to prolong my torment with
my life. Ah disloyal, it is not now that thou did deceive me: This
Hippolita, whose praises in my hearing thou did sing, persuading me that it
was a counterfeit name under which thou hiddest mine, was the true subject of
thy passion; and Sot that I am, I took it to mine advantage, and fed my
self with praises and affections which thou breathedst for another. What
should I make account of any man's fidelity? Let Heaven and Hell torment me
for ever with some new punishment (if they have any wherewith they have not
afflicted me) if ever I suffer my self to be overtaken again by any man. Thus
without either comfort or counsel the fair Calista lamented.

Ambrisia who was present at these news, was little less afflicted than she,
and knew not what reasons to use in her brothers excuse. Olinda, Otranta and
Argire were all in the same astonishment, and as one hardly believes that
which is not seen, they could not imagine that Lisander in so small a time
could be so much changed, or have fallen into so great a forgetfulness of
himself, they all supposing that although he had lost the memory of his love,
yet he would always preserve that of his honor, which did oblige him to
justify Calista in verifying his own innocence, and that necessarily some
other great accident besides love had stayed him. Dorilas himself was of that
opinion, although those who had reported this evil news (not dreaming of the
grief which they brought with them) had told him for a certainty of their
knowledge, as being at the hunting where Lisander and Hippolita first saw
themselves together. But Calista taking it at the worst, and thinking her self
the most wretched woman that ever was, being ashamed ever to appear in the
world, or in the presence of her own parents, or almost to see her self after
such unsupportable miseries as she had suffered, resolved upon the strongest
design that could fall into a woman's thought: first she would neither see nor
be seen of any person; and having commanded that they should leave her, that
she might take her rest, she spent the day in sad and bitter solitariness,
eating her heart in silence, and meditating deeply in those furies wherewith
she was troubled, and when night descending with sleep had wrapped all
creatures else in their rest, she softly rose from her bed, and (without
awaking any servant) she went from her own chamber, unto that wherein Lidian
lay before his departure. There finding, amongst many other necessary
implements which he had left behind him, a suite of green Satin laid thick
with silver, which he had but newly made, with a silk Grograine cloak of the
same color, and laced, in brief, all things suitable, she accommodateth her
self therewith as well as she could; her legs she hides with his Boots, by
her side she hangs his sword, and her long hair she covered with a gray
Bever, shadowed with a green Feather; afterward going unto the Stable (having
first took all her money with her) she her self chose and made ready the best
horse Dorilas had in the Stable, and getting upon him, went to the next way she
met, in the horror of a dark night, without knowing what way she should
keep, or what resolution she should take.

Who will not now confess unto me, that love is a rage which troubles the
most settled brains, since that Calista (who lived in the opinion of a Lady so
wise, that the death of her husband, the infamy of a prison, the loss of her
wealth and reputation, the belief of her parents, or the extreme danger of a
shameful death could not move) was shaken and carried from all her constancy
by the first strokes of a false report? and more light, and more a woman than
ever she had witnessed her self, she forgot the grief which she had raised
unto her parents, the scandal which she had brought unto her house, her own
honor, which had been (until that time) so dear unto her, to expose her
self unto the wide world for the uncertain news of a contrived untruth, and
run (as it is said) blindfoldly rather after her own despair than upon any
well placed resolution.

The next morning Otranta and Dorilas would go see their daughter, and finding
her gown which she had left in the place of Lidians habit; one tore her
hair, the other his beard, both of them called themselves miserable, having
children at such rate, thinking none happy but those who had none. Sorrow
redoubleth in this house, and that which over night was but an ordinary evil,
in the morning became extreme. In vain is she sought after; for those who came
back without finding her, confirmed her loss unto her parents, and made their
grief almost past remedy.

On the other side, Adrastus seeing Lisanders love with Hippolita did not
kindle and burn (as he hoped) at first, after many other subtilties, said
unto his son, that now being old, the greatest contentment that Hypermestra
and he could at these years have, was to see him retire himself home unto
them; That he had run enough up and down in the world, it was fit now to
rest, and that it was high time for him to take the house to his care, and
suffer his father and mother to divide the remainder of their years in rest:
not that he would abridge him of going to the Court, where he knew well his
honor did oblige him, to purge himself as well from Cloridon and Chrisantes
deaths, whom he had killed, as also from Cle^ders, which (as he said) he not so
much as thought; but that this might be done with time, and in the mean while
he would be glad to have him make choice of such a party who might tie him to
stay in the country, offering to assist him as a father, and as he had always
done in all places until this very time; That it was told him he had some
design upon Hippolita, but for some considerations which were unknown he had
not yet witnessed it; That if it were out of any doubt that he would not be
willing, he would clear that doubt by telling then that he knew Hippolita to
be of an illustrious family, of a virtuous condition, of a rare beauty, and
that he did not know any in the world whom he would rather desire to be his
daughter in law; That if peradventure he feared he should not be able to
attain the end of his suit, and that this did keep him from discovering his
suit, he did engage himself to draw assurance from her, that he should not
lose his labor nor travail in vain in her service.

Lisander wondering at this speech, knew well that his father would engage him
to marry with Hippolita, whom he would have purchased at any price (excepting
Calista's los^e) but there was no duty of a son, nor reverence of a father
could draw him from so happy a captivity as hers, to serve in any other place:
yet not willing to lose the respect which he ought him, with obedience he
answered, That the small stay he had made in the country, and the disorder of
his affairs, had kept him from thinking of marriage, not imagining it fit to
be suitor for a wife while he had such criminal processes upon his hands, and
such deadly quarrels: Nevertheless seeing he did witness it to be his
pleasure, he would always conform himself, especially for so fair a subject
as Hippolita was, whom he knew more worthy to be served, than he thought
himself capable of serving her. But before he did embarke himself, he did
entreat to suffer him to make one voyage unto the Court, to give silence unto
the infinite slanders which unworthily did injure his reputation; that being
returned, he would unfallibly serve Hippolita, and would spend the rest of his
days under the shadow of his house, if he pleased. Lisander (said Adrastus)
you ask leave of me to go unto the Court, where you dare not appear without
evident danger of losing your self: you promise me to serve Hippolita at your
return, even as he who promised the grand Signeur to teach an Elephant to
speak, and took so long a time, that it was not possible but either the grand
Signeur, or the Elephant, or himself must be dead before he were tied to the
accomplishment. I see how it is, you are bewitched in the love of Calista, who
has reduced you to the brink of your ruin, and whom you have in like manner
drawn into like danger. You may do what you please, but remember it shall
never be with my liking. By these words Lisander knew that his father
understood little less of his business than himself. This said, Adrastus
turned himself away, and not expecting any reply, left Lisander in great
perplexity. And although he resolved rather to suffer any thing, than the
loss of his Love, yet he intended to search some means, whereby in keeping
her, he might not lose his parents favor. At night, Adrastus being gone into
the Garden to take a turn, rather to digest his thoughts than his supper,
Lisander took occasion to speak unto his mother Hypermestra, unto whom he
told the words which his Father had said unto him, and his answer (which she
already knew from Adrastus) with the coffeehouse which thereby he received,
whereat he was so grieved, that although he did passionately desire to
return unto the Court, for the reasons which he had alleged unto his Father,
yet he had rather suffer them and all extremities, than displease him; For this
cause having more ripely considered of it, he resolved to obey him in
whatsoever he should please to command: And because he had declared that his
pleasure was he should serve Hippolita, he was determined (by his good will)
the next morning to go see her, which he humbly entreated Hypermestra to let
him understand.

Hypermestra, glad that her son had better bethought himself, said, that she
never hoped less from his education and good nature, and confirming him in
this resolution, she that night advertised Adrastus, who was much rejoiced
therewith. The next morning Lisander pompously clothed himself, as one who
went to see his Mistress, and taking with him only his faithful footman, his
Flemming, and the Porter of the Castle at Paris, who was now become Groom of
his chamber; he gallopped unto Hippolita, loaded with blessings of his Parents,
who accompanied his journey with vows, and thanked God that he was so
disposed to obey them: but the old folks were much deceived, as we shall
shortly see, and thereby a strange effect of the power of love, which of the
most loyal and the most absolute man (one of them in the world as Lisander
was) made him a deceiver of his parents, betraying the hopes which he had
given them, and afflicted their age with as much grief as was possible. He
went therefore unto Hippolita, with whom he pratled some small time of love,
like a man who had more upon his lips than in his heart, and charmed her so
well, that representing unto her the necessity of his affairs which did oblige
him to return unto the Court, he procured her to write this letter to his
Father Adrastus.

Hippolita's Letter to Adrastus.
SIr, I will tell you, that your son finding me in apt occasion to employ the
affections which he has witnessed to me, does me the honor to undertake a
journey at my request unto the Court, whereof I have thought good to advertise
you; thinking you would not be offended with the proof which he offers me
of his service, for which I do entreat you to receive the humble affection
which I have to do you the like, and to believe me

Your humble servant Hippolita.


This letter was no sooner dispatched, but Lisander took his leave of
Hippolita, fearing lest his Father might come and stay him there: and
determining to go into Normandy to see Calista, he made haste, and rid great
journies; yet when he was at Bourdeaux he heard of a magnifick tilting which
was in England, where desiring to be, he changed his resolution, and sending
the groom of his chamber with a letter unto Calista; he embarked himself
upon Garrowne, with his footman, directing his course for the river Thames.
Adrastus having received Hippolita's letter, knew well that his son had gone
beyond him, whereat he was much discontented. In the midst of which discontent,
Lidian arrived at Miramont, and not finding Lisander there, he addressed
himself unto his Father, unto whom he told how Dorilas had obtained his
pardon, upon condition that he presented himself within a month; That he
had expressly sent a Gentleman to advertise him so much, of whom, as also of
Lisander, there was no news. So that the month being past, the King had given
his last order, by which, not presenting himself within three weeks, he was
to be declared guilty of the crimes whereof he was accused; That all France
wondered at his not appearance in this needful occasion, and did think him
convicted; That his friends could not tell what to think, nor what to do, but
only to present themselves at the last day, to fight with his accusers in his
absence. But what a shame would that be (said he) in the sight of so great a
King, that Lisanders friends should enter combat for his cause, he in the
mean time being idle in the country? Adrastus more vexed at this last news
than at the former, knew not what answer to make unto Lidians speeches, but,
that they had neither heard of Gentleman, nor any man else that brought letter
from Dorilas; that this was the first word he had heard of his pardon: And as
for Lisander, see what is written unto me, which I received but now; and saying
this, he showed him Hippolita's letter. Lidian marvelling that there was no
news of the Gentleman, and sorry that he had missed of Lisander, comforted
himself with hearing that he was gone unto the Court: and giving unto
Adrastus and Hypermestra Ambrisia's letter (wherewith they were much rejoiced)
he stayed only one night at Miramont, departing the next morning early, and
determining to see Hippolita as he passed by, as well for the estimation was
made of her, as to make a true discovery of Lisanders ways; he found her,
such as she was described unto him, exceeding fair: and having understood by
her, that Lisander was gone toward Bourdeaux, and by easy journies, he
thought if he did go Post, he might come thither as soon as Lisander: for
which cause he took his leave, being much satisfied with her fashion and
behavior, and presently took his way after his friend: Nevertheless Lisander
had made such haste, thinking his father was still at his heels, that he was
departed from Bourdeaux the very day that Lidian came thither; wherefore
believing that it was not Gods will, out of some secret judgment which he
understood not, that he should meet him, he resolved to ride no more after him,
esteeming it unprofitable, seeing he traveled to bring him unto a place,
whither (it was said) he was gone before. And hearing of the great tilting
which was to be in England, he resolved to break a Lance there: a
consideration worthy of a rash man, rather than of Lidian, who knew well the
great grief wherein he had left his parents, neither would he ever have
undertaken this journey, but through the assurance which was given him in so
many several places, that Lisander was gone unto the Court.

Let us now return unto Calista, whom we have left wandering alone so long, and
see what became of her. After that she was gone from Clarevall, her horse
which was accustomed to Paris way, brought her about break of the day unto the
gates of that great City; and then remembering the times which she formerly
spent there, in the glory of her fortune, and comparing it unto her present
misery, her heart was likely to melt in her breast, and come forth at her eyes:
Ah Calista (said she) what meanest thou to do? what design have thou taken?
unto what extremity has thy misfortune reduced thee? dare thou ever return
before the face of thy parents, having thus injured them? But coward as thou
art, why speak thou either of coming in thy parents sight, or of living in
the world after this affront? No, no, Calista, thou must dye once for all, and
in dying, tie about the neck of thy ungrateful Lover the revenging furies of
this death. In saying this, she entered into the city, covering with her cloak
her face, which was all wet with tears, and went to seek for a lodging toward
the Temple, the most retired part of all Paris, lest she should be known.
Having rested a little (if the grief, which did continually rack her, may be
called rest) she called her Host, and entreated him to get her a servant, who
was an honest fellow, and could dress a horse, and to cause an Armorer to come
unto her. An Armorer, answered my Host, you shall presently have, but an
honest servant is not found in a small time: yet I will get you such a one, for
whom assurance shall be given: Saying this, he caused an Armorer to be sent
for, of whom she bespake an armor complete, all black, with a devise of a
wheel, like unto one of those used in watring of gardens, encompassed with
water-pots, some full and others empty: his word was Los llenos de dolar ylos
vazios de Speransa, and entreated him to make it as speedily as was possible.
Now she knew the combat which the King had granted unto Lucidan, in case
Lisander did not appear within three weeks, or some other for him: which she
believing he would not do, considering the engagement of his new love, did
resolve to fight with him for Lisander, whom she accounted her enemy, certainly
determining to die in the fight, and cause thereby sorrow and grief unto
Lucidan for killing of her, in thinking to kill Lisander, and make Lisander
repent that ever he had left her, seeing that although he had despised her, and
betrayed her, yet she would lose her life for him: All being fantastic
passions of a woman, blinded with love and jealousy.

Now let us make a step into great Britain, waiting for the tilting day. We
left Lisander on his way thither, and Lidian following him shortly after: But
to relate all things in their order: Lisander being come unto London, keeping
himself secret, caused Arms to be made for him of an ashie color, which
hid the sparkles of a lively fire, spotted with Flower-de-luces of silver,
his device was a Love tied to a pillar in the middle of a faggot, kindled by a
Lady, the word was, Always constant: his Feather was Gree de liu and white,
his Coat of Arms and caparison of his horse Gris de liu, embroidered with
silver. Lidian, coming the next day to the town, caused Arms to be made of
Azure color, spotted with stars of gold without number: his Device was a
Love, holding a Dart in the mouth, an Olive branch in the hand, and having a
goose at his feet, holding a stone in the bill: the word was Leale and
secreto, a devise which he had made in the time when Clarangeus his jealousy
made him love (no less secretly than faithfully) his Lady Olinda: His feather
was yellow and blew, his coat armor and the caparison of his horse was of
blew Velvet embroidered with gold. The tilting was begun before the Arms of
our Knights could be finished: The Tourney was in this manner, with Lances
having steeled and sharpened heads, and in open field, he who was overthrown
at the tilting, might not demand the combat with the sword, but if they both
fell unto the ground, or that after the breaking of three lances they remained
unhorsed, it was granted them: If it happened the defendants were overthrown by
the assailants, the victorious assailants must take the place of the vanquished
defendants to the end of the Tourney, which was to continue three days. The
Prize of the Tourney was a sword, which King Arthur had sometime worn, for the
Knight who should be victor, and a Carquanet of great Pearl for his Mistress.
Four defendants, Britains, descended in straight line from the famous
Knights errants of the Round Table, were come within the lists of the field in
pompous and magnificke show: The first had for his device, A Sun rising in
the East over the top of a mountain, with this word, Sin occaso. Four
diverse Engines rolled after them by an admirable art: The first was full of
Musicians, who sung these Verses in passing before the Scaffold where the King
and the Ladies sat.

YOu beauties, whose excelling light
Obscure the beams of Phoebus bright,
Whether he does his race begin,
Or else the waters passing under,
The rays from men be keeps in,
To their still increasing wonder.
You can with one glance of your eyes,
Dazzle his looks amidst the skies,
And make him hide his blushing head,
Or else for fear if he discry
Your beauties which hav' him surpassed,
They should eclipse his flaming eye.
But to this Sun which me subdueth,
And in my heart more brightly shows
Than the other in his Hemisphere,
My law prescriber, this fair eye
All the respect you can it bear
Is to adore it like as I.
Fair Sun, so trust I to attain
Ever to see you shine again,
And show your beams, which always are
Without eclipse or accident,
Which as they be without compare,
So yet they have no Occident.
The second Engine followed after, with the second Defendant, carrying a Globe
under a Love, which he pierced through many ways with his arrows, with this
Motto, Conservat cuncta Cupido. Then followed the third Engine, wherein was
represented the history of the lame god Thermes, who though he would never
yield unto Jupiter, now followed the triumphing Chariot of Love, laden with
iron among the slaves of his tyranny: The Motto was, Cedere nolo Jovi, cedere
cogor amori. In the last Engine, marching with the last Defendant, was carried
the same God Thermes, overthrown with his heels upwards by a stroke with a
Lance, with these two words, Cedit and cecidit, together with a Consort of
Music singing these Verses.

THis staff enamelled with gold,
Is that which Argalus did hold,
Or Cephalus his dart much rather,
Which I with a warlike arm direct,
And being fatal still to conquer,
Never gives blow without effect.
To break a Spear is action light
Of a courageous noble Knight,
But he that breaks Therme with Lance,
And without stroke does make him fall,
Is of heroicke valiance,
This force is most heroical.
This Therme, that from all bond is free
But only of eternity,
Whom nothing can resist, if tried,
That god which unto nothing yields,
By me thrown down, to me he gives
That which to Jove he has denied.
What man is he that can be found,
But my steel blade shall bring to ground;
Since with this wood for wars unstable,
Braving both Fortune and the skies,
I thus to throw to the earth am able
The strongest of the Deities.
Shortly after these four Knights had placed themselves in the lists, four
brave Turks entered into the field, having their Dolimans upon their Arms,
their Turbants upon their heads, their Lances in their hands, and their
Cemeters hanging by their sides, after their manner. Their device was the
Crescent of Silver, which serves them as an ordinary mark without any word.
After they had made a turn about the lists, and placed themselves opposite
unto the defendants, all eight ran one against another; their Lances couched,
with their sharp steel points, they gave full in the visers of each others
Helm, the staves flew in pieces, and the four Turks were thrown unto the
ground at this first course, not without pleasure and laughter unto the
English: about forty other Assailants were overthrown (to their comfort) after
them, the Defendants not so much as losing a stirrup. So all that day the
English continued vanquishers, and so went triumphing out of the field. The
next morning, so soon as the Defendants had taken their places, two strange
Knights entered at the other end of the lists, whose only countenances promised
extraordinary valor: The one had read Arms full of flames of gold, a red
Feather; the caparison of his Horse crimsin velvet embroydered with flames of
gold: for his device he had a Love, bearing a Globe, with this word, Piufort
d'atlante. The other was in green Armor, engraven with silver, his feather
green, his caparison green velvet embroydered with silver; his device was a
Love, which overthrew a measure of corn, with this word, Sin mesura. So soon
as the Defendants had seen them take their places, two of the four opposed
themselves, and couching their Lances, came one against another with such
grace, and met with such force, that their staves breaking to their hands, the
two defendants fell to the ground, and the strangers perfected their careere
without moving, to the great admiration of the beholders. The two defendants
remaining, seeing their companions overthrown, endeavored to revenge them,
spurring against the assailants, and the assailants against them, made the
bravest encounter that had been seen: but nevertheless the defendants were
overthrown, leaving their place to the strangers, who from being assailants (as
they were at first) now became defendants. All those who presented themselves
that day, were overthrown with much less resistance than the first; And the
night coming, giving an end both unto the Joust, and the day, the strange
Knights went victorious out of the field, with the sound of trumpets, and the
like solemnity that had accompanied the Vanquishers the first day. The King of
great Britain, desirous to know these Champions, sent to learn their names,
and of what country they were; but they humbly be sought his Majesty to pardon
them, if they showed any unwillingnesse to make themselves known until the
end of the Tournament, which being finished, they would not fail to offer
their most humble service to him.

All this was past before Lisander could recover his Arms, whereat he was
desperately enraged: but in the end, having put them on the third day, he was
the first in the list, with such a brave behavior, upon that incomparable
Horse which he had from Cloridon, that he gave cause of admiration to all the
Assistants. Those who had formerly beheld the others, having their eyes now
fixed upon him, would not vouchsafe to look upon the other. The defendants
seeing him come, judged by his countenance that he would cut them out more
work than all the other; and therefore (either of them making choice of a
strong Lance) they prepared themselves to receive him: He in green armor
advanced himself first, and as a whirle-winde, in the middle of the course met
him, who fell upon him as a tempest; their Lances breaking upon the visers of
their Helmes, flew into splinters, and the Knights perfected their career
without any advantage, which had not happened since the beginning. Having taken
new Lances, they ran the second time, with more force and fury than they did
the first. The banks of the river Thames sounded with the blows, and their
clear waters were troubled. Lisander lost a stirrup, and bended toward his
crupper, but the green Knight was thrown unto the ground so violently, that
he had much ado to rise, whereat a great cry was raised by the people. The
Knight in the red Arms, desirous to revenge his shame, in whose company he
had gotten so much honor, fiercely spurs against Lisander, who came against
him like a Torrent. Amongst all the Assistants there was an universal silence,
without speaking, without moving, or without stirring their eyes, which were
fixed upon the Combatants: and by the Knights there was a noise made, and a
dust raised under their horses, which darkened the air, and made the earth
tremble: The Knights met with equal violence, their Lances failed not to hit
right, and to break unto their hands, and they passed by without being stirred
in their seats, not only in the first encounter, but in the second and third
course, with admiration (through the novelty of the act) doubling in the minds
of all the beholders. When they had run their courses, they drew out their
swords, and if before they had witnessed their force and nimblenes in the
Jousting, they did no less in the combat. Lisander provoked that a man should
break three Lances against him, and yet withstand him, so violently struck
him upon the head, and upon every part of the body, that at every blow he
brought away a piece of his Armor, with great abundance of sparkles of fire:
The other who saw himself handled so rudely, kindled his courage out of shame
and despite, and his force increasing with his rage, doubling strength upon
strength, and blow upon blow, he covered the ground with pieces of Lisanders
Vambrases and Tasses. Horror seized upon the minds of the beholders, which
made their faces look pale, and the Combatants in these fearful motions,
endeavor to show themselves greater and stronger than two men can be: Two
hours this cruel combat lasted, without any rest taken between them, and
their horses were covered with dust and sweat all over their bodies, and blood
in many places (although proceeding but from slight wounds) when Lisander
feeling his adversaries forces begin to fail, rained back a step or two,
and said thus unto him: Knight, your valor is equal (at the least, but I have
more Fortune; seeing that she is contrary unto you, and favorable unto me,
content your self with that proof which you have witnessed both of your noble
courage and strength: our combat is not to death, and I should be sorry, that
so brave and valiant a Gentleman should lose his life, which in all places else
I would preserve with the hazard of mine own. Willingly yield what you cannot
have by force, and be not sorrowful that you give place rather to fortune
than unto virtue. Whatsoever you are (answered the other) you have a great
deal of courtesy, but no less presumption, to think to oblige me to that
by your tongue, unto which you cannot reduce me by your sword. And not to
flatter you long in this vain hope, do not think that I will quit the honor
of this Tourney but with my life, nor my life without dearly selling it. I
thought to do you a pleasure (replied Lisander) but seeing my courtesy
offends you, we will speak of it no more. Then began they with more fury and
violence than before, and by the cruelty of this second charge, they wiped away
the astonishment of the first: But in little time it was plainly seen, that
the Knight of the red Arms grew heavy, and although he did his uttermost
endeavor, and witnessed as much courage and valor as his adversary; yet his
nimblenesse began to fail with his strength, and Lisanders valor appearing
advantageable above his, made it seen that the victory (after it had hung in
an equal balance until then) together with the glory of the combat (the
Prize) would fall unto him: Which the King seeing, and not willing that the
victory should be bloodied with the death of so good a Knight, nor the feast
fouled with so tragic an action, commanded them to be separated by the
Judges, appointing two new prizes besides the first: The one for the four
defendants, which had vanquished the first day; and the second for the other
two, leaving the third for Lisander, if he were not vanquished before night by
some other, which was thought impossible.

Nevertheless contrary to every bodies opinion (that after the proof of such
invincible valor no man durst oppose so strong an adversary) a strange Knight
entered into the place, who by the richness of his Arms, the goodness of his
horse, and the comely presence of his person, renewed again the attention and
silence in all the multitude: his Arms were azure with stars of gold. Now
you must understand that this was Lidian, who coming last to London, could not
get his Armor finished before toward the end of the last day, whereat he had
suffered great impatience* Lisander walked on the other side of the field,
newly come from the Judges, who had parted him from the Knight with the red
Arms, and had left him alone defendant: When Lidian saw him, he went softly
unto him, where perceiving his Armor broken, his Horse in a sweat, and
himself in blood issuing from slight wounds, he spoke in this manner unto
him, Knight, it is my great grief that fortune has occasioned me any fighting
with you this day, you but newly coming out of a great fight, which I see you
have made, and I fresh, having done nothing: But, if it please you to join
unto my prayer, we will humbly entreat the King to defer it unto another
time, when you may have more means to defend your self, and I more glory in
assaulting you. Knight (answered Lisander) your courtesy binds me to esteem
of your valor, for they ordinarily follow one the other, as the shadow does
the body; and hardly shall you find a courteous man who is not valiant, or a
valiant man who is not courteous. But I thank God, I am not in so weak a
plight that I should be constrained to receive your advice, neither do I
think it fit to entreat the King to revoke a general law for two particular
men; wherefore, if you please, we will obey the law of the Tourney, and
presently end the controversy of the prize, which fortune has taken from so
many, to give together with the victory of this day, unto one of us twain. Be
it as you please (replied Lidian) but I wish you less wearied than you are,
that I might enter with less advantage: Saying this, he turned his horse, and
being gone a space sufficient for his Careere, he came against Lisander with
that fierceness, that their staves breaking into shivers, they met horses and
bodies with such extreme force, that they went all unto the ground: Lisanders
good horse, which had run so many courses, and suffered so long and so
violent a combat, was nevertheless so vigorous, that he presently rose
again, scarcely setting his crupper unto the ground, and Lisander had also
rose with him, or rather had not fallen; for he lost not his saddle, but the
girths (with the strength of the blow) brake and left the saddle between his
legs, whereat all the people cried Lucifer was fallen: Lidian he was in
worse plight, for his horse tumbled upon one side, and he of the other so
astonished, that Lisander was already with his sword in his hand, before he
was come again to himself; yet he got up, and both of them kindled with
despite and shame, began the fiercest combat that had been seen during the
Tourney, Lisander being as fresh as if he had not struck one stroke all the
day. Lidian could not think that he was any other than a Devil, or else
enchanted, he seemed so unfatigable in his Arms; and all the Assistants, who
had seen him endure so long with so much violence, thought as much: But
Lisander thinking that he had to do with English, could not sufficiently
admire the English Knights bounty, and did believe that what had been said of
the Knights of the Round Table, was nothing in respect of the truth, having
never in his life received such violent encounters as of those three Knights,
whom he did think to be issued from their blood. The red Knight, and the
green Knight were both of them retired upon one side, no less angry against
Lisander, than wondering at his prowess; and admiring also Lidians, could not
imagine who those Knights should be, who with so much force and nimblenesse
debated for the Prize which they had lost. In the mean time our two Combatants
laid such blows one upon the other, as if it had been two hammers upon an
Anvill: the iron made a horrible noise upon their Armor, yet neither of them
was astonished at their own danger, wherewith others were amazed. Lisander,
seeing the day pass, and fearing, the night coming, they should depart the
field with equal honor, redoubled his strokes upon his adversary, and made
him feel them more heavy, and more speedy than before. Lidian, finding that
his adversary was fiercer in his strokes, and that his force seemed to increase
with his labor; used his utmost power, strikes, thrusts, presses him on
all sides: they were like waves against a rock which could not be moved. In
the mean time the Sun (it may be) frighted with the horriblenesse of this
combat, hid himself in the sea, astonishing the Nymphs with relating the
wonders which he saw in this Tourney. Then Lisander, despiting at Lidians long
resistance, gave him so violent a thrust upon the Gorget, that piercing both
Gorget and Curas it entered even unto the skin, and doubling a stroke upon the
top of his Helmet, made him fall with his hands and knees unto the ground, and
the Caske off from his head.

So soon as the two Knights in the red and green armours saw Lidian barefaced
without his caske, they knew him, and thinking that Lisander would make use of
that advantage, they put themselves between to hinder him, at the instant that
Lidian rose again. But Lisander knowing him also, and being as it were sorry
for the victory, in respect he had handled him so roughly, desired rather to
lose the prize of the Tourney, than to discover himself, thinking that in his
absence it could not be judged but unto Lidian, who had last fought for it;
wherefore in putting up his sword, he said unto him, Knight, I ought to have
known you by your valor, before I saw your face, and willingly quitted that
unto you, which I am constrained unto by your victory: enjoy therefore
peaceably the prize of your virtue, which I honor, and believe, that I have
both sorrow for opposing you, and a great desire to serve you. This said,
without staying for an answer from Lidian, who was almost ravished at this
excessive courtesy, he quickly got upon his horse, and turned himself to be
gone: but Lidian running after him, stayed him by his coat armor, saying unto
him, God forbid, Sir, that you should vanquish me both in courtesy and
strength, or that I should triumph for a victory due unto you; for Gods sake
do me not this shame, in refusing your own glory. While they were in these
terms, the Judges of the field came, and all the multitude desiring to know
what passed between them, came round about, so that Lisander could not pass,
wherefore alighting from his horse, I protest (says he) against the violence
you do me, and that I do only stay to accompany you in your triumph, and in
taking off his Caske made himself known. It is not possible to express
Lidians joy and admiration: Ah brother, said he, will you thus hide your self
from me who honor you as I do? Will you fly from him who searches you over
the world? With these words Lidian held him fast embraced, when the other two
Knights, who in the beginning were approached unto them, pulling off their
Helmets, made themselves known for Berontus and Alcidon, who embracing sometime
the one, and sometime the other, the contentment and wonder of this happy
meeting doubled. The Judges with much labor interrupting their embracings, had
them all four unto the King, who unwilling to frustrate Lisander of the prize
due unto his virtue, gave him a sword by the Prince of Wales, and a rich collar
by the Princess: and willing also to acknowledge Lidians valor, as also
Alcidons and Berontus, sent them three armors of an excellent goodness, with
three of the best Horses in his stable. As for the four English which had
vanquished the first day, he also, according to the great bounty of his mind,
richly rewarded them: But knowing that Lisander was in some disfavour in the
Court of France, and desiring to draw unto his service a man of his eminent
valor, offered him a pension of a thousand pounds sterling; yet Lisander
refused his offer as well as he had done the Archdukes, excusing him upon the
same reasons which he had done unto his Highness. After being brought with
triumph to the Palace with the King, they past away the evening amongst the
Ladies of great Britain, who for beauty and noble courtesy bear away the
prize from all the Ladies in the world. Lidian telling Lisander the necessity
of his affairs, and how much he was desired in France, they took their leave
of the King and Queen that night, and generally of all the Court, leaving both
a great sorrow for their departure, and an incomparable reputation of their
valor. The next morning rising early, they went all from the Court, and
imbarking themselves at the nearest port, they set sail for Callis: and
although by all tokens they were threatened with a violent storm, yet Lisanders
impatience was so great, that whatsoever the Mariners said, and what token
soever of foul weather they marked, he would not abide until it was past. We
will leave them passing the straight between England and France, and return
unto Calista, who having got armor some ten days before the three weeks were
expired which were given unto Lisander, one evening armed her self from head
unto foot, and only with one Lackey which her Host had procured unto her, she
rid from Paris to lie at Suren, from whence the next morning she sent a letter
of challenge unto Lucidan, of this substance.

Calista her Letter to Lucidan.
LUcidan, you have offered the King to fight with a Knight now absent, whom you
dare not look in the face if he were present, and undertaken to verify that
by Arms which you cannot do by justice: Seeing then his absence has given
you this boldness, his right binds me to maintain him, and show you as much
reason in his defense, as you have passion in your prosecution; for which purpose
I expect you in the plains of Suren, with a good horse, a good sword, and good
arms, such as the K. has granted you, and above all a good heart to abate your
pride, and make you repent your undertaking an evil cause. Inform not your
self of my name, for you shall not understand it until after the combat, if
you remain alive, but be contented to know that I am a Knight, Lisanders
friend, whom you hate, and so consequently your enemy.


Calista having dispatched this letter, and instructed her Lackey of his name
and lodging unto whom he was to deliver it, all armed mounted on horseback, and
accompanying him about a mile, stayed in the middle of a great field, which is
between Suren and an Abbey of religious women called Longchampe, whither she
commanded him to come to her, framing in the mean time such discourses in her
mind, which none but she only could speak. The Lackey no less diligent than
faithful, and although he knew not his Master, yet made such haste, that he
took Lucidan in his bed, where he was rather musing upon Calista's beauty,
and of her loss which he had heard of, than of such news; which having
received, he was much troubled, not only to know who this Knight should be (so
good a friend unto Lisander) who would expose his life for his honor, but also
to resolve how to content him; for it troubled him much to refuse him, and on
the other side he thought (as it was true) that a combat being granted at his
instance, and appointed by the King, he should much offend his Majesty if he
should enter into a private one, which was forbidden by the laws: wherefore
after a long debate in his mind, ballancing sometimes upon one side, and then
upon another, he answered in this manner.

Lucidan his Answer.
KNight, it is true that I have offered to combat with Lisander, or any other
of his friends, such as you witness your self to be: But not that his absence
has given me courage, or thinking him so dangerous that I dare not look him
in the face: it is also true that if I could verify by justice, what I intend
to prove by arms, there would be no need of any combat; but it follows not
therefore that I prosecute it with passion, or that he has reason on his
side: and if you have so much desire to maintain his right, as I have to show
the injury he did unto Chrisantes and Cloridon, you need not make choice of
the solitary plains of Suren, but rather the field for battle appointed by
the King, and at the time which he also has set down, and there make known
not alone unto his Majesty, but unto the eyes of all France, the justice of our
cause by the end of our combat. To effect this you need only to have
patience but eight days, in which time you may moderate your choler, and
learn that your threatenings do bring you more neglect and shame, than they
will either fear or hurt me: I will not inform my self of your name, seeing
you dare not tell it, but will content my self with the knowledge that you are
a Knight, my enemy, of whose courage I doubt not, having assured my self that
the King has not in vain granted the liberty of combat unto your friend
Lucidan.


Lucidan having given the Lackey this answer, entered into a deep imagination
who this Knight should be, who not respecting the Kings displeasure, defied
him with so much daring; sometimes he thought it was Lidian, who would not
discover himself in respect of the agreement between them, and sometimes he
thought it was Lisander himself, who would prevent the time appointed, and
make a private duel of a combat which ought to be public. But Calista,
finding by his answer that fortune constrained her to keep her life, which
she would so willingly lose; confirmed her self more than ever in her
despair, and not knowing where to spend the eight days which with so much
sorrow she had left to see the light of the Sun, determined to retire her
self unto Longchampe amongst the religious women until the day of the
combat, cursing Lucidan that he had not accepted this challenge, although that
she greatly (in her heart) commended his discretion, who wanted neither courage
nor judgment in his young years* As she was going toward Longchampe, having
already given her helmet unto her Lackey, she saw upon the way toward Paris a
man traveling in great haste: presently she had a conceit to go near him,
which she no sooner thought but did, and instantly knew him, although he were
in other fashion than when she last saw him. It was the Porter who had
delivered her out of the Castle at Paris, whom Lisander had sent into Normandy
unto her (as we have formerly said) then when he went into England: He came
at this time from Bellaire, where not finding Calista, he went to Paris, where
he was told he should hear of her at Olinda's. When he saw Calista in Armor
he knew her not, but she (not knowing that he dwelt with Lisander) called him
by his name, and using him with a great deal of courtesy, offered to
acknowledge with all her power the service which he had done her. The Porter
(astonished both with wonder and joy, to find her whom he sought for, when
he least looked for it, as also at her being armed) made her also marvel
more, when he gave her Lisanders letter; her lively color blushed in her
cheeks, and fled away incontinently: her knees trembled, and her horse
bridle fell out of her hands, and likely herself also to fall unto the ground,
stricken with astonishment at so unhoped for news, and with the grief which
the memory of Lisander made her feel. In the end going into a wood hard by,
she gave her horse unto her footman, commanding him to walk him, and lying
along under a tree upon the fresh grass, she opened her enemies (as she
thought) letter, wherein she found these words.

Lisanders Letter unto Calista.
Only death can show you, that the separation from my soul, is not so
unsupportable as my being divided from you: but the interest you have in my
life, makes me careful to preserve it, because I would not deprive you of the
absolute power you have over it, and lessen the number of your creatures by my
loss: The cause of my Martyrdom lesseneth the pain; for although it be
without example, and that my passion is neither capable of counsel nor remedy,
yet it is a sweet imagination that I suffer for you, and the image of your
beauty (which is the only present object of my mind) makes my torment easy,
and withal makes me to confess, it is both just and reasonable that I
suffer the extremest grief in the world for the most excellent beauty: let
me finish the rest in silence, seeing my words will rather lessen my conceits
than express them. You who know the wounds which your eyes have made in my
soul, by the knowledge which you have of the power of their strokes, and who
cannot be ignorant of the amorous flames which you have so lively kindled in
me, behold the pitiful feelings of my true languishing, and think that your
perfection is the cause thereof: which could not be infinite, as it is, if it
could be told. Farewell fair one, and judge of my exceeding grief by the
failing of my voice, whereby all means of complaining is taken from me;
neither does it suffer me to live, but by the glory which I have to be your
Lisander.


Ah disloyal creature (said she in reading this letter) with what cunning
do thou disguise the perfidiousnesse of thy heart? these words, her deep
sighs, and warm tears, which like great pearls rolled over the roses of her
cheeks, easily let the Porter know, that there was jealousy in her passion,
which made him say unto her, I am sorry, Madam, that I have brought you such
ill news to afflict you, and do no less wonder why Lisander should use me
in this business, seeing that next after God, there is nothing in the world
which I do reverence so much as your image. Are you belonging to Lisander,
said she? Yea, Madam, answered he, ever since he delivered me out of the hands
of the Marshals men, who were carrying me to Paris, where without his help I
should have been made a pitiful spectacle. Then he told how Lisander had
delivered him (as you have heard.) Friend (replied Calista) you serve a man who
of all men in the world does best acknowledge services done unto him, and who
does more for all them who deserve of him. I would to God, he were as good a
servant as he will be a good Master, but unto me he is the vilest Traitor that
ever was: God forgive him, he has been the loss of mine honor, out of the
love which he has borne me, and by his perfidiousnesse he will also be the
loss of my life. Madam, said the Porter, do not so much wrong unto Lisanders
virtue, in depriving your self of the greatest glory that a Lady of your
quality can have in this life, which is to be served and adored by the most
accomplished Knight in the world. Then Calista said unto him, come hither, and
(if thou also have not lost that affection which heretofore thou have witnessed
unto me, and if from being faithful as thou were, by being conversant with thy
Master, thou art not become so perfidious as he) let me conjure thee by the
light of the Sun, and by the first causer thereof, to tell me the truth: Is
is not the greatest treason that can be in Lisander, not alone to abuse me
with so many false protestations, as he has done, but now to write me letters
of love, whilst he in his own country serves and loves a new Amazon called
Hippolita? It is true (answered the Porter) he has seen this Hippolita, and
is pressed to serve her by all the remonstrances and commandments which his
parents may lay upon him: But I wish the ground may open under my feet, and
swallow me up before you, if he has not left the country, fearing he should
be constrained to sue unto her, and is now gone into England to a Tournament
which is held there, with an intent to come from thence hither: From whence he
will never return into Gascoigne until Hippalita be married, although next
unto your beauty (which surpasses all those of your sex) there is none who
equals her.

Although Calista were well satisfied with these news, yet could she not put
off the desire which she had to dye, thinking that though Lisander were
innocent of the crime of infidelity, he was guilty of suspicion, which had
enforced her to this discontented and unseemely course, after which there was
no joy left her to live, or be seen in the world; and willingly would she
have confined her self within the cloisters of Longchampe with the religious
women of that Abbey, but that she thought she should not be received, neither
would she at any hand present her self in the habit which now she wore;
together also that not being able to suffer the condition of a free life being
a Mistress, how was it possible for her to endure the strictness of a
religious obedience? All these things considered in her mind, she confirmed
her self in her first resolution of fighting with Lucidan, and in dying by his
hands in the sight of all the world, revenge her self of Lisander, and end her
ill fortune, which had prosecuted her with that outrage: wherefore she said
unto the Porter, she would have him stay a while with her, that he might
witness unto Lisander her actions, and that after she would give him an
answer. So retiring unto Longchampe, she accommodated her self as well as she
could in the house of a poor Peasant adjoining unto the Abbey, where having
left her horse and her armor, after dinner she went to see the religious
women, with whom she not only spent this day, but eight more, which were
remaining of the three weeks granted unto Lisander.

In the mean time Dorilas seeing the day for the combat granted unto Lidian
approach, and hearing no news of Lisander, and less of Lidian, whom he had
sent unto the other, determined in their absence to present himself, not so
much for love unto Lisander, against whom he was extremely angry by reason of
Calista's loss, as because he had already engaged himself by his overture made
before the King; wherefore going from Clarvall unto Paris, without acquainting
any body with his design, he caused black arms to be made, taking for his
device a great green oak, shaken with two contrary winds; his Motto was,
Tanto pui fermo quanto pui scosso, whereby he would show, that the adversities
wherewith he was assailed of late, had rather confirmed than shaken the
constancy of his heart. On the other part, Adrastus understanding by Lidian how
Lisanders affairs stood, and willing to show the youthfulness of his courage
in his old years, took his way in post unto the Court immediately after
Lidians departure, where not finding Lisander, as he verily thought he should,
determined to enter into the combat for him against Lucidan: and for this cause
he made himself gray armor, almost of an Iron color, in which for his device
he had an Eagle encompassed with a cloud full of lightning and thunder, with
this word in Spanish, Ni Matarme, ni Spantarme; By which he would give to
understand, that all his and his sons enemies did neither fear him nor
overcome him. So the appointed time for the combat being come, by three
several ways there entered into the Horse-market, which was the royal place
by the King ordained for battles to be fought, Adrastus, Dorilas, and
Calista, all completely armed, and mounted upon good horses, not one knowing of
the others enterprise. Of the other side of the field entered Lucidan with the
sound of Trumpets, mounted upon a brave horse, with an engraven Armor, having
a Cupid for his device, who held arms in his right hand, and wings in his
left, with this word, Ardito and presto, thereby willing to signify that he
was no less valiant than ready, as well in his love as in arms. Shortly after
came the King, with many Princes of the blood, Peers of France, and officers
of the Crown, whom he had made Judges of the combat, according unto the
ancient laws and customs of the kingdom.

When he was in his seat, the three unknown Knights having humbled themselves
unto his Majesty, without discovering their faces, remonstrated unto him that
they were there, every one in particular to maintain Lisanders honor, not
only against Lucidan, but against all others who should accuse him of
disloyalty: Nevertheless meeting all three with one intent, without knowing
either of others design, they humbly entreated that they three might be
suffered to fight against three others all together, and that in this respect
Lucidan might be permitted to choose three of his friends to second him in this
quarrel: but he unwilling to have either second or third, and offering rather
to fight with all three one after another, so long as his life should last; the
King appointed them to draw lots, which of them should fight first; after whose
combat, were he either overcome or conqueror, the other two should not be
received to make any further quarrel concerning Lisanders innocence; thinking
the one unnecessary, and the other unreasonable, because if Lucidan were
vanquished, Lisander remained acquitted, and if he did overcome, the other
should remain culpable: besides, it were not just, that he should expose
himself unto a second combat being weary, and it may be wounded, against
another fresh and without hurt. This equal sentence was nevertheless grievous
unto the strange Knights, who were every one (apart by himself) afraid to be
dsifavoured by the lot, which (although they were three) yet could favor but
one: but the sorrowfullest of all was Calista, who distrusting her fortune, did
believe she should never receive so much favor as to dye in this combat, but
that she should be still reserved unto more misfortunes. She had with her the
Porter of whom we have spoken, unto whom a little before she had given the
answer which she sent unto Lisander, commanding him only to wait the event
of this day, that he might report it unto Lisander; but if she had known
that the two Knights which contended with her about fighting with Lucidan, had
been the one Adrastus and the other Dorilas, the one Lisanders father, and the
other hers, and also if Dorilas had known that she had been his daughter
Calista, without doubt their trouble (although extreme) would have been much
greater. When the lots should be drawn to see which of the three strangers
should fight with Lucidan, their names were demanded, which they being
unwilling to declare, Adrastus first answered, that he was called the Knight of
the Eagle, Dorilas called himself the Knight of the Oak, and Calista (as we
said before) having a wheel environed with buckets for her device, named her
self the Knight of the Buckets. Three Billets were made with their three
names, which were all put into a caske: and as a child (who was appointed to
draw) was putting in his hand, there came in a fourth knight who stayed the
drawing. Who this knight was, we will speak of in another place: But now we
must return unto Lisander, the principal subject of this story. We left him
floating between Dover and Callis, with his three companions in Arms: The Sea
was then troubled with wind, whereby the waves in bigness being doubled, in
that little space they ran a dangerous fortune. At the beginning they thought
it was but a blast, which as short as violent would turn into fair weather:
but the sky armed with lightning, and darkened with clouds, which brake
amongst them into violent rain and fearful thunder, and the blasts of this
wind (which in the darkness of this storm lifted them upon the waters,
sometimes unto the stars, and sometimes opening the waves in the middle, did
with horror throw them into the bottom) made them repent their rashness in
despising the storm, hoping of saving themselves. The pale Pilote having for a
time resisted this fortune, causing all the sails to be stricken, and
stirring the helm as he saw occasion, was constrained to abandon that also,
seeing by reason of the noise which continually came from the thunder, the
winds, the waters, the cries and the confusion which was through all the ship,
he was not able to command, nor the Mariners able to obey. Lisander seeing
both steerage and tackle forsaken, and the sails in disorder, expecting every
minute to be swallowed by the waves, which already filled the ship, endeavored
to raise their courages; which he so well effected, that every one began to
stand to his work, some to the helm, some to the tackles, some to pumpe out
the water which came into the ship: But seeing that the Patron (judging the
ship lost) had lept into the skiffe with an intent to save himself therein,
he leaps after him with his sword in his hand, and setting it at his throat,
threatens him with a speedy death, if he did not return into the ship, and
take upon him the guiding of the same. The Patron seeing death present it self
unto him on both sides, desiring rather to receive it by the waves than by
iron, promised to obey him; but as he was going to return into the ship, a
huge roaring wave struck against the skiffe with such violence, that breaking
the cords wherewith it was held, it was presently driven away, that they in the
ship could never more set eye upon it. He who was able to express Lisanders
grief, was no bad Orator: he was ready then to effect what he had threatened
against the Pilot, and if he had not used his skill, I know not what he would
have done; but his friends sorrow was no less, believing certainly that he was
cast away, so suddenly they had lost the sight of the skiffe amongst the waves.

After this unhappy accident, Neptune (as satisfied with this revenge, and
contented to have punished those audacious persons, who had rashly contemned
his power, by Lisanders loss) showed himself less terrible, by little and
little appeasing the fearful motions of his Empire. The sky waxed clear*
the sea calm, and the winds having strove all day against the waves, now
retired into their dens, leaving in some rest the miserable ship, who all
broken with the tempest, in the end came to Callis, having been a whole
summers day, making a three hours voyage with a good wind. Then did Lidian,
Alcidon, and Berontus (who now had altered his opinion conceived against him
for his brothers death) renew their complaints for Lisanders loss, especially
when they saw his Arms, his Horse, his rich Sword, and the collar which he
had gained at the tilting, resolving to keep them safe until they could hear
more certain news of him, and staying only one night at Callis, the next
morning very early they took their way toward Paris, hoping to be there at
the day of Lucidans combat, with whom every one of them had a particular
design to fight in Lisanders quarrel: who then being in the skiffe alone with
the Pilot ran a fortune all that day, and the next night tossed upon the waves
at the pleasure of the winds, through the darkness of the night, in the
greatest misery that ever he had seen. The day following, the light appearing,
the air being clear and the sea quiet, they were carried upon an Island which
the Pilot knew to be Gersey, where landing with great danger, in a place
amongst cragged and desert rocks rarely frequented by any man, they found a
young Hermit, who (not seeing them) complained so loud, that they easily heard
all his lamentations, which you shall understand in order after we have related
the memorable combat which about that time was fought in the most famous City,
and before the greatest King in the world.

We left three Knights pretending all to fight with Lucidan, with great
impatience expecting him whom fortune should choose for that purpose, when a
fourth entering into the field, stayed the childs hand, as he would have drawn
the lot out of the Caske: This Knight was mounted upon a Spanish Jennet as
white as milk, his Arms also were white, having for his device a naked Cupid,
which passed through Pikes, Lances, Swords and Darts, with this word,
Spresoogin rischio, by which he made known that there was no danger which he
did not despise to follow his end. After he had humbled himself before the
King, without discovering himself more than any of the others, he made it
known unto him, that having more interest in this combat than any of those who
had presented themselves, he required, if not to be preferred, at the least to
be put to the casting of lots with the rest; which being granted him, and
having called his name Lisanders Knight, it was put into the Caske with the
other, where having been shaken together, every one expected with great
unquietness unto whom fortune would dispose the battle. It was wondered at by
all when the child drew forth the Knight named Lisanders Knight, to the
extreme grief and sorrow of the other three, whom the Judges causing to depart
the field, and having equally (for advantage of some) placed the combatants,
the Trumpets gave the token of the battle, and the Knights spurring their
horses and couching their staves, met with such fury, that their lances
breaking; flew into pieces, and their horses astonished with the blow, set
their cruppers unto the ground, from whence with bridle and spur being
raised, they bravely perfected their careere without advantage; and setting
their hands unto their swords, began a combat no less strange for the
novelty, than admirable for the combatants valor. Lucidan, who was esteemed
(and justly) one of the best Knights in France (and consequently of the world)
striking his adversary sometimes with the edge, and sometimes with the point,
made him bend sometime to his horse neck, and sometime back upon the crupper.
The other who gave not place unto him, pressing upon him with strokes like a
fury, made him also swerve sometimes upon one side, then upon the other, with
the gesture and motions of a man falling unto the ground: yet he held firm,
and when he was thought to fall, he recovered himself with more vigor and
strength, reducing his adversary to many great extremities. Thus the combat,
without advantage, was continued the space of two hours before they stayed to
breathe: while they thus rested themselves, they looked one upon another
through their visers in great fury, themselves being beheld by all the
assistants in great admiration, who expected the end, uncertain and doubtful
unto which of them the victory would happen. But above all, the fair Calista,
D^rilas her father, and Adrastus, were in great pain, not knowing who he was
that so valiantly maintained the justice of Lisanders cause. It was about four
of the clock in the afternoon, when three unknown Knights entering into the
field, and passing through all the multitude, went to do their reverence to
the King, of whom one of them craving leave to speak, said in this manner (a
general silence being amongst the multitude, and a general attention unto his
words, out of curiosity of the novelty) Sir, these two Knights who are here
fighting, have entered into this combat rather out of passion, the one desiring
to revenge his kinsmans death, the other to serve his friend, than out of any
certain reason which they have; both of them grounding their actions upon the
good opinion which they have of those for whom they are armed. There is none in
France but my self and one Knight more (who I think is not here now) that can
clear your Majesty in this action, and maintain unto Lucidan with certainty,
that Lisander killed Chrisantes and Cloridon like a valiant Gentleman: for I
knew it from Chrisantes himself, who told it unto me at his death, being gone
out with Leon (who is the absent Knight of whom I spoke) to part them, and
having found him even upon the point of death, with the loss of his arm, he
had only the power to tell me succinctly the combat, and afterward gave up
the ghost, commending his enemies virtue, and blaming Cloridons passion and
their evil cause, for which both of them lost their lives: and of this, Sir,
Leon wheresoever he is to be found, will be my witness, and many other persons
unto whom the very same day I made the relation, although I was not then, nor
have been since any great friend unto Lisander, in regard of some accidents
which have mischievously fallen out: But my conscience, Sir, obliges me to
utter this truth, and my honor binds me to maintain it, not only thereby
to preserve the reputation of an honest man, but also to save the lives of
these two Knights, who labor no less rashly than honorably to kill one the
other. But if your Majesty will yield the combat to any man for Lisander, it
is to be granted unto me, Sir, who speak out of knowledge, and who esteem
Lucidan so brave and so noble a Knight, that he will not absolutely say the
contrary.

By this discourse you may easily know that this Knight was Berontus, and the
other two Alcidon and Lidian, whom we lately left upon their way from Callis
toward Paris, with an intent to fight with Lucidan, but seeing themselves
prevented, they used this means to separate them. Upon this proposition of
Berontus, the King caused the Judges of the field to ask Lisanders Knight,
upon what ground he had enterprised this fight. He answered to maintain
Lisanders honor. It was again demanded of him what proof he had of his
innocence. Unto which he answered, none but the glory of his former actions.
The same Judges asked Lucidan, what assurance he had of the murder which he
pretended Lisander had committed. He answered, none, but that he would
hazard his life to revenge Chrisantes his death. These words agreeing with
Berontus his speech, the King declared Lisander (to the contentment of the
whole company) innocent of the pretended murders, and also absolved from
Cloridons and Chrisantes death, and imposed a silence concerning that unto
Lucidan for ever, commanding him to embrace, not only the Knight who combated,
but also the other three who had offered to fight with him. Lucidan witnessing
as much obedience to the Kings command, as he had showed violence to revenge
his Kinsmans death, put up his sword, and putting off his Caske, with open
arms went to embrace him, whom lately he endeavored to kill; who unwilling
also to give place in courtesy, put up his sword, and pulling off his helmet,
goodly tresses of hair fell about his shoulders almost to the heels, which
with new admiration to the world, made them all see that this masculine
courage, and more than manly strength, proceeded from a woman. At the first
these goodly tresses astonished Lucidan, as well as the others, who was ashamed
and despi^ed with himself, that he had so vainly employed his Arms against
a maid, who had so lively made him feel her cutting sword: but when he beheld
her Angel like face, and considered so many beauties among so many virtues, he
was more wounded with her looks than with the blows of her sword: and in the
instant the remembrance of Calista, whom he despaired ever to obtain, was
lost by the impression which this ^a^e warrier had made in his heart. Adrastus
presently knowing her and Lidian also, they both of them ran together to
salute her with so much joy, that I am not able to express it. Afterward
knowing one the other, they both took her, one by one hand, and the other by
the other, and went with her to do their reverence unto the King, who
embracing Adrastus and Lidian, although he had been angry with him, knowing
that it was the fair Hippolita, who, with so gentle a courage, had undertaken
to fight so dangerous a combat in Lisanders behalf, gave her the best
entertainment, and did her all the honor he could devise, with commendations
as glorious as the party that spoke them was great: Hippolita humbly demanded
his hands to kiss, but the King with a grace truly royal, said, Rather
(excellent maid) should I kiss your hands, which either by love or force will
make all the world do homage unto them: And so presenting her unto the Queen,
he said, See here another Amazon, whose beauty shameth the fairest, and her
valor the bravest of this age. Heretofore you have heard how Knights have
fought to defend the honor of Ladies, but now you see Ladies fight for
Knights: Whilst he yet spoke, Dorilas and Alcidon having pulled off their
Helmes, did their reverence unto his Majesty, who rejoicing amongst so many
good Knights, wondered to see Adrastus and Dorilas undertake this combat. But
Calista seeing her father, her brother, and her other friends discovered
without their Helmes, and learning by the common report which spread it self
through the assembly, that the Knight which had fought against Lucidan, was
Hippolita her Rival, out of jealousy of whom she was brought unto this
despair, and that for Lisanders sake she had undertaken this combat,
considering her love unto him, and that which he was tied to render again to
her beauty, grace, nimblenesse, courage and strength, wherein she gave place
unto none; and seeing also the infinite kindness wherewith Adrastus used her,
and the countenance wherewith so willingly she received them, she upon all
these appearances concluded that the first report of Lisanders infidelity was
true, and the treacherous excuses of the Porter false, wherefore now she
thought her self more miserable and wretched than ever. In this common and
public joy she stole out of the pre^se, and as well as she could, retired
her self unto Longchampe, wherewith grief upon grief, and complaint upon
complaint, we will leave her in this discomfort, not being able to comfort her.

In the mean time the King turning to Dorilas and Adrastus, said, Me thought
there was a third, who came with you to fight with Lucidan, what is become of
him? Sir, answered Adrastus, I know not, for so many others came after him, and
so many wonders are done this day (especially since the coming of this fair
Warrior, pointing at Hippolita) that my eyes were only busied in beholding
them. You make love (replied the King) but I think it is for another (intending
Lisander) yet I should be glad to know this Knight, who is thus gone away
without speaking to us: Let some go after him (said he to some of his guard
which were about him) and so entering into his Coach with the Queen, followed
with a great Court, he returned triumphantly unto the Louure.

To tell you the thanks which Lucidan gave unto Berontus for parting him from
the battle which he had with Hippolita, the service which he offered unto the
same Hippolita, the contentment which she received in the glory which this day
she had gained, besides the pleasure she conceived in obliging Lisander:
Adrastus his joy to see him absolved, and in the Kings favor, hoping that this
glorious action of Hippolita would oblige him to serve her: That also of
Alcidon and Lidian, to see their friend in his former luster, and Berontus that
he was an instrument in it: The comfort which Dorilas took in seeing Lidian,
and in Lisanders innocence, after which, he also hoped to see his daughters;
it would be a discourse too long for one breath upon the end of a Book, which
we will conclude by Gods help in the tenth part of this Story.

The End of the ninth Book.
A TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF these Times. THE TENTH BOOK.
We have represented passions in the end of the last Book, after the manner
of Architectures, who (as it is said) make their buildings with the greatest
beauty and glory toward the street, hiding their errors of contriving within
the house: for if we look near and judge not by outward appearance, but by
truth, we may find that among their sweetness and joy there was a great deal
of bitterness and sorrow: All the contentment which Lisanders friends had to
see him absolved, and in the Kings favor, no ways equalling the sorrow which
they had for his loss, or that which those who knew not thereof (as Adrastus
and Hippolita) had for his absence: And Dorilas his joy which he had to see his
son, and Lidian his Father, did no way balance the grief, which one
suffered for his sister, and the other for his daughter. Alcidon and Berontus,
who in reason had least cause to complain or desire, were not contented,
because they could not see Argire and Ambrisia shine at the Court: yet the
web of these evils were mingled with some prosperities, which made them some
way sufferable; only Calista was incapable of comfort, her whole reason and
wisdom serving but to augment her grief. We left her within Longchampe, sad,
wandering and desperate, all in tears and fury, not knowing what to do but to
dye, whereunto she fought all occasions, but found none; unexorable death,
which with so many sensible and violent sorrows takes away life from others,
would not do her that favor.

In the mean time the Porter, who (amongst Alcidons and Lidians followers) had
seen Lisanders Flemming and footman, and from them having learned the sad
news of his Master, oppressed with his loss, and with the despair wherein he
had left Calista; resolved to go seek for one, and discover the other:
wherefore having spent this night with his fellows, he rose early the next
morning, and going unto Alcidon (who instantly knew him) told him, that the
Knight who offered to fight with Lucidan, together with Dorilas and Adrastus,
having such a device and such arms, and who afterward stole away without
making her self known, was the fair Calista, so ^arre transported not only
out of love unto Lisander, but of jealousy unto Hippolita, whose sight had
carried her back unto Longchampe with the same despair wherein he had first
found her: That although he had promised not to discover her unto any body, yet
he believed he should err less in breaking his word, than in leaving her in
this discomfort.

Alcidon wondering (yet glad at this news) left the Porter at Paris (who
departed immediately from thence toward Normandy, to see if upon the Coast he
could have any news of his Master) and not speaking a word either unto
Dorilas, or Lidian of what he had heard of Calista, went unto Longchampe, where
she was still a bed, with her chamber door so fast shut upon her, that it was
impossible to open it without breaking. He first found her Lackey with her
horse, who brought him directly unto her chamber, where knocking at her door,
Calista, who thought it had been her boy, or the Porter, who having lost her
when she stole out of the throng at Paris, was come to seek her, asked who was
there: Alcidon answered, a Friend. What seek you, said she (knowing by the
voice that it was neither of them whom she thought it to be:) I seek you
(answered Alcidon.) Stay without (replied she) and I will speak with you
presently. In the mean time she arose, and not content to cloth her, she
also armed her self, believing by these means to pass unknown amongst all
men. When she was come out of her chamber, and that she saw it was Alcidon,
who was not armed, she was like to fall down dead: yet not knowing what he
would say, nor thinking that he knew her, she dissembled her astonishment as
well as she could, and disguising her voice and behavior, she asked him what
he would. Alcidon making as if he did not know her, asked if she were the
Knight of the Buckets, who yesterday had presented himself with Dorilas and
Adrastus to combat Lucidan. Whereunto she answered, yes. It is then, replied
Alcidon, with you that I would speak, but I would desire it might be private.
As much as you please, replied Calista, who presently commanded her boy to make
ready her horse. When Alcidon saw himself alone with her, he spoke in this
manner; You do well to command your horse to be made ready, for he must now
serve you to escape away, or else to go unto the King, who commands a straight
search to be made for you, forasmuch as that after your going from Paris,
remembering that you are the only man who did not discover your self, he
commanded that you should be followed, to know who you were; but he was told
by some that you were Lisander, and that you would not discover your self in
regard of Calista's process, whereupon his Majesty more expressly commanded
to find you, out of a desire he had to marry you to Hippolita, at Adrastus his
request, unto whom he has promised to pardon Cleanders murder in favor of
that marriage. Now if you be Lisander, I believe, according unto that great
affection which we have born unto one another, you will not hide your self
from me: I will counsel you freely as a friend, no longer to dwell upon that
wretched and unfortunate love of Calista, who is lost both for you and her
self, but looking more seriously into your affairs, not to lose, with the
Kings favor, and your parents, so advantageable a match as Hippolita is.

Hardly had he uttered the last word, when Calista looking upon him in
disdain, and setting her hand upon her sword, interrupted him with this
answer: Ah thou impudent Traitor, who has given thee boldness to use this
speech unto me? do thou use thus to counsel thy friends, to betray that
which they ought to hold most dear in the world, for a simple appearance of a
petty commodity? But why have thou not thy arms about thee, to maintain that
which thou counsellest? now will I show thee unto whom thou addressest thy
self, and before thee kill my self, to the end that the grief and horror of
thy having been the cause thereof, may torment thee all thy life. Saying this,
she pulled off her Cask, and transported with fury, she drew out her sword:
but Alcidon catching her in his arms, said thus unto her: Madam, pardon me (if
it please you) this invention whereunto I have been constrained to fly,
thereby to make you discover your name, seeing you resolved to hide your self
from me. It is true that the King has sent after you, and if you turn not
your self out of the way, you will see him but too soon: not that he does
think you are Lisander, not that any body has told him so, and less, that
he has any intent to marry him unto Hippolita; but I my self have contrived
it, knowing by the Porter whom you had yesterday with you, the pitiful misery
into which (by the false report made unto you of Lisander) you were brought.
Wretch as thou art (answered Calista) hold thy peace, art thou not ashamed to
think I should be such a Sot, as to believe any word that should proceed out
of thy mouth, and to persuade my self the contrary of what thou even now
toldest me, and what I have seen? Madam, said Alcidon, what you have seen
does not prove that true which you believe; what I have said of the King, in
part I have devised it, and of that which I have said of the Porter, you your
self may judge of the truth, if it be but by the direction which he has
given me of this place, whither you were retired, which I should have been no
more able to find, than a great many others who are now a seeking you: whereby
you may easily gather, I knew you when I spoke unto you, as well before your
helmet was off, as since: but as for that which has been told you concerning
Lisander, it is absolutely false, that ever he had such a thought, as Lidian
and Berontus can equally witness with me, for all four of us came out of
England together, and he had been here with us now, if the sea, the wind,
and a strange accident had not joined together to our parting. Berontus loves
him no more than he loves you, neither do I: and if both our testimonies were
suspected, yet your brothers ought not to be so, whom I was unwilling to bring
with me, or to say any thing unto him, or unto Dorilas, of what the Porter had
told me, believing that as you have done me the honor always confidently to
assure your self upon my friendship, you would rather communicate your passion
to me, than unto any of them: See now if there be any appearance in this
discourse, and if you think not, turn against me the point of your sword,
which I had rather feel through my heart, than once think to offend you.
Alcidon unto the strength of these reasons, added the discourse of what had
happened in England, how Lisander after a long combat against Berontus, Lidian
and himself, had gained the prize of the combat, which was a sword of an
inestimable value, and a collar of admirable beauty and riches, which was
destined unto her: Finally, how being embarked to come into France, and how
entering into the skiffe to force the Pilot back unto the charge of the ship, a
wave had unfortunately separated them (as you have heard.) And that these
things are true (said he) besides the witnesses which I have named unto you,
the sword and the collar are now at Paris, in Lidians hands, with Lisanders
horse, arms, and footman, from whom you may draw more particular proof of
this discourse, although none more true, nor none more certain.

Calista, vanquished with these reasons, knew not what to say, nor what to do,
only with folded arms she begged pardon, and entreated him to counsel her,
converting her first fury into pitiful bewailings of hers and Lisanders hard
fortune. The best counsel I can (for the present) give you, said Alcidon, is
to leave these arms, which will (in stead of hiding you) easily make you
known, and until some remedy may be found, retire your self into this Abbey;
the Lady whereof is my Kinswoman, and when she shall know your condition, she
will not be wanting to yield you the honor and entertainment which you
deserve: you shall live there (at the least) free from being found, for no men
come there, and although they should, it will be less scandalous to be found
in a Covent amongst religious women, than armed in a field. In the mean time I
will treat with Lidian, how to bring about that Dorilas and Otranta may see
you, who will be as glad to know that you are here in this Abbey, as they are
sorry and desolate because they cannot tell where you are. This counsel being
approved by Calista, she left arms, horse and man in her lodging, and in her
cloak and her sword she went unto the Abbess with Alcidon, unto whom they
needed not say any more, but that she was Calista. The Abbess wondering, yet
glad that she had power to oblige such a Lady, received her with admirable
contentment, and with as much demonstration of love as was possible. Alcidon
returns directly to Paris, and finding Lidian ready to go in quest of his
sister, told him, that he would bear him company, if he would go first and
see the Ladies which were at Clarvall; whereunto he willingly agreeing out of
a desire to see his dear Olinda, Alcidon by the way told him, how he had found
Calista, and where he had left her, with all which you have heard, to Lidians
great astonishment, who nevertheless was as glad to hear the end of her
salley, as he was sorrowful to hear of the beginning. After many discourses
which they had together about this subject, they resolved to communicate it
unto the Ladies (whom they went to see) before they would acquaint Dorilas, who
lodged together with Adrastus at Paris, and often visiting and courting one
another, they swore a most perfect friendship, being both equally troubled, one
with the loss of his son, the other of his daughter.

On the other side Hippolita having left her arms, and dressed her self in
the most advantageable habits of her sex, she gave with such lightning into
the Courtiers eyes, that for one which with her sword and a great deal of
labor she had vanquished, she had with her looks without intending it, and
without contentment, captivated a hundred: For although she brought great
contentment unto all who beheld her, yet she received none, not seeing him for
whom she undertook this voyage. One day after Alcidon and Lidians departure,
she going unto the Louure with Adrastus, Dorilas and Lucidan, who could be no
more without her, than a Pilot sail without directions to the pole, there
entered into the Presence Chamber one of the Guard, bringing with him the arms
which were presently known to be the Knights, who with Adrastus and Dorilas
offered to combat Lucidan; who presenting them to the King, said thus: Sir,
your Majesty having commanded me to seek the Knight who wore these arms, I
followed him to Saint Anthonies gate, by which I was told that he went; and
having understood that he turned down by the ditch, until he came unto Saint
Honnorius his gate, taking his way from thence unto Chaliot, I followed him,
always inquiring of those whom I met, until I came unto the Wood of Bollogne,
where finding none who could tell me which way he was gone, I ran unto all the
Villages round about where I imagined he might be, as Newly, Surene and S.
Cloud, without hearing any news of him, until this day as I was upon my
return, having now no hope to meet any body who could satisfy me, I met his
Lackey near Longchampe, who came to water his horse. Knowing him, Sir, I asked
for his Master, whom (as he told me) he had not seen since the next day after
Lucidans combat, when a Gentleman came to ask for him early in a morning at a
little house near Longchampe where he lay; and for proof of what he said,
because I did not believe him, he led me into the house, where I found nothing
but these Arms: I was in the Abbey which is hard by, to enquire of the
religious women, who were not able to tell me any thing, wherefore I returned
back to his lodging, and took his Lackey, his Horse, and his Arms to present
them to your Majesty. The King called the Lackey unto him, and asked him of his
Masters name; but he could learn no more but what the Guard had already told
him. Desiring then to see the Horse, he commanded that he should be brought
into the Court of the Louure, where Dorilas beholding him with a quicker
spirit, and more earnestness than when he saw him under Calista, and seeing
him without any caparison or other coverture but his saddle, presently knew him
to be his own, and consequently that he whose name they were in such care to
know, was his daughter Calista. It is not possible to express his
astonishment, but by the same silence wherewith he then covered it, retyring
himself without speaking of a word, for fear left his grief should discover
his thought. So soon as he was gone unto his lodging, he went from thence unto
Clarevall, where finding (contrary to his expectation) Lidian and Alcidon
amongst the Ladies, unto whom he had a resolution to tell what he had heard of
Calista, he found that they had better intelligence; wherefore in some
proportion he comforted himself to understand that she had retired her self
into this Nunnery. Ambrisia being amongst these Ladies, and knowing that
Adrastus was at Paris, entreated the company to be pleased that she might go
see him, whereunto they all condescended, and resolved to go with her.

In the mean time, the King curious to know who the Knight of the Buckets was,
commanded that the Arms should be exposed in a public place, until some one
were found, who could tell news of him who had worn them the day of the
combat between Lucidan and Hippolita; who was then in the Lou^re with
Adrastus, and believing that they did belong unto Lisander, who having lost
them by some accident, would endeavor to recover them by some means or other:
entreated his Majesty that they might be raised as a Trophee, in the field
which was appointed for the battle, offering her self to keep and defend
them the space of eight days against any man, who without discovering of
himself, should offer to take them down: And by the same means, Sir, added
Hippolita, forasmuch as I know that Lisander and Calista are no less innocent
of Cleanders murder (whereof they were most grieved, and are most falsely
accused) than Lisander appeared innocent the other day of murdering Chrisantes
and Cloridon, I most humbly entreat your Majesty to suffer me to defend their
innocence, and to ordain, that those who shall accuse him, may appear within
the time abovesaid, and prosecute their cause like Knights, and not with
wrangling. Adrastus being by at this entreaty joined also his, casting himself
at the Kings feet, humbly besought him to have compassion on his age, and of
the sorrow which he might have for a son, such as Lisander was, conjuring
him with tears that he might second Hippolita in this enterprise. Verascus
was not then at the Court, who would have been much offended at Hippolita's
words: but Berontus who in show should be obliged to undertake the answer in
Verascus his absence, as well for the neernesse between them, as for the
interest he had, being next kinsman to the dead, stood nevertheless silent,
retained not only out of love to Ambrisia and respect which (for her sake) he
bare unto all those who maintained her brothers right, especially unto
Hippolita and Adrastus; but also out of knowledge, which the same Lisander had
given him of the justice of his cause: Yet the King asking him if he had any
thing to answer against Hippolita's request, he said, That heretofore
vanquished with the appearances which were in his brothers murder, he had
maintained that no man but Lisander could do it: but since having certainly
known that at that time he was in Flanders, and that the day of his combat
with Cloridon and Chrisantes he had left his sword (broken in the handle) in
the field, he would rather combat to defend him than to accuse him: believing
also that his sister in law had too much honor, and too noble a heart ever to
conceive a thought of so infamous an act. All the Court wondered at these words,
and the King himself was astonished, and seeing him who had the principal
interest in the justice of Cleanders death (contrary to the opinion of all the
world) to insist upon the innocence of the accused, answered Hippolita, That he
did permit her to keep the arms of the unknown Knight, in the place and upon
the conditions required: but that he did not grant her the combat which she
demanded against Lisander and Calista's accusers, there being no need since
they did confess them innocent, nevertheless at her request, he would take
the hearing of the cause from the Judges unto his own knowledge, and that they
might both freely come unto Paris to justify themselves, he dispensing with
their returning into the estate wherein they were, and giving them the Court
for their prison.

Hippolita and Adrastus having humbly thanked the King, went both of them to
embrace Berontus, and from thence Hippolita having brought Calista's arms into
the field, set up a Tent, near unto which she raised a Trophee, expecting when
some body should present himself to question them. But Adrastus returning unto
his lodging, thinking to find Dorilas there, to carry him the first news of
his happy success in Calista's and Lisanders business, understood by his
Host that he was gone unto Clarvall, which made him presently dispatch
Lisanders two footmen, which Lidian had left with him, one into Normandy, the
other into Britain, to learn some news of his Master: and he in the mean
time going on horseback unto Clarvall with Berontus, who offering to accompany
him, out of a desire he had to see Ambrisia, met her upon the way, with
Dorilas, Otranta, Lidian, Olinda, Alcidon and Argire. The joy which Dorilas and
all the company received at the news which Adrastus told them, the contentment
which Ambrisia had in seeing her father, and which Berontus had in seeing
Ambrisia, (who thanked him for the faithful testimony which he had given of
Lisanders and Calista's innocence) tempered the sorrow which all of them had
for their absence: and to make it more perfect, they went all together unto
Longchampe, not only to see Calista, but to bring her to Paris, expecting
Lisanders return, seeing that by the Kings clemency both the one and the
other, without fear of the Justice, might appear safely. Calista being
advertised of their coming, had left her cloak and sword, and being
apparelled in the ordinary habit of her sex, received them with a shame, which
did raise unto a higher luster her incomparable beauty, wherewith she excelled
the fairest, which above all others astonished Adrastus (who had never before
seen her) and made him not only excuse Lisander, but also think that he had
a great deal of reason to disobey him, for which he formerly blamed him.
Madam, said he, in saluting her, I do not now wonder if those who have had the
honor to see you, do despise all other glory: for I my self, whose age ought
now to dispense me from that servitude, whereunto you bring all the world,
would not wish a greater good, than to be deprived from all others, to have
that of your service. Calista knowing who he was, made a great reverence unto
him, saying, she would receive these praises from him, more for the respect
which she bare him, than any ways presuming that she could merit them: And
seeing Dorilas and Otranta, who stretched out their arms unto her, she kneeled
at their feet, humbly entreating them to pardon her the displeasure and sorrow
which she had raised them. But they lifted her up, entreating her not to bring
into their minds a thing which might trouble the contentment which they had to
find her again. Furthermore, said Dorilas, thank this good Knight; for with a
fair Amazon who is at Paris, and Berontus his faithful testimony, which he
gave before the King of your innocence, they are all three cause, that without
fear of any castle or prison but the Court, you and Lisander may now enjoy your
liberties, which heretofore you have had in Paris, having the King himself for
Judge only. Calista, together with the joy of this news, felt a secret motion
in her heart at the name of this Amazon, which wrought an alteration in her
face: But Berontus advancing himself then with Ambrisia, whom he conducted,
afterward Alcidon with Argire, and last of all Lidian with Olinda saluting
her, put it from her mind for the present, and raised in her a contentment, to
express which I am incapable.

After they had a little rested, and refreshed themselves within the Nunnery,
and thanked the Abbess and the religious women, they all departed toward
Paris, where coming before night, they alighted at the Louure. Adrastus led
Calista, Dorilas Otranta, Alcidon Argire, Lidian Olinda, and Berontus Ambrisia.
The King being then in the Queens chamber, they were all brought in to their
Majesty's, unto whom Adrastus presenting Calista, spoke unto the King in this
manner. Sir, behold the Knight whom a desire to justify Lisander concerning
Chrisantes and Cloridons death, to the end that he might afterward justify
them both for Cleanders, has made her cover her self with black Arms, which
your Ma* has committed unto Hippolita's keeping: We are not now come humbly to
entreat you that they may be rendered unto her, she having more power thus
disarmed, than all the Knights in the world armed; but to offer you her,
together with our humble service, to lay her honor with out means, and our
lives into your hands, giving you most humble thanks that it has pleased your
Majesty to take knowledge of our cause, and to entreat your Majesty to do her
justice, which yet you never refused to any person. Adrastus having spoken
these words, Calista kneeled down before the King, who having never seen her
in Cleanders life (in regard it was much retired from the Court) much less
since his death; was kindled with the lightning of this beauty, which having
lifted up, and graciously saluted, he presented her unto the Queen, saying*
What think you of this Knight, Madam? was it not great pity that such a jewel
should be shut up in the Castle? She seems unto me rather an Angel than a
Knight, answered the Queen, and that those who took her from thence, had more
reason than those who imprisoned her. These words, and the presence of their
Majesty's, environed with a great company whose eyes were all fixed upon
Calista, raised no less blushing in her, than she kindled fires in their
minds: The Court at this time resembled bled a clear heaven, set full of
bright stars, whereof their Majesty's were the principal^ lights, and
Calista, Ambrisia, Olinda, and Argire four of the lesser Planets; to perfect
whose number, the fa^re Hippolita came, who being led by Lucidan, knowing that
this Calista of whom she had heard so much speech, was not only come, but
known to be the Knight of the black arms which she had undertaken to defend;
left them in the guard of Erifila her maid, to be her self at this assembly:
So soon as the King perceived her, he said unto her, You must now (fair
Amazon) render the arms, or fight with this fair Lady, unto whom they do
belong. Sir, answered Hippolita, not only these arms, but all others ought to
be yielded up unto her beauty. What shall then be given unto yours, said
Calista, which does shine with so much advantage over the fairest? I am not
able to utter all the fair words which then proceeded from their fair
mouths: But what contrary thoughts were in the mean time hid in their
hearts with what different spirits from their outward show, did these fair
Rivalls behold one the other? with what confusion did Hippolita look upon the
advantage of Calista's incomparable beauties? with what grace, Calista, drawing
her glass sometimes by stealth, seemed to enquire of it about the victory
which she presumed to have over Hippolita's perfections? how many torments did
Lucidan suffer between the new fires which Hippolita had kindled in his breast,
and the lively sparkles which having been raked up in the ashes of Calista's
absence, did now become flaming by her presence?

In the mean time night descending, covered with her large mantle poudered
with stars, licenced this fair company; every one departed contented, except
Hippolita, who seeing Calista conducted back by Adrastus, as if he had
already accounted her for his daughter, despaired ever to be so her self. All
night she could not sleep, Calista's fair face, and the admirable attractions
of her surmounting beauty swome in her mind, she saw her self overcome by
Calista, she thought her self despised by Lisander, and called him traitor
for speaking of love unto her, being engaged in another place, and ungrateful
for leaving her for any other; then again would she excuse him for having
made so worthy a choice, which she her self was enforced to approve. In these
disquiets having passed a great part of the night, she called Erifila, and
arming her self in Calista's Arms, leaving her own hanging in the place, she
departed early in the morning, taking no leave of any body.

Whilst these things thus passed in France, Lisander, who by the tempest was
cast upon the I Will of Gersie, together with his Pilot, as we have already said,
hearkened unto the man, (yet unknown) whom we left complaining in this
manner* Ah wretch, unworthy of this light, whereof thou have deprived the best
Knight in the world, what do thou in this solitary corner, where, as a
Prometheus tied to this rock, thy bowels renewing, are continually devoured
with the eternal repentance of this offense? think thou that this great sea
can wash away thy crime, or this secret place hide thee from thy self? O Love,
thou art a Traitor and a Murderer, hiding under such sweet apparances such
bloody and mortal effects: Poor Cleander, now reduced unto ashes by thy
deadly flame, nay rather by thy impudent flaming desire: Infamous Clarinde, who
have brought me into this extremity for thy fault, cursed be thy memory if it
yet remain amongst men, and cursed be thy Ghost if it be gone into Hell: Let
thy body be without burial, thy spirit without rest, and thy name without
honor, for ever to remain scandalous and opprobrious unto all the world. By
these words Lisander knew that he who lamented was Leon, whom sorrow for
having killed Cleander, and fear of punishment, had shut up in these rocks. O
what vows did he make unto Neptune for running this fortune? how many times
did he thank the winds and the waves for this happy encounter? Well Leon, said
he, stepping unto him, resolve your self to go to Paris with us, or else here
^o leave your life, in satisfaction of that, which you have wickedly taken from
poor Cleander. Leon knowing him both by his voice and by his face, and seeing
his sword shining in his hand, and over his head, now no less troubled with
the apprehension of death, than even now weary of living, answered thus: It is
true that I have killed Cleander, not maliciously, nor out of design, but
only to save my life, with the honor of a person whom then I loved, and who
was more dear unto me than my own life; which you cannot think strange, if
ever you have loved: The repentance and sorrow which I suffer, will (I hope)
something excuse the offense, for which I would not refuse death, if my life
might not serve to justify two persons, of whom I believe you are one, without
which respect, I had rather leave it here, than carry it to Paris to lose it
upon a scaffold: but I consider that there is another, in which we must give
an account for this, wherefore I should be sorry to bury with me Calista's
reputation and yours, whose innocence is so troubled, that it cannot clearly
appear but in the confession of my fault. Your reasons are good, answered
Lisander, but your considerations are a little too slow, and would have been
unprofitable, if stay had been made until you had executed them. But better
late than never, and although I do not help you to obtain your pardon for
the death of so dear a friend as you have killed, yet I will not hurt you, and
it may be the King, according to his accustomed clemency and goodness,
considering that it was love and necessity of saving your life, which made you
deprive him of his, will rather use mercy than justice. After some other
discourse which they had together, Lisander, without entering farther into the
I Will (so great was his desire to be at Paris) made him enter with him into the
ship, and the wind being fair, and the sea calm, they made their course
along the Coast of Normandy, until they came unto New Haven, from whence going
(without any accident) unto Roane, he was constrained to stay there to buy
horses, and arms, the richest that he had ever yet worn; and to witness that
he had rather dye in the sight of his Lady, than suffer any longer the torment
of his absence, he bare for his device, an Argent Eagle with wings spread and
half burned under a Sun of gold, upon which he firmly looked with this word,
Purche godon gli occhi, ardan le pin.

Whilst he busied himself about this, the Porter, who (as we have said) was
gone from Paris to seek him, after the combat between Hippolita and Lucidan,
and going from city to city, was come from Paris to Roane (believing that (in
regard of the frequent arrival of strangers which the sea brings thither) he
might there hear news of him) and passed by chance through the same street
where Lisander was about his arms, who perceiving him, called him by his name;
Never man in this world was so content as he was: but if he were joyful to
have found him, the other was as sad when the story of his Mistres was told him
(as you have heard) and the letter given him, which said thus.

Calista's Letter unto Lisander.
THis Letter serves not to bewail, but to rejoice with you for the marriage
which is said that you contract. If you had advertised me, and that my
presence had not troubled your contentment, I should have desired to have been
at the feast, at least to have served as a foil unto the luster of that beauty
you sue unto. But seeing I cannot be there without troubling your peace, and
without making your face blush, I will only endeavor to learn the color of
your livery that I may wear it in your absence, and thereby witness unto you,
that although I have not ties enough to hold you, I have resolution enough to let
you go, and more patience in your loss, than I had contentment in possessing
you. Do not look that I should here accuse you of infidelity; for herein you
do me the most pleasing service that is possible for you, and for which I am
rather to thank you than complain: neither have you deceived me, for the
words which you have said, proceeding but from an unconstant heart, make me
sufficiently judge, that your actions must needs partake of the same
lightness. But you have deceived your self, in thinking to find in me any
thing more lovely, or more easy to conquer than you have done. I am glad that
at the last you know your self: for although your malice has not been able
to prevail over my goodness, yet the oaths wherewith you have accompanied
your words, the easier to make them sink into my belief, have had so great
effect, that they raise a grief in me, to see you sigh forth a passion,
whereof you cannot be healed but by inconstancy, which justifies to me your
infidelity, and not only makes me approve thereof, but also to thank you for
wiping away (by this change of yours) the sorrow which I conceived by seeing
you suffer for my sake a remediless evil: I also give thanks unto her who is
the cause thereof, seeing that laboring my mind as I did to free yours, I
must need^ be obliged unto her who has eased me of that pain. Other
jealousy I have none, for I shall be always glad to yield that unto her,
which I should be sorry to gain from her: And besides her merit, which by your
election I must needs acknowledge, she has been sooner and better beloved of
you than I am, and in my opinion does love you better than I do: Not that I
will not always wish you well, and that this last action, more than all the
other of your life, does not oblige me to acknowledge your feined affections
with a true friendship: wherefore I wish unto you in this new servitude, the
contentment which you could not find in mine, and do give you back (together
with your liberty) all your false promises which you have made me, in
satisfaction and revenge of which, I will make but one unto you, and that
inviolable, ever to rest your servant,

Calista.


The condemned man, who after a pardon vainly hoped for, sees himself led
unto execution, is not more astonished than sorrowful Lisander was in
receiving this news, then when he thought that all difficulties were removed,
and that all things smiled upon him. The Porter told him three or four times
over, all the sallies which jealousy had enforced Calista to make: First, how
she had gone from Clarevall in man's apparel, had put her self into arms at
Paris, and going from thence to challenge Lucidan, had entered there again to
fight with him before the King: Actions so extravagant, that they must needs
proceed from an extraordinary passion. And finding in her letter so much
disdain and indifferency, he could not imagine from whence such unequal
contrarieties should spring. In the end comforting himself in his innocence,
and in the means which he had to serve his Lady, by representing Leon, a
principal justifying piece in her process; he sent away the Pilot with his
skiffe, and the next morning early, with Leon and the Porter, departed from
Roane to find Calista at Longchampe, where he yet thought she was. As he was
about half way toward Paris, having rid in extreme diligence until noone,
he met two Knights well mounted, and well armed, who came from the same town.
They were jealous Hippolita, and her maid Erifila, who the same day were
departed from the Court, as you have heard, to search for Lisander with the
same passion which lately had so far transported Calista. So soon as the
Porter saw Hippolita's arms, he judged that it was Calista, and presently
told Lisander, who as suddenly believed it, as he had a strong desire it
should be so; wherefore spurring his horse directly unto her, he lifted up the
visour of his Helm, and bending his body to the pummell of his saddle, in
saluting, entreated her with as much submission and humility as was possible,
not to condemn him without hearing; she especially, who had proved how much
it behooved those who were accused to be heard in their justifications:
Hippolita knowing him, and desirous to convince him of infidelity by his own
confession, seeing he took her for Calista, endeavored to confirm him in
that error by her silence, and despising his excuses, not discovering her
self until Lisander transported with passion told her, That he had never
seen the world otherwise, but that those who had best served, were worst used,
That for his part he had attempted all possibilities for her service, and
effected them: neither in all the services which he had done, could he ever
find himself guilty of any fault, either in effect or will, That he knew
well the report which was spread of his love unto Hippolita, whom he had been
constrained to see out of reverence unto his Father; but that he could never
love her, what demonstration soever he had made, or what excellencies soever
were in her, which although they were great, yet were not such as that they
could enter into any comparison with hers.

So far had Lisander discoursed, and would have proceeded further, believing
that he spoke unto Calista: But Hippolita despited to see her enemy preferred
before her, and by a man who had formerly preferred her before all mortal
creatures; not able to bear his discourse any longer, turning away her head,
and pouring forth tears under her Helmet, answered nothing, but O Traitor;
which word confirmed Lisander more in opinion that she was Calista. In the
end, Hippolita desirous to revenge her self, or to dye by his hands, and
thereby to leave him in sorrow all his life, imagined this answer, which put
Lisander unto extreme pain, and her self into no less danger: Thou art
deceived said she, in what thou say, and she for whom thou take me, is
far enough from hence; for know, that I am thy enemy Lucidan, who have taken
from her this horse, and these arms, which thou see upon me, and have sent
her whither she shall never return. But to comfort thee, make thy self ready
to follow her, for I will either lose my life, or send thee speedily unto her,
revenging the shedding of Chrisantes blood by thy death.

Lisander knew he was deceived by Hippolita's voice, and thinking that he who
spoke of revenging Chrisantes death was Lucidan, he easily believed (fear
being as quick as desire) that according unto his speech he had killed
Calista, and was thereby kindled in such rage, that not able to answer one
word, he set his hand unto his sword, Hippolita having drawn hers, and
struck such a blow upon her Caske, that piercing it unto the skin, he wounded
her sorely in the head, and raised more fury in her, than ever in her life
possessed her; so that seeing Lisander lifting up his arm to redouble his
stroke, she directed the point of her sword unto that place of his Arms,
where his Vaunt-brace was joined unto his Curas, and spurring her horse with
all her might, she ran through his arm. Lisander provoked above all that can
be imagined, to see himself so ill handled by one enemy, who had bragged of
killing Calista; as his force was doubled by his anger, so his anger was
greater than ever it was; and as his strokes were greater than ever he had
given any, so the resistance which he found, was greater than any that ever
he met with. Their combat could not be long, because it was so violent,
besides, they fought more in eagerness and fury, than according either to art
or judgment, which in all other combats were wont to guide them; both of them
lost much blood: Whilst Erifila beheld this pitiful spectacle in great
distress for the danger wherein she saw Hippolita; and in no less fear was
the Porter, who in the mean time keeping Leon, according to the use which he
had learned in the Castle, thought that God would here give stay unto Lisanders
victories and good fortune, who preferring the pleasure of revenge before his
life, and determining to end the battle with one stroke, bore a point against
Hippolita's breast so straightly, and with such violence and cruelty, that his
sword pierced the Curas, and sliding along by one side, it past under her arm
pit. Hippolita reeling with this great stroke, he spurs close unto her, and
with his Horse thrust so violently, that she fell down unto the ground,
whither he lighted in such haste, that Erifila could not stay him, pulls her
Caske from her head, and lifting up his arm to cut it off (not vouchsafing to
look upon her face) her goodly tresses of hair died in blood, made him first
see his error, and afterward know that the person whom he intended to kill
with so much hatred, was the fair Hippolita, who having lost her knowledge and
sense, was in a swound in his arms. It is not possible to tell the least part
of the confusion which was in his soul: he knew not what to do, nor what to
say, nor what to think; sometimes he was angry with the Porter, who had made
him take Hippolita for Calista, sometimes he blamed Hippolita her self, for
hiding her self under the name of Lucidan, and under the pretext of Calista's
death had given way and exacted this disgrace: but Erifila told him, that he
himself was the cause, forasmuch as Hippolita justly offended, after the
demonstration of love which he had made unto her (and the great bonds wherein
she had tied him, as well in enterprising the voyage unto the Court, the
combat with Lucidan, and now in going in quest of him; he had nevertheless
spoken so disadvantageably of her, and had so highly raised Calista's
perfections before hers, and she not able to suffer, that one who had offered
so much love unto her; as in excuse thereof should say, and to her face, that
he had loved her to satisfy another) had upon purpose feigned Calista's
death, that the desire of revenge might incite him to fight with her, believing
that she had killed Calista, and that falling under his arms as she had
done, she might leave with him, together with the horror of her death, an
eternal sorrow and repentance of his ungratefulness and perfidiousnesse. This
redoubled Lisanders perplexity and astonishment, who seeing her lose a great
deal of blood, and losing no less himself, caused her to be carried unto the
next village, where having gotten a Surgeon with much difficulty, and finding
that Hippolita's wounds were not mortal, he caused his own to be dressed, and
then put himself again upon his way to Paris, not so much as taking leave of
the Lady whom he had so much injured, nor having the courage to ask pardon of
her, whom he had the heart (not knowing her) so mortally to offend, as well
fearing that his presence should cause some alteration in her, as out of shame
he had for the words which he had spoken, thinking her to be Calista: yet he
did entreat Erifila to excuse his departure without seeing her, fearing the
danger which the trouble of his sight might bring unto her: assuring that he
never had so sensible a sorrow, as that which he carried with him for the
offense which innocently he had done, in satisfaction whereof there was no kind
of torment or pain which he would not undergo to content her, and to recover
the honor of her favor. We will now let the sorrowful Hippolity rest a
while, unto whom speech was forbidden for fear of a fever: and we will
follow unfortunate Lisander, who went from her no less sorrowful than she.
After that he had rid the rest of the day meditating of that which had happened,
and the estate wherein he left her, together with grief for these mischiefs
fallen, he arrived in the evening at Pontoise, which is some seven leagues from
Paris, no less weary and travailed in his body, than disquieted in his mind:
and, as his ill fortune did guide him, he alighted at an Inn, the Master
whereof was but newly come from Paris, and with him a Gentleman belonging unto
Dorilas, who knew Lisander well by report, and not by sight, although he were
one of the two whom Dorilas had with him, when he was set upon in the forest
of fountain Bleau, and saved by the same Lisander, as you have heard in the
beginning of this History. Lisander, who desired some divertion from his
thoughts, was glad to sup in their company, where his curiosity made him
entreat this Gentleman to tell him some news from the Court, who knowing none
more memorable nor fresh than that whereof Calista had been lately the
argument, discoursed unto him what had happened since the combat between
Hippolita and Lucidan: First with Alcidon, then how her arms had been brought
into the Louure, and put under Hippolita's guard, in the field where the
battle was fought, until they should be known: how Dorilas knew his horse;
and how Hippolita and Adrastus offered to combat against Lisanders and
Calista's accusers, for the murder of Cleander: how the King having heard
Berontus his answer, who discharged them, had taken the cause from the Judges
into his own hearing: how Adrastus and Berontus having carried this news unto
Dorilas, they went together with Alcidon, Lidian, and the Ladies which were
with them, to find Calista at Longchampe, from whence they had brought her to
Paris: finally, the words which had past before their Majesty's with Hippolita,
and the contentment whereunto all things had happily succeeded; all which was
matter of joy and comfort to Lisander.

But when following his discourse, he came to touch the love between Lucidan
and Calista, which he took upon him to know, as being a household servant unto
Dorilas, especially since Lidians and Lucidans atonement, and that he added,
he believed verily, his young Ladies misfortunes would end in a marriage with
Lucidan, which being most earnestly sought by him, and as closely followed by
Adrastus, out of a desire he had to marry his son unto Hippolita, it could
not be refused by Calista, nor by her parents, principally in Lisanders
absence, who had witnessed so little feeling of this last occasion, that she
was extremely provoked. Then Lisander turning into tragical the comicall
subject of this news, lost, together with his stomach to eat, all rest and
quiet in his mind, his very countenance changing, sometimes red as scarlet,
then pale as death, astonished all the company with his sudden alteration; yet
all the company thought that it proceeded from weakness and pain of his
wound in his arm, and counseled him to go to bed. But he well knowing that
this remedy was not apt for his evil, entreated this Gentleman to proceed in
telling what he knew of these Lovers, faigning that his grief would be
diverted by his discourse. I can say no more unto you, said he, but that this
morning before I came away to go to Bellaire, whither Dorilas has sent me
for money, he together with Otranta entered into Calista's chamber to propound
unto her the advantageable conditions offered by Lucidan: one of which was,
That the King promised in favor of this marriage, absolutely to free her
concerning Cleanders death. Besides, they did not think it agreeable with
Calista's reputation to marry a man, who was accused of the death of her
husband. But if he be innocent (said Lisander) what then? It is all one
(replied the other) he is still accused, and that leaves an aspersion, as a
bite or a wound does a scarre, although it be healed. Besides, it is verily
believed that Lisander is drowned at sea, or that if he be not, he has
witnessed so little affection unto Calista, that she ought not to think that
ever there was any such in the world. But is it possible (said Lisander) that a
Knight who has saved Dorilas his life, and Lidians many times, and unto
Calista both her life and honor, should now be forgotten for Lucidan; who not
only was never their servant, but has always been their capital enemy? As
for Lidian (answered the other) he holds for Lisander, and as well he as
Alcidon and Berontus, will leave the kingdom, rather than be present at
Calista's marriage with Lucidan; and she for her part has not yet made any
demonstrations that she does incline either unto one part or other: but
Dorilas, Adrastus and Otranta do stir heaven and earth for Lucidan, and which
is greatest, the King himself favors the match, and he can do more than all.
All these words were like daggers at Lisanders heart, who being able to endure
them no longer, bid all the company good night, and retiring into his chamber,
went to bed.

While he rests there (if a man tormented with so many furies can enjoy any
rest) we will return unto Hippolita, who being recovered from her swound, and
awake from a short sleep, which a general numming of all her spirits had
brought upon her, not seeing her mortal enemy, who had so cruelly wounded her,
whom nevertheless she loved more than she loved her self, she demanded of
her maid where he was? She told her his going away* and his excuses together.
How (said she) is he gone without speaking to me? and has he thus left me
in this pitiful estate, whereunto I am brought by his cruelty? O Tiger!
although I were unknown unto him, I think mere humanity should oblige him to
stay with one afflicted; set apart that I am for his sake, and by himself thus
wounded, and that deceived by his feigned affections, I am come into this
country, moved by my true affection unto him, have preserved his honor with
the loss of my blood and the hazard of my life: and if we only speak of
common good will which is amongst the most barbarous men, were not that bond
enough upon him, to make him see the success of the wounds which he has given
me? Madam, said Erifila, he was so afflicted that it would rather have
increased your evil than lessened it; and (therefore he went away, fearing
that his sight should cause some alteration in your wounds. Afflicted, said
Hippolita! what proof of affliction? have thou seen him shed one tear? or
only fetch one sigh for me? yet ( Erifila) I must love him, and if thou also
love me, and wilt bind me to love thee more, thou must ride speedily after
this ungrateful Knight, and conjure him not to fly from Hippolita, who
seeks and would run after him, if the wounds which he has given me did
not hinder me. Tell him I pretend nothing in all that affection which he has
vowed unto me, but common good will, that I quit him of his promises, and that
not only I will not constrain him in the love which he bears unto Calista,
but that I will mediate his peace with the King, and his marriage with her, and
will take upon me to solicit her against my self; let him vouchsafe only to
see me, and suffer me but to accompany him. I am none of those who have
accused him for killing of Cleander, but clean contrariwise, I am she who have
defended his innocence, and for his sake, his Ladies. But dispatch Erifila, and
reply not, if thou love me, or if thou desire I should live. Erifila, who
knew with what spirit she had to do, said only she would not stay, but
would make such haste that she would find him, and she would lose her life,
or bring him back. But, Madam, said she again, who shall have care of your
wounds in my absence? Care not you for my wounds, said Hippolita, they are
neither mortal nor dangerous, only go thy ways, and take heed thou do
not try Lisander in arms, for therein he is no less invincible, than in
grace and comeliness incomparable. Erifila departs (although it were night)
and upon a speedy gallop follows after Lisander: where leaving her, there is a
necessity now we should relate what is done at Paris.

Besides the instant pursuits of Lucidan to marry with Calista, Verascus, who
was advertised of the propositions which Hippolita and Adrastus had made unto
the King about Cleanders murder, and also what the King had ordained, as well
upon their offers, as upon Berontus his declaration in favor of the accused;
came Post to Paris, and addressing himself unto the Court of Parliament,
obtained a sentence against Calista, containing, that most humble remonstrances
should be made to his Majesty, to be pleased, that justice might freely be
executed upon the persons of those who were accused of Cleanders death: which
sentence being gravely pronounced, yet vainly, because the King had already
given his word; although they did not hide, that this crime scaping humane
justice, could not escape divine, neither could this innocent blood unjustly
shed upon earth, crying vengeance in heaven, fall in any other place but upon
his Majesty's head, or his childrens; Verascus addresseth himself unto the
King, and entreats him to grant unto him the like combat against those who
had offered to defend Lisander and Calista, as he had granted unto Lucidan; a
request not only just, but also favorable: for besides that the combat
granted to Lucidan served him as a prejudged case, there was no reason to deny
or refuse Verascus upon a cause already judged, and against persons condemned,
having suffered it unto Lucidan against a man who was not in appearance:
furthermore, he required nothing but what the friends of the adverse part had
already demanded, and besides the cause of his kinsman, for whose justice he
sued, he was injured in his honor by Hippolita's words: The King granted that
which in justice he could not deny. Thus was Adrastus his life and Calista's
honor once again in trial, and all the joy of the days passed turned into
grief and desolation; Lidian, Alcidon and Berontus were all mad to dispute
this difference with Verascus, who in all their opinions, was like discord let
loose by envy out of hell, to trouble all their quiet. But God forbid, said
Adrastus, that any other but my self, being in health and present, should
undertake the defense of my son and of my own offer: I have demanded this
combat against Verascus, and (if it please God) I will be the first that shall
maintain the innocence which he would oppress. Who is able to utter Dorilas
his anger, Otranta's complaints, Ambrisia's grief, Olinda's tears, Argires
sorrow, and the deadly confusion of unfortunate Calista? who can declare
Lidians fury, to see his sisters cause and his friends, hazzarded under the
defense of a feeble old man, whose age might justly be dispensed from Arms?
finally, who can speak the universal discomfort of all? For besides Calista's
and Lisanders interest, which was common amongst them, every one had a feeling
of his own particular* Lucidan to see himself frustrate of his hope to marry
Calista if her Father were vanquished by Verascus, Berontus to see himself
deprived of his marriage with Ambrisia, and Alcidon to see his also with Argire
to be deferred, there being no hope to marry in the calamity of two persons so
dear unto him, as was Lisander and Calista. So that Verascus was universally
cursed of all: yet the combat being granted, it was published that very day,
and assigned three days after in the same place, and with the same Arms as
had been appointed unto Lucidan; the King reserving unto himself the
judgment of the cause after the combat was finished.

Lisander in the mean time having spent the night in the greatest trouble of
mind that ever he was in* continually meditating what means he might use to
undo the knot of his love, which was so entangled that he could find no end,
about break of day rose with Leon with purpose to go to Paris, and hoping by
his presence to give stop unto Lucidans further suite, or else to fight with
him rather upon that quarrel than about Chrisantes his death. But as he was
ready to get up on horseback, Erifila came, who having posted all night, and
coming unto Pontoise upon the opening of the gates, she met him even as he was
going away, and having delivered the charge which her Mistress had given her,
to find him, and to entreat him to come back unto her who did but desire to
see him; the trouble and perplexity of his mind redoubled so upon him, that
he became dumb and immovable as a statue: Of the one side, he saw it was an
unexcusable ungratitude to refuse the going back seven or eight leagues to see
one, who had come two hundred for his sake, had fought in his quarrel against
Lucidan, and afterward had offered to fight against those who did accuse him
for killing Cleander: Furthermore, such a person as Hippolita was, who seeking
him after so many obligations, he had in recompense doubly offended, both in
words which he had spoke, and by those blows which he had made, and now to
refuse her in so pitiful a plight, whereunto he had brought her he thought it
was a cruel discourtesie, extremely contrary to his nature: Of the other side,
setting before him Calista's jealousy, the strange courses which this passion
had enforced her unto, the combat which she had enterprised for him, then
when she believed that he had left her, with so much more danger unto her than
unto Hippolita, by how much she was less practiced in arms than Hippolita,
and with so much the more merit, by how much she thought she fought for an
enemy, against a servant by whom she was adored* The letter which she had
written upon the subject of this jealousy, and the displeasure which she
would receive when she understood that he was now with her Rival: The fresh
news of Adrastusses and Dorilasses laboring to marry her with Lucidan, and
the means which he had to break it off, and to serve her both in justifying
himself and her by Leons own mouth, and by this last obligation to surpass
all his former, which he could not defer without great danger of losing all.
All these reasons together, making the balance weigh down in favor of
Calista, made him entreat Erifila to pardon him, and to excuse him to her
Mistres if the necessity of his affairs, which had so long called him unto the
Court, hindered him from doing this small service, unto the most sensible and
most violent of all his sorrow. God never be helpful unto me, answered
Erifila, if I do not kill my self rather here in your presence, than suffer
you to commit so great a fault; what, would you kill her? for I am sure the
despite which she will receive by this denial can work no less: Is this the
recompense of all the dangers whereunto she has exposed her self, of the
travel which she has taken, and of the evil which she has suffered for you?
Do not do your self, Sir, this wrong: I conjure you by that which you owe
unto the greatness of your courage, and to the glory of so many brave and
generous actions which you have performed, not to refuse her, for I assure you
if you do, you will for ever wither with a reproach of an eternal infamy: I
promise you, you shall not stay, and so far will she be from constraining you
in the affection which you bear unto Calista, that contrariwise she will serve
you; wherefore give this contentment unto one, who does perfectly love you, and
who for all acknowledgment of the love which she bears, and satisfaction for
the injury which you have done her, demands only but this fight.

While she thus spoke, a Post coming from Paris, was known by Dorilas his
man, who had supped over night with Lisander: he asking in Lisander and
Erifila's hearing of news from the Court, was told the combat which was to
be fought between Adrastus and Verascus about Cleanders death. Will you have
any more lawful excuses, said Lisander unto Erifila? must I without any
feeling of my honor, or of Calista's (which ought to be more dear unto me)
suffer my father to hazard his life in my quarrel, while I foolishly trifle
out time in contenting Hippolita's idle humor? besides, if I could serve her
to her desire, what profit could I bring her, unless it be a ^eaver? Your
presence will not be unprofitable, answered Erifila, for it will save her
life; and for the combat, you have time enough to be there in three days:
and never think that she who has come so long a journey to defend your
honor here in your absence, will now counsel you to lose it here before your
eyes, or suffer you to do so, if you were willing. Let us go then, replied
Lisander, vanquished with her importunity, upon condition you press me not to
stay, but that immediately after I have seen her, I may return my way: upon
these conditions he follows Erifila with his company, and came unto the
Village where Hippolita lay wounded. To tell you the discourse which she
fashioned unto her self in Erifila's absence, those which were made at her
return, as well by her as by Lisander, the shame that both of them had when
they saw one the other, one remembering what he had said, the other what she had
heard spoken; it is not possible: At the first they only beheld one another
without speech, thinking that their looks could better express their thoughts
than words. In the end, Lisander going about to speak first, was so
confounded, that the more he endeavored to express himself, the less he
was understood: Hippolita judging the confusion of his mind by that of his
words, and seeing his astonishment in his face, was more satisfied to see the
apprehension and trouble which she raised in this great courage, than with all
the excuses and submissions which he could make; and receiving this perplexity
for a testimony of his sorrow, resolved to pardon him: whereupon clearing the
beams of her face, which grief and danger had darkened, and beholding him with
a more pleasing eye than she had done at the first entrance, she loosened his
tongue whereby he had power to utter these words: Madam, I take heaven to
witness, that it was force, and not will which has constrained me to offend
you, and that now it is will, and not force, which brings me, for your
satisfaction, to offer you my life, entreating you to do it so much honor, as
to think it worthy of your revenge: I could wish that I had something more
dear unto me, if by the loss thereof you might be better satisfied: But
seeing I have nothing, whereof I can dispose, more dear unto me than my life,
and since that has committed the fault, I do entreat you to sacrifice it to
your anger, and receive this voluntary reparation of a constrained injury. Ah
Lisander, answered Hippolita, you have much more grace than reason, in excusing
the wrongs which you have done: but tell me, I pray you, what has miserable
Hippolita done unto you, that you should so poorly betray her facility? for I
do not bewail the wounds which I have exacted from you, nor your words, which
strength of passion and of truth, obliged you to speak unto me, thinking you
had spoken unto Calista: But of those which from a free motion you have of your
own accord uttered, falsely persuading me that you only lived for me. It is
true, Madam, answered Lisander, that I have spoken something of love unto you,
pressed by the instance and authority of my parents, who much desired that I
should serve you; but never out of any free motion as you have believed: for
not only then, but long time before I had the honor to see you, I was
promised unto Calista, and Calista unto me: But though her absence, and the
object of your present beauty, should have wrought me unto it, yet had it not
been from a free motion, but constrained by the violence of a passion which
you cause in many others; And am I (think you) beyond others so free from
passion, that I cannot be subject unto it? Is it a crime to love a thing so
lovely? Am I the only man in the world who at diverse times in diverse places
has served two Mistresses? or rather, was there ever Knight, that has loved
but one Lady? It is no justification of your crime (replied Hippolita) to
allege examples of others infidelity, but contrariwise it is an inwrapping of
their faults with yours, and a charging your self with them for the same
evil. You are a better Knight, than a faithful Lover, in this time, when it
is a bravery amongst many to sport themselves with the love of Ladies: you have
let me see heretofore the quickenesse of your spirit, but I did never so
plainly discern it as in this occasion, wherein you want no fair words and
good reasons, at the least in appearance, to color so evil a cause: I am
sorry you have no better, that I might have less cause to complain of you,
and more to pardon you. But an offense of this nature is not so easily
justified as committed, yet I think you have one reason which your discretion
concealeth, I see I must utter it my self against my self, that is, the
subject for which you leave me, is of such perfection, that she meriteth not
only an excuse for you, but also that you should be commended for so worthy a
choice; for although you had loved me before you saw her, as you loved her
before you saw me, and that you were the faithfullest lover that ever had
name, yet she has charms enough to make you lose your constancy, and to make
you ungrateful and perfidious to all the world, to be constant and
acknowledging unto her only: and this comfort (at the least) remains unto me,
that if you have left me, it is for a Lady who does merit it, and whose beauty
incomparably surpassing all others, does lessen the sorrow and the shame which
I may conceive for her being preferred before me: yet one thing I would entreat
of you, which is, that though I have lost your affection, you would
nevertheless preserve unto me your good will, and assure your self, that you
may well be possessed by some other, but I shall only be yours.

Lisander no less ravished with the beauties than with the spirit and
judgment of Hippolita, could not answer but with sighs, and offering her his
humble service with a perfect friendship, sorrowing that he could not give
himself unto her, being not his own. Erifila then seeing them in this fair
way of agreement said unto her, Madam, I have promised this Knight that he
should return this day, to ease his Father of a combat which he is to have
with Verascus, but he may be there time enough although he come but to morrow.
How? (answered Hippolita) is there a combat assigned between Adrastus and
Verascus. I, Madam, replied Erifila, who presently told what they had learned
of the Post in passing by at Pointoise. Upon my honor (said Hippolita) it
shall not go so: It is I, who have made the first overture, and Adrastus can
be but my second, if there be two accusers, and there being but one, it is I
who must make the battle. I, Madam, answered Lisander, if I were not present,
but all being enterprised upon my occasion, and in my absence, it is not
reasonable, that I being present, any other should defend my right. Besides, I
have Leon here who will depose my innocence, who being heard, I do not think
any combat will be necessary, unless it be between him and me, if he will
deny the truth which he has confessed. I will tell you what we will do, said
Hippolita; to morrow I shall be able (notwithstanding my wounds) to go in two
days to Paris; for by your only coming, I find my self almost well, and we
will appear all together. A thousand other fair words said they amongst
themselves, which I cannot repeat: but to be short, after the day was spent,
and a good part of the night in this manner, the next morning they rose very
early to go to Paris, as they had determined.

Hippolita's wounds were the cause they could not come thither before the day
of the combat, which was already begun. Adrastus of one side, and Verascus of
the other, were both come into the field; the first in his arms whose color
and device we have already spoken of, and the other in tawnie armor, having
for his device an Austridge, holding an horse shoe in the mouth, with this
word, Sic nutriantur fortes. He was followed by all Cleanders kinsmen,
excepting Berontus* who would not be there, neither for one nor other. Adrastus
was accompanied with Dorilas, Lidian, Alcidon, Lucidan, and many others. They
were both courageous and strong, and witnessed in their arms great
fierceness, as those who in their youth had achieved many memorable
adventures. The royal Scaffold was furnished with their Majesty's, followed
with a great Court, besides which, there was an infinite company of others, who
did inviron the whole field, and upon one side was Calista all in mourning,
accompanied with Otranta, Olinda, Ambrisia and Argire, and miserable Clarinda
alone upon the other. Already was the Sun equally divided* and the Trumpets
sounding the charge, the combatants having ^ne one against another with great
violence, breaking their Lances to their hands, and remaining without
advantage, had perfected their careere: And as they were returning, with their
swords shining in their hands, every one looking steadfastly upon them without
stirring an eye, and silent without a word; Hippolita and Lisander, together
with Erifila and Leon, came into the field, which drew the eyes of all the
company upon them. At their first entrance there was raised a little noise,
like a gentle murmuring, proceeding from this infinite world of people, whereof
some knowing Hippolita by the Arms which she wore, raised this gentle noise.
In the end, seeing they went directly to speak unto the King, and every one
being desirous to hear what they would say, there was an universal silence (a
thing rarely happening in so great a multitude) during which, Hippolita having
entreated his Majesty to stay the combat, and to cause the combatants,
together with Calista and Clarinda, to be brought near; she spoke in this
manner: Sir, I am Lisanders Knight, who first had the lot to maintain his
cause against Lucidan, and who first have offered to defend it against
Verascus. Adrastus, unto whom you have permitted it in my absence, being but my
second, cannot be received but after me: But, Sir, before this difference be
decided, and that all men may know with what justice I have undertaken the
defense of the accused, I do humbly entreat you to hear what this Knight can
say concerning Cleanders death. Saying this, Hippolita presented Lisander, who
pulling off his Helmet, and doing humble reverence unto the King, he filled
all the assistants with wonder and astonishment. Sir, said he in presenting
Leon, of this man your Majesty must be informed of Cleanders death, and not of
me, who was far off, and who had not known it but by his ^o wise confession.
It only concerns me Sir, to defend my innocence and Calista's, against those
who have ^o vilely slandered us unto your Majesty; and for me to demand pardon
(which I do, Sir, with as much humbleness and submission as is possible) that
not having means soone^ to justify my innocence, and not daring in the (...)
to appear before the angry face of my Prince, I have been constrained to go
aside, with as much sorrow as a faithful subject could have to spend his life
out of the sight and favor of so great a King. At the same instant Leon cast
himself at the Kings feet, implored his mercy, and demanding pardon, first of
his Majesty, and after of Lisander and Calista, declared openly before all the
world, that only he and Clarinda were guilty of Cleanders death; reciting the
long love between himself and Clarinda, the means which she used to bring
him unto Beauplaine without the privity of her Mistress, and how, as he would
have gone from her chamber when Calista was coming in, he was stayed by
Cleander, who came out of his own chamber at his wives cry, and that he
having gotten Lisanders sword (which he wore then about him) in the manner as
you have heard formerly, he was constrained to kill him, to save his own life
and Clarinda's honor, which was then most dear unto him: He added, that this
fault had been committed without his design, that he had suffered long and
extreme sorrow, and done great penance, wherefore he besought his Majesty that
it might be in stead of punishment. Wicked Clarinda seeing her self thus
convicted of her crime by him for whose sake she had committed it, and not able
to deny her vi^ treachery, was compelled to confess it, humbly craving pardon
of the King, of Lisander, and of her Mistres Calista: But the King abhorring
her prayers, and yet retained by his mercy, instantly condemned her to spend
the rest of her days within the four walls of the repentants; perpetually
banished Leon out of his kingdom, restored Lisander and Calista unto their
former honor; and for a reparation of the injury which had been done them,
adjudged them the goods of the guilty. Whilst these things were a doing, joy
and admiration possessed the hearts of all those who were present. Adrastus and
Verascus, who lately would have killed one the other, now lovingly embraced.
Dorilas and Otranta thanked the King for his justice to their daughter; Lidian,
Alcidon, and Berontus with tears in their eyes embraced Lisander, remembering
how they had lost him at the Sea, and how God had sent this storm that Leon
might be found, whereby things were brought to so happy an event. Ambrisia,
Olinda and Argire kissed Calista, as if they had not seen her a long time,
rejoicing with her at the change of her fortune past unto this present, and at
the glorious end, to which these long miseries were brought, considering the
inconstancy of our life, and how small a distance the^e was between the time
wherein they had seen her in so great calamity, and this, wherein they found
her in so great glory. Lisander could not tell which way to turn him, so much
he was busied, sometime in speaking to the King, sometime to his father, and
by and by to entertain his friends: yet in the end getting from them, and
going to kneel down before Calista, she turned from him unto Lucidan, who
was near her, and began to entertain him with speech, not saluting or so much
as looking upon Lisander. And from hence I gather that all women (for the most
part) have a spirit of contradiction, and so strange and so unequal a humor,
that no judgment or knowledge can be settled of them; for who can otherwise
say, seeing Calista, the ornament of her sex, leap over walls after Lisander,
then when her husbands death, her own process, her parents authority, and
Lisanders love with Hippolita might have justified her ingratitude, and now
when nothing could excuse her, after such extreme obligations, such present and
signal services, to turn her back unto him when he offered himself? When I
remember how she went from Clareval, disguised in a habit so undecent for one
of her condition, how she resolved to fight with Lucidan who loved her, for
Lisander by whom she thought she was forsaken; she who had never managed
arms, and whom I now see honor the same Lucidan to despite Lisander, and to
constrain her self to disdain him, then, when he gave so great and so
necessary a proof of his fidelity, I must needs accuse her of inconstancy and
ingratitude, and think her worthy of the miseries which she has suffered,
losing the sorrow which I had to see her endure them.

But as meats wherewith one eats in health unto a fullness, in sickness are
many times abhorred, so the extreme and violent love which she bore unto
Lisander being absent, turned at the seeing him into hatred; and remembering the
follies which the passion of this man had made her commit, she was ashamed, and
wished him evil, for the same cause for which she had wished himself well:
furthermore, being jealous of Hippolita, as she was, and seeing her come with
him; she thought he did not much care for displeasing her, since he durst
appear before her in the company of a person who had caused so much grief
unto her: As for Lisander he remained mute and immovable as a rock, neither
was this an affront which could be repaired with a word. Oh! if any other but
Calista had done this, how would he have returned it? What, said he to
himself, in so good company, in the presence of my Rival, to do this
indignity unto me? An Calista! thou shall never return, I will never give you
this advantage over me. In this meditation (which was raised by anger, that
Arch rebel against love) he turned to the other Ladies, all of them giving
him as much honor, as Calista had given him neglect: And the King being entered
into his Coach, together with the Queen, both joyful for the happy success
of this day, they all waited upon them unto the Louure, and from thence retired
themselves unto their lodgings, very few observing the coldness that passed
from Calista to Lisander, who all that ^ight had a grievous conflict with
himself, whether to yield unto love, or unto anger* and his associates fury
and despite* feign he would have expo^ (...) and laid unto her his merits, and
her ungratitude, but his great heart, counseled with youth and heat, and both
seduced by wrath, resolved never more to see her, l^st love, with the
unresistable power and charms of her looks, might pacify his mind (most
ordinary amongst lovers) and work his own sovereignty by a reconciliation: Of
the one side, by yielding unto his wrath he sai^ despair, like a chief
messenger of angered love, press hard (...), a^uring him that without enjoying
Calista he could not love: Of the other side anger represented unto him ^he
sco^es which he should undergo by seeking unto her* which wrought so with
him, (...) especially (...) absence, that he resolved though he could not live
(...) enjoying the one, he would (...) rather than suffer the other: A
resolution (...) worthy of a brave Gentleman, i^ he had performed i^. The sp^
Lisander the (...).

The next morning, Alcidon and Lidian rising very early, went one (...)
Adrastus his chamber, and the other into Dorilasse^, unto whom at large (...)
remonstrated Lisanders long (...) to enjoy Calista* whom he having delivered,
first, out of prison, and then freshly from all suspicion of the crime whereof
she was accused, she could not justly be refused unto him: wherefore they
entreated to crown the end of their adventures by a lawful marriage, which
would accomplish their felicities, adding, that it was true indeed Calista's
honor was restored unto the first luster, by the verifying of her innocence:
but having remained so long in Lisanders company, although it were with all the
honesty that could be desired between persons of their conditions and merit,
her reputation would nevertheless be exposed unto the discretion of evil
tongues, if it were not defended by this marriage. Adrastus seeing that Calista
had now the same advantages over Hippolita, which Hippolita had formerly had
over her, and not willing to force his son in a matter which ought to be so
free, went instantly into Dorilas his chamber, whom he found already disposed
thereunto by Lidian, and who seeing, that Lucidans offers were now of no value
unto Calista, desired rather Lisanders alliance (unto whom he was so straightly
bound) than his: wherefore meeting both in one desire together, they agreed
upon the marriage between Lisander and Calista, no body doubting of the parties
consent, whom all the world knew to love one the other most perfectly.

But when Adrastus would speak of it unto Lisander, thinking to rejoice him in
bringing so good news, for which not long since he would have given the
Monarchy of the whole world, he was astonished at his answer, which was, That
having run so dangerous a fortune at Sea, he had made a vow to God, that if he
had the blessing to escape, he would go in pilgrimage unto Rome, whereunto
being more strongly bound by his finding Leon, and the happy issue of his
business; he entreated him that he might perform his vow before he contracted
any marriage: And in the same time Calista answered Dorilas, upon the
proposition which was made unto her of marriage with Lisander, That being in
the Abbey of Longchampe, afflicted with so many adversities, God had so ^ouched
her heart, and had given her so lively a feeling of the difference between the
sweetness of a religious life and the bitterness which is tasted in this
other life of the world, that she had vowed to leave it, and enter into that
Monastery, so soon as she should have ended her process. The sad old men
astonished and confounded with their childrens answer, were so much the more
sorry by how much they durst not tell one the other the answer which they had
received, and wondering from whence so sudden and so great an alteration should
proceed, as those who did not easily believe the vows wherewith their children
would have amused them, and fearing lest they should plunge themselves again
into new mischiefs, from whence they but now got out, could not choose but
witness the feeling they had of this their disobedience. What, said Adrastus
unto Lisander? when I would have married you with Hippolita, you pretended a
voyage unto the Court for love of Calista, and now when I would marry you with
the same Calista, you pretend another unto Rome. Well, go whither you please,
but never account me for your father, nor think that I will ever avow you for
my son, but will fail of my purpose if I have not another course held with
you: with these words he flung out of the doors from him. So much in the
mean time said Dorilas unto Calista, threatening her in extreme choler to shut
her up, not only in the Nunnery of Longchampe, but in the house of the
repentants with Clarinda. How? said the old men, have you followed him through
all France, all Flanders, and all Frisland? Have you gone out of Clareval at
midnight all alone to seek after him? have you left your parents, disguised
your sex, forgotten your condition, taken arms, attempted all kind of
extremities for love of him, then when you were despised? and now when he does
adore you, when he has bound you unto him with so extraordinary a service* you
play the disdainefull fool: Remember your self better, Calista; God never
pardon me, if I pardon you, or if I do not endeavor to make you an example;
and so goes out of the doors. Judge you in what plight our Lovers were by
their own folly, which (...) to torment themselves: Calista began to (...)
wrong which she had done unto Lisander, and beginning to repent he self,
desired only that he would come unto her, and she would repair it; I, she
would have come half way, if she could have found some honest occasion to go
unto him: But Lisander, who knew he could not go from her but to his death,
not so much moved with his Fathers anger and threatenings, as with love,
although he could have been contented to have urged his merit, and desired to
have known his fault, as also to have been pardoned; yet not knowing her
mind, but setting before his eyes the scorn which she did him publicly, and
in favor of his arrival, he willingly gave himself to death, and rather
than he would any more sue unto an ungrateful woman, who had paid all his
signal services with such an affront, he swore he would never see her, but
leave the country: First, intending to write a bitter letter unto her, which
his trusty Porter should carry her; unto which end, he went unto an Inn, with
resolution toward the evening to depart: but half his letter was not written,
when there comes one of the Kings Guard, who having enquired him out, told him,
that the King had sent for him, and that he must presently go with him unto
his Majesty: for Adrastus, incensed by Lisanders disobedience (as he conceived
it) hastes to the Court, and finds out the King, unto whom (not so much out
of sound judgment, as out of petulancy of age, resolving to force his sons
will, or remove all things under Heaven) being admitted into his presence
(kneeling down, with grievous sighs and looks to move the King unto
compassion) he said, Sir, I have formerly come unto you to beg pardon and
mercy, which was in your pleasure to give: but now, Sir, I come with much more
sorrow at my heart to beg for justice, which you may not deny, and against my
son; that son, for whom my feeble age, carried more with strength of
affection than body, has made so long a journey, undertaken such dangers, and
in this place implored mercy: wherefore, Sir, have pity of the just grief
which makes me complain, and think how great it is, since it makes a father
demand justice against his son, who, unless your Majesty be a helper unto
me, will be the affliction of my miserable age: Be pleased therefore, Oh Sir,
to command him to be brought before you, that to his faced may urge my
accusation. The King* together with all the standers by, wondered what new
accident was fallen out, as well out of curiosity, as out of a desire to do
justice to the complaints of his subjects, presently gave command that Lisander
should be sought for and brought before him hardly had the King made an end of
commanding to bring Lisander, when Dorilas came into the presence, and
witnessing as much have, anger and grief as Adrastus had done, kneeled down
before the King, begging the like justice against his daughter Calista* urging
the cause of his complaint to be such, as was beyond a Fathers suffering, and
such as ought by punishment to be made an example; humbly entreating, that
she also might be commanded to come before his Majesty where if she had any
thing to allege in her behalf, she might then speak. This increased the
Kings wonder and desire to hear the cause, and therefore gave order to have
her also fetched before him: She was found as soon as Lisander, and came
accompanied with her Mother, Ambrisia, Argire, and Olinda* as also with Lidian,
Berontus and Alcidon, all wondering what the occasion of their sending for
should be. When Lisander and Calista were come before the King (for they came
almost together) and both beheld one the other, Oh! how soon had Calista's
looks (which were with more gentleness) dispersed Lisanders anger, and
utterly ruined his resolution?) he commanded Adrastus to declare the cause of
his complaint against his son; whereupon Adrastus began, that besides the
common duty of a good Father, which he had always performed unto his son,
he called his Majesty to witness what he had lately enterprised for him in
this his old age, to the extreme peril of his life: yet nevertheless having
twice offered him marriage with parties more worthy of him, than he of them, he
was so fa^re from yielding any kind of obedience, that first having stolen
from him, and by the flight having put both him and his friends unto such
unevitable dangers of utter ruin, if by a particular care, and admirable
providence, God had not miraculously preserved them* He was now about the same
course under pretense of a feined vow, making religion a cloak to palliate his
disobedience. He had hardly proceeded thus far in his complaint, when Dorilas
advanced himself, and interrupting his further discourse, began his complaint
against Calista in this manner: As much, Sir, can I say against this
ungrateful Calista, who knows not, or at least will not respect the sorrows
and the travailes which she has given me; the afflictions and evils wherewith
she has so often broken the course of my life. I need not abuse your
Majesty's patience in relating the story, it is but too manifest;
Nevertheless, Sir, she is not ashamed to disobey me, in that which above all
things in the world she has most earnestly desired, how then, Sir, would she
have obeyed me in any other matter which should have been contrary unto her
mind? Sir, you having settled order in the estate, ought also to do the like in
families, and as you are a great father of the kingdom, exacting obedience,
and maintaining the paternall authority of the Royalty; so I hope you will, and
we do humbly entreat you to render the ancient power of fathers over their
children who will not obey.

The end of these complaints were not less pleasing unto Lisander, than the
beginning had been displeasing, seeing they concluded in the marriage of
Calista, who silent, yet with looks full of pity and love upon him, he spoke
in this manner: Sir, it cannot be denied but that my fathers words are most
true, and if I had yielded all kind of obedience unto him, yet his benefits and
fatherly goodness are so great unto me, that I ought not to be ungrateful;
although I cannot satisfy them, yet Sir, if I have but deferred and not
refused his commandments, the injury is not irreparable; wherefore I do
humbly entreat your clemency and his to forgive me, upon condition I repair
my fault. And you fair one, said the King then unto Calista, what answer make
you unto your fathers complaint? Calista seeing things brought to the point
which she did desire, and being glad that her fathers command, or rather the
Kings, might constrain her to pardon Lisander, and to marry him, absolutely
believing that either one or the other of them two would compel her (as Ladies
would feign be forced in those occasions, and do never yield but with some
show of constraint) answered in this manner: Sir, it is a complaint which I
renew every day in my soul, and one of the greatest evils wherewith my mind
is afflicted, that ever I should be the cause of sorrow unto my parents. But
that which comfort me, Sir, is the assurance which I have in my heart, that
your Majesty and they themselves do clearly see, that it is rather my evil
fortune than my fault. And as unto the disobedience, whereof they complain, I
have yielded it as fully as ever any daughter in this world did, excepting
only in one point, from which the condition of my widowhood, and a thousand
other reasons which I cannot speak of, do dispense me. And Sir, though there
were no other reason but my will, having once submitted me unto theirs, they
shall force me to submit if I do again in so unreasonable a matter.

Calista said this, believing that the King would have more respect unto
Adrastus his request and unto Dorilas, than unto any reasons which she should
bring: but she was deceived, and did quickly repent her of this last folly;
for the King wisely judging that nothing in the world ought to be freer than
marriage, nor that any thing was so contrary unto the liberty thereof as
violence, dismissed the two fathers from the power which in this case they
demanded over their children. Calista, because she had been once married at
her fathers will, and Lisander, because he was not bound to obey his in a
matter impossible; exhorting nevertheless to obey him in any other thing. This
sentence being pronounced by such a King, Calista was disappointed, the parents
confounded, and Lisander desparate, who casting himself at his Ladies feet,
with tears in his eyes, spoke in this manner: I see that after so many labors
and hazzards, for a reward of my fidelity, which is beyond that of all lovers,
I must find ingratitude, in a heart which has always promised me never to be
capable thereof; and that for having adored you, I suffer such usage as I
should have deserved if I had done the contrary. I will not dispute with you
whether it be with justice, for that were to seek reason in love; and your
will holding in me the place of reason and law, does bind me to believe
against my proper feeling, that what you do is just: but if you do not think
that the services which I have done are injuries, I do most humbly entreat
you, Madam, to tell me here in this most illustrious company, what offense I
have committed, and let not my condition be worse than that of criminal
persons, unto whom the cause of their punishment is (at the least) told before
they suffer any: And if I do repent my services here, it is not to reproach
you, but to show that in serving you, I have not been so unhappy as to offend
you. You may think what you please, but I must needs think, that you might
better have acknowledged them, than I could better have addressed them; and God
forbid, Madam, that ever I should complain the time which I have lost in your
service, since it has bin employed according unto my intention, which was to
honor you. It is true, Madam, that herein I have done but my duty, yet I do
not know that I have committed any fault; and it is no small matter to pay all
that one owes, especially unto one unto whom all is owing; nevertheless, since
together with the eternal affections, which you have so solemnly promised, I
must lose the greatest happiness that ever I hoped for in this world, I will
leave with you (if you please) this remembrance of you^ Lisander, that he is
not sorry he has suffered so much, and is glad he has not deserved this
suffering. Live therefore satisfied and contented with my misfortune, and
believe it shall be a comfort unto me in all my miseries, to hear that they
do bring you contentment. I only ask your permission to endure them, and to
honor you at the least in holding my peace, and in hiding in the secret of my
heart that which you cannot take away but in appearance. To conclude, Madam, I
will not complain of you, but of my fortune which makes your pity dumb, and
changes your nature without changing my affection, thereby showing that it is
not subject unto the change of her wheel. And I should think my self
unthankful, if in this my complaint, I did not give her thanks, that by my
destiny being reserved unto such cruel mischiefs, she has ordained, that
they should come from your hand, Madam, whose cruelty I have loved more than my
life, and whose despising I do honor in the pangs of death, do me this last
office, and bear this pitiful testimony of your Knight, That he had lived
longer, if he had been less faithful.

This his long speech ended with their Majesty's incredible patience, who were
pleased to hear him, and no less disquiet in Lisanders friends, who feared he
would never get out to his advantage. It was a pleasant spectacle to see them
in one instant to shed tears for joy, Lisander for love, and Calista out of
pity, upon whose answer depended the misery or happiness of their lives; who
having consulted some time with her self, her heart inflamed with love, and
her face with shame, in the end answered in this manner: It is true, most dear
Lisander, that I have promised you never to be capable of ingratitude; and if I
have been so until this time (in regard of the cause which you have given me)
I will not be so now, you having taken the cause away. Wherefore pardon me the
evils which you have suffered, seeing that I my self first felt them, and in
respect they will serve to be so many witnesses of your fidelity, and will make
the enjoying which we shall have one of the other, so much the sweeter, by how
much we have endured the more. And seeing their Majesty's do suffer me, my
parents command me, and your services do oblige me, I do confirm in this most
excellent presence and assembly, the oath which particularly I have made unto
you, that I will be only yours.

In saying this Calista gave him her hand, which he most amorously kissed,
blessing the evils which he had suffered for so great a good. And the
contentment of these two lovers, not being able to be contained in themselves,
spread through all the company, renewing imbracings with joy, which was then
pure, without any mixture of sorrow or fear, if this word Joy be not too weak
a word to express the feelings which cannot be spoken, hardly comprehended.
Who can tell the diverse motions of so many persons, who had a part in this
common rejoicing? Verascus his astonishment, Berontus his admiration, as also
of Hippolita and Lucidan? who can speak of the infinite pleasure of Alcidon
and Lidian, of Olinda and Argire, of Ambrisia and Otranta, and the unspeakable
pleasure of Dorilas and Adrastus? These two latter, having long embraced
Lisander and Calista, snatching them one from another, and embracing them
between them with tears, as those who after a dangerous storm, having escaped
shipwreck, do meet upon the dry land in uncredible joy: To increase which,
Lisander knowing the love which Lucidan bore unto Hippolita, most humbly
entreated the King to marry them together, and after turning to Adrastus, made
the like request unto him, in favor of Berontus and Ambrisia. Then looking
unto Argire and Alcidon, Lidian and Olinda, he entreated them that as they had
suffered great grief and sorrow with him, so they would honor him so much, as
to let one day give an end unto all their troubles, and one day by marriage a
beginning unto their joys.

By this means the Marriages were resolved to be in one day finished between
Alcidon and Argire, Lidian and Olinda, of Lucidan and Hippolita, of Berontus
and Ambrisia, and of brave Lisander and Calista, who humbly taking leave of
their Majesty's, retired all together to Dorilas and Adrastus, who, as we have
said, had but one house, where after a magnifick supper, they gave themselves
unto their rests, expecting the next morning with longing; which being come,
all of them most richly apparelled, especially Calista, who having ever since
Cleanders death neglected her attire, now (richly beset with jewels, and with
that rich collar which Lisander had conquered in great Britain) drew all the
eyes of the beholders upon her with admiration. They were solemnly married in
the Chapel of Burpon, where I will leave them, returning home with wishes of
the people, that they might long and peaceably, after so many alarums and
storms, enjoy the dear delights, and sweetest pleasures of this life.

FINIS.

